
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF MR. BADMAN




NOTE



The Life and Death of Mr Badman was published by John Bunyan in
1680, two years after the First Edition of the First Part of The
Pilgrim's Progress.  In the opening sentence of his preface he
tells us it was intended by him as the counterpart or companion
picture to the Allegory.  But whatever his own intentions may have
been, the Public of his own time seem to have declined to accept
the book in this capacity.  Indeed, another writer, who signs
himself T. S., undertook to complete Bunyan's Allegory for him, in
a book in size and type closely resembling it, and entitled The
Second Part of the Pilgrim's Progress . . . exactly Described under
the Similitude of a Dream.  It was printed for Jho. Malthus at the
Sun in the Poultry, and published in 1683.  So far as is known,
only one copy of this book is now in existence, the copy which was
formerly in the library of the poet Southey and now in that of the
Baptist Union.  Upon this Bunyan seems to have changed his purpose,
so far as The Life and Death of Mr Badman was concerned, and on the
first of January, 1685, published the story of Christiana and her
Children as his own Second Part of The Pilgrim's Progress.

The work before us, therefore, now stands apart by itself.  In its
composition Bunyan seems to have been greatly influenced, so far as
form is concerned, by a book which his wife brought with her on her
marriage, and which, as he tells us in his Grace Abounding, they
read together.  It was entitled The Plaine Man's Pathway to Heaven:
By Arthur Dent, Preacher of the Word of God at South Shoobury in
Essex.  The eleventh impression, the earliest now known, is dated
1609.  Both books are in dialogue form, and in each case the
dialogue is supposed to be carried on through one long day.
Bunyan's Mr Wiseman, like Dent's Theologus, holds forth instructive
discourse, while the Mr Attentive of the former, like the
Philagathus of the latter, listens and draws on his teacher by
friendly questionings.  There is not in Bunyan's conference, as
there is in Dent's, an Asunetus, who plays the part of an ignorant
man to come out enlightened and convinced at last, or an Antilegon,
who carps and cavils all the way; and there is not in Dent's book
what there is in Bunyan's, a biographical narrative connecting the
various parts of the dialogue; but the groundwork of each is the
same--a searching manifestation and exposure of the nature and
evils of various forms of immorality.

Bunyan's book came out in 1680, and was published by Nathaniel
Ponder, who was also the publisher of The Pilgrim's Progress.  A
third edition appeared in 1696, but as no copy of the second
edition is known to exist, no date can be assigned to it.  In 1684
Johannes Boekholt, a publisher in Amsterdam, obtained leave of the
State to issue a Dutch translation, with the title Het Leven en
Sterben van Mr Quaat.  This edition was illustrated by five copper-
plate engravings, executed by Jan Luiken, the eminent Dutch
engraver, who also illustrated The Pilgrim's Progress the following
year.  In 1782 a Welsh version, translated by T. Lewys, was
published at Liverpool with the title:  Bywyd a Marwolaeth yr
annuwiol dan enw Mr Drygddyn.  A Gaelic version also was published
at Inverness in 1824, entitled Beath agus Bas Mhr Droch-duine.

The present edition {1a} has been reprinted from a copy of the
first issue, lent by the Trustees of the Bunyan Church at Bedford,
and the proofs read with a second copy of the same issue, in the
library of the British Museum.  For convenience of reading, as in
other issues of this series of CAMBRIDGE ENGLISH CLASSICS, the old
type forms of j, s, u, etc. have been made uniform with those in
general modern use; but neither the spelling (including the use of
capitals and italics) nor the punctuation has been altered, save as
specified.  Effect has been given to the errata noted by Bunyan
himself, and printed on page 15 of this issue.

The text of this edition of Bunyan's Holy War {1b} is a careful
reproduction of the First Edition of 1682.  It is not certain that
there was any further authentic reprint in Bunyan's life-time.  For
though both in the Bodleian and the British Museum there is a copy
purporting to be a second edition, and bearing date 1684, it is
difficult to resist the impression that they are pirated copies,
similar to those of which Nathaniel Ponder complained so bitterly
in the case of The Pilgrim's Progress.  For both paper and
typography are greatly inferior to those of the first edition; some
of Bunyan's most characteristic marginalia are carelessly omitted;
Bunyan's own title--'The Holy War made by Shaddai upon Diabolus for
the regaining of the Metropolis of the World'--is altered to the
feebler and more commonplace form--'The Holy War made by Christ
upon the Devil for the Regaining of Man'; and, further, when a new
edition was issued in 1696, the alterations and omissions of 168 4
were ignored, and a simple reprint made of the first edition of
1682.

J. B. {1c}
9 October, 1905.



THE AUTHOR TO THE READER



Courteous Reader,

I was considering with my self, what I had written concerning the
Progress of the Pilgrim from this World to Glory; and how it had
been acceptable to many in this Nation:  It came again into my mind
to write, as then, of him that was going to Heaven, so now, of the
Life and Death of the Ungodly, and of their travel from this world
to Hell.  The which in this I have done, and have put it, as thou
seest, under the Name and Title of Mr. Badman, a Name very proper
for such a Subject:  I have also put it into the form of a
Dialogue, that I might with more ease to my self, and pleasure to
the Reader, perform the work.

And although, as I said, I have put it forth in this method, yet
have I as little as may be, gone out of the road of mine own
observation of things.  Yea, I think I may truly say, that to the
best of my remembrance, all the things that here I discourse of, I
mean as to matter of fact, have been acted upon the stage of this
World, even many times before mine eyes.

Here therefore, courteous Reader, I present thee with the Life and
Death of Mr. Badman indeed:  Yea, I do trace him in his Life, from
his Childhood to his Death; that thou mayest, as in a Glass, behold
with thine own eyes, the steps that take hold of Hell; and also
discern, while thou art reading of Mr. Badmans Death, whether thou
thy self art treading in his path thereto.

And let me entreat thee to forbear Quirking and Mocking, for that I
say Mr. Badman is dead; but rather gravely enquire concerning thy
self by the Word, whether thou art one of his Linage or no:  For
Mr. Badman has left many of his Relations behind him; yea, the very
World is overspread with his Kindred.  True, some of his Relations,
as he, are gone to their place, and long home, but thousands of
thousands are left behind; as Brothers, Sisters, Cousens, Nephews,
besides innumerable of his Friends and Associates.

I may say, and yet speak nothing but too much truth in so saying,
that there is scarce a Fellowship, a Community, or Fraternity of
men in the World, but some of Mr. Badmans Relations are there:  yea
rarely can we find a Family or Houshold in a Town, where he has not
left behind him either Brother, Nephew or Friend.

The Butt therefore, that at this time I shoot at, is wide; and
'twill be as impossible for this Book to go into several Families,
and not to arrest some, as for the Kings Messenger to rush into an
house full of Traitors, and find none but honest men there.

I cannot but think that this shot will light upon many, since our
fields are so full of this Game; but how many it will kill to Mr.
Badmans course, and make alive to the Pilgrims Progress, that is
not in me to determine; this secret is with the Lord our God only,
and he alone knows to whom he will bless it to so good and so
blessed an end.  However, I have put fire to the Pan, and doubt not
but the report will quickly be heard.

I told you before, that Mr. Badman had left many of his Friends and
Relations behind him, but if I survive them (as that's a great
question to me) I may also write of their lives:  However, whether
my life be longer or shorter, this is my Prayer at present, that
God will stir up Witnesses against them, that may either convert or
confound them; for wherever they live, and roll in their
wickedness, they are the Pest and Plague of that Countrey.

England shakes and totters already, by reason of the burden that
Mr. Badman and his Friends have wickedly laid upon it:  Yea, our
Earth reels and staggereth to and fro like a Drunkard, the
transgression thereof is heavy upon it.

Courteous Reader, I will treat thee now, even at the Door and
Threshold of this house, but only with this Intelligence, that Mr.
Badman lies dead within.  Be pleased therefore (if thy leisure will
serve thee) to enter in, and behold the state in which he is laid,
betwixt his Death-bed and the Grave.  He is not buried as yet, nor
doth he stink, as is designed he shall, before he lies down in
oblivion.

Now as others have had their Funerals solemnized, according to
their Greatness and Grandure in the world, so likewise Mr. Badman,
(forasmuch as he deserveth not to go down to his grave with
silence) has his Funeral state according to his deserts.

Four things are usual at great mens Funerals, which we will take
leave, and I hope without offence, to allude to, in the Funeral of
Mr. Badman.

First, They are sometimes, when dead, presented to their Friends,
by their compleatly wrought Images, as lively as by cunning mens
hands they can be; that the remembrance of them may be renewed to
their survivors, the remembrance of them and their deeds:  And this
I have endeavoured to answer in my discourse of Mr. Badman; and
therefore I have drawn him forth in his featours and actions from
his Childhood to his Gray hairs.  Here therefore thou hast him
lively set forth as in Cutts; both as to the minority, flower, and
seniority of his Age, together with those actions of his life, that
he was most capable of doing, in, and under those present
circumstances of time, place, strength; and the opportunities that
did attend him in these.

Secondly, There is also usual at great mens Funerals, those Badges
and Scutcheons of their honour, that they have received from their
Ancestors, or have been thought worthy of for the deeds and
exploits they have done in their life:  And here Mr. Badman has
his, but such as vary from all men of worth, but so much the more
agreeing with the merit of his doings:  They all have descended in
state, he only as an abominable branch.  His deserts are the
deserts of sin, and therefore the Scutcheons of honour that he has,
are only that he died without Honour, and at his end became a fool.
Thou shalt not be joyned with them in burial.--The seed of evil
doers shall never be renowned.

The Funeral pomp therefore of Mr. Badman, is to wear upon his
Hearse the Badges of a dishonourable and wicked life; since his
bones are full of the sins of his Youth, which shall lye down, as
Job sayes, in the dust with him:  nor is it fit that any should be
his Attendants, now at his death, but such as with him conspired
against their own souls in their life; persons whose transgressions
have made them infamous to all that have or shall know what they
have done.

Some notice therefore I have also here in this little discourse
given the Reader, of them who were his Confederates in his life,
and Attendants at his death; with a hint, either of some high
Villany committed by them, as also of those Judgments that have
overtaken and fallen upon them from the just and revenging hand of
God.  All which are things either fully known by me, as being eye
and ear-witness thereto, or that I have received from such hands,
whose relation as to this, I am bound to believe.  And that the
Reader may know them from other things and passages herein
contained, I have pointed at them in the Margent, as with a finger
thus:  {2a}

Thirdly, The Funerals of persons of Quality have been solemnized
with some suitable Sermon at the time and place of their Burial;
but that I am not come to as yet, having got no further than to Mr.
Badmans death:  but for as much as he must be buried, after he hath
stunk out his time before his beholders, I doubt not but some such
that we read are appointed to be at the burial of Gog, will do this
work in my stead; such as shall leave him neither skin nor bone
above ground, but shall set a sign by it till the buriers have
buried it in the Valley of Hamon-gog, Ezek. 39.

Fourthly, At Funerals there does use to be Mourning and
lamentation, but here also Mr. Badman differs from others; his
Familiars cannot lament his departure, for they have not sence of
his damnable state; they rather ring him, and sing him to Hell in
the sleep of death, in which he goes thither.  Good men count him
no loss to the world, his place can well be without him, his loss
is only his own, and 'tis too late for him to recover that dammage
or loss by a Sea of bloody tears, could he shed them.  Yea, God has
said, he will laugh at his destruction, who then shall lament for
him, saying, Ah! my brother.  He was but a stinking Weed in his
life; nor was he better at all in his death:  such may well be
thrown over the wall without sorrow, when once God has plucked them
up by the roots in his wrath.

Reader, If thou art of the race, linage, stock or fraternity of Mr.
Badman, I tell thee before thou readest this Book, thou wilt
neither brook the Author nor it, because he hath writ of Mr. Badman
as he has.  For he that condemneth the wicked that die so, passeth
also the sentence upon the wicked that live.  I therefore expect
neither credit of, nor countenance from thee, for this Narration of
thy kinsmans life.

For thy old love to thy Friend, his wayes, doings, &c. will stir up
in thee enmity rather, in thy very heart, against me.  I shall
therefore incline to think of thee, that thou wilt rent, burn, or
throw it away in contempt:  yea and wish also, that for writing so
notorious a truth, some mischief may befall me.  I look also to be
loaded by thee with disdain, scorn and contempt; yea that thou
shouldest railingly and vilifyingly say, I lye, and am a
bespatterer of honest mens lives and deaths.  For Mr. Badman, when
himself was alive, could not abide to be counted a Knave (though
his actions told all that went by, that indeed he was such an one:)
How then should his brethren, that survive him, and that tread in
his very steps, approve of the sentence that by this Book is
pronounced against him?  Will they not rather imitate Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram's friends, even rail at me for condemning him,
as they did at Moses for doing execution?

I know 'tis ill pudling in the Cockatrices den, and that they run
hazards that hunt the Wild-Boar.  The man also that writeth Mr.
Badmans life, had need to be fenced with a Coat of Mail, and with
the Staffe of a Spear, for that his surviving friends will know
what he doth:  but I have adventured to do it, and to play, at this
time, at the hole of these Asps; if they bite, they bite; if they
sting, they sting.  Christ sends his Lambs in the midst of Wolves,
not to do like them, but to suffer by them for bearing plain
testimony against their bad deeds:  But had one not need to walk
with a Guard, and to have a Sentinel stand at ones door for this?
Verily, the flesh would be glad of such help; yea, a spiritual man,
could he tell how to get it.  Acts 23.  But I am stript naked of
these, and yet am commanded to be faithful in my servi[c]e for
Christ.  Well then, I have spoken what I have spoken, and now come
on me what will, Job 13. 13.  True, the Text sayes, Rebuke a
scorner, and he will hate thee; and that, He that reproveth a
wicked man, getteth himself a Blot and Shame; but what then?  Open
rebuke is better than secret love; and he that receives it, shall
find it so afterwards.

So then, whether Mr. Badmans friends shall rage or laugh at what I
have writ, I know that the better end of the staffe is mine.  My
endeavour is to stop an hellish Course of Life, and to save a soul
from death, (Jam. 5.) and if for so doing, I meet with envy from
them, from whom in reason I should have thanks, I must remember the
man in the dream, that cut his way through his armed enemies, and
so got into the beauteous Palace; I must, I say, remember him, and
do my self likewise.

Yet four things I will propound to the consideration of Mr. Badmans
friends, before I turn my back upon them.

1.  Suppose that there be an Hell in very deed, not that I do
question it, any more than I do whether there be a Sun to shine;
but I suppose it for argument sake, with Mr. Badmans friends; I
say, suppose there be an Hell, and that too, such an one as the
Scripture speaks of, one at the remotest distance from God and Life
eternall, one where the Worm of a guilty Conscience never dyes, and
where the fire of the Wrath of God is not quenched.

Suppose, I say, that there is such an Hell, prepared of God (as
there is indeed) for the body and soul of the ungodly World after
this life, to be tormented in:  I say, do but with thy self suppose
it, and then tell me, Is it not prepared for thee, thou being a
wicked man?  Let thy conscience speak, I say, is it not prepared
for thee, thou being an ungodly man?  And dost thou think, wast
thou there now, that thou art able to wrestle with the Judgment of
God?  Why then do the fallen Angers tremble there? thy hands cannot
be strong, nor can thy heart endure, in that day when God shall
deal with thee:  Ezek. 22. 14.

2.  Suppose that some one that is now a soul in Hell for sin, was
permitted to come hither again to dwell; and that they had a grant
also, that upon amendment of life, next time the dye, to change
that place for Heaven ant Glory; what sayest thou, O wicked man?
would such an one (thinkest thou) run again into the same course of
life as before, and venture the damnation that for sin he had
already been in?  Would he choose again to lead that cursed life
that afresh would kindle the flames of Hell upon him, and that
would bind him up under the heavy wrath of God?  O! he would not,
he would not; the sixteenth of Luke insinuates it:  yea Reason it
self, awake, would abhorr it, and tremble at such a thought.

3.  Suppose again, that thou that livest and rollest in thy sin,
and that as yet hast known nothing but the pleasure thereof,
shouldst be by an angel conveyed to some place where with
convenience, from thence thou mightest have a view of Heaven and
Hell; of the Joyes of the one, and the torments of the other; I
say, suppose that from thence thou mightest have such a view
thereof, as would convince thy reason, that both Heaven and Hell,
are such realities as by the Word they are declared to be; wouldest
thou (thinkest thou) when brought to thy home again, chuse to thy
self thy former life, to wit, to return to thy folly again?  No; if
belief of what thou sawest, remained with thee, thou wouldest eat
Fire and Brimstone first.

4.  I will propound again.  Suppose that there was amongst us such
a Law, (and such a Magistrate to inflict the penalty,) That for
every open wickedness committed by thee, so much of thy flesh
should with burning Pincers be plucked from thy Bones:  Wouldest
thou then go on in thy open way of Lying, Swearing, Drinking and
Whoring, as thou with delight doest now?  Surely, surely, No:  The
fear of the punishment would make thee forbear; yea, would make
thee tremble, even then when thy lusts were powerfull, to think
what a punishment thou wast sure to sustain, so soon as the
pleasure was over.  But Oh! the folly, the madness, the desperate
madness that is in the hearts of Mr. Badmans friends, who in
despite of the threatnings of an holy and sin revenging God, and of
the outcries and warnings of all good men; yea, that will in
despite of the groans and torments of those that are now in Hell
for sin, (Luk. 16. 24. 28.) go on in a sinfull course of life; yea,
though every sin is also a step of descent, down to that infernal
Cave.  O how true is that saying of Solomon, The heart of the sons
of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they
live, and after that they go to the dead, Eccles. 9. 3.  To the
dead! that is, to the dead in Hell, to the damned dead; the place
to which those that have dyed Bad men are gone, and that those that
live Bad men are like to go to, when a little more sin, like
stollen waters, hath been imbibed by their sinful souls.

That which has made me publish this Book is,

1.  For that wickedness like a flood is like to drown our English
world:  it begins already to be above the tops of mountains; it has
almost swallowed up all; our Youth, our Middle age, Old age, and
all, are almost carried away of this flood.  O Debauchery,
Debauchery, what hast thou done in England!  Thou hast corrupted
our Young men, and hast made our Old men beasts; thou hast
deflowered our Virgins, and hast made Matrons Bawds.  Thou hast
made our earth to reel to and fro like a drunkard; 'tis in danger
to be removed like a Cottage, yea, it is, because transgression is
so heavy upon it, like to fall and rise no more.  Isa. 24. 20.

O! that I could mourn for England, and for the sins that are
committed therein, even while I see that without repentance, the
men of Gods wrath are about to deal with us, each having his
slaughtering weapon in his hand:  (Ezek. 9. 1, 2.)  Well, I have
written, and by Gods assistance shall pray, that this flood may
abate in England:  and could I but see the tops of the Mountains
above it, I should think that these waters were abating.

2.  It is the duty of those that can, to cry out against this
deadly plague, yea, to lift up their voice as with a Trumpet
against it; that men may he awakened about it, flye from it, as
from that which is the greatest of evils.  Sin pull'd Angels out of
Heaven, pulls men down to Hell, and overthroweth Kingdoms.  Who,
that sees an house on fire, will not give the Allarum to them that
dwell therein? who that sees the Land invaded, will not set the
Beacons on a fame?  Who, that sees the Devils, as roaring Lyons,
continually devouring souls, will not make an Out-cry?  But above
all, when we see sin, sinful sin, a swallowing up a Nation, sinking
of a Nation, and bringing its Inhabitants to temporal, spiritual,
and eternal ruine, shall we not cry out, and cry, They are drunk,
but not with Wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink; they
are intoxicated with the deadly poyson of sin, which will, if its
malignity be not by wholsom means allayed, bring Soul and Body, and
Estate and Countrey, and all, to ruin and destruction?

3.  In and by this my Out-cry, I shall deliver my self from the
ruins of them that perish:  for a man can do no more in this
matter, I mean a man in my capacity, than to detect and condemn the
wickedness, warn the evil doer of the Judgment, and fly therefrom
my self.  But Oh! that I might not only deliver my self!  Oh that
many would hear, and turn at this my cry, from sin! that they may
be secured from the death and Judgment that attend it.

Why I have handled the matter in this method, is best known to my
self:  and why I have concealed most of the Names of the persons
whose sins or punishments I here and there in this Book make
relation of, is,

1.  For that neither the sins nor Judgments were all alike open;
the sins of some, were committed, and the Judgments executed for
them only in a corner.  Not to say that I could not learn some of
their names; for could I, I should not have made them publick, for
this reason.

2.  Because I would not provoke those of their Relations that
survive them; I would not justly provoke them, and yet, as I think,
I should, should I have intailed their punishment to their sins,
and both to their names, and so have turned them into the world.

3.  Nor would I lay them under disgrace and contempt, which would,
as I think, unavoidably have happened unto them had I withall
inserted their Names.

As for those whose Names I mention, their crimes or Judgments were
manifest; publick almost as any thing of that nature that happeneth
to mortal men.  Such therefore have published their own shame by
their sin, and God, his anger, by taking of open vengeance.

As Job sayes, God has strook them as wicked men in the open sight
of others, Job 34. 26.  So that I cannot conceive, since their sin
and Judgment was so conspicuous, that my admonishing the world
thereof, should turn to their detriment:  For the publishing of
these things, are, so far as Relation is concerned, intended for
remembrancers:  That they may also bethink themselves, repent and
turn to God, lest the Judgments for their sins should prove
hereditary.  For the God of Heaven hath threatned to visit the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children, if they hate him, to the
third and fourth generation, Exod. 20. 5.

Nebuchadnezzars punishment for his pride being open, (for he was
for his sin, driven from his Kingly dignity, and from among men
too, to eat grass like an Ox, and to company with the beasts,)
Daniel did not stick to tell Belshazzar his son to his face
thereof; nor to publish it that it might be read and remembred by
the generations to come.  The same may be said of Judas and
Ananias, &c. for their sin and punishment were known to all the
dwellers at Jerusalem, Acts 1. Chap. 5.

Nor is it a sign but of desperate impenitence and hardness of
heart, when the offspring or relations of those who have fallen by
open, fearfull and prodigious Judgments, for their sin, shall
overlook, forget, pass by, or take no notice of such high outgoings
of God against them and their house.  Thus Daniel aggravates
Belshazzars crime, for that he hardened his heart in pride, though
he knew that for that very sin and transgression his father was
brought down from his height, and made to be a companion for Asses.
And thou his son, O Belshazzar, sayes he, hast not humbled thy
heart, though thou knewest all this.  Dan. 5.  A home reproof
indeed, but home is most fit for an open and continued-in
transgression.

Let those then that are the Offspring or relations of such, who by
their own sin, and the dreadfull Judgments of God, are made to
become a sign, (Deut. 16. 9, 10.) having been swept, as dung, from
off the face of the earth, beware, lest when Judgment knocks at
their door, for their sins, as it did before at the door of their
Pregenitors, it falls also with as heavy a stroak as on them that
went before them:  Lest, I say, they in that day, instead of
finding mercy, find for their high, daring, and Judgment-
affronting-sins, Judgment without mercy.

To conclude, let those that would not dye Mr. Badmans death, take
heed of Mr. Badmans wayes:  for his wayes bring to his end;
Wickedness will not deliver him that is given to it; though they
should cloak all with a Profession of Religion.

If it was a transgression of Old, for a man to wear a Womans
Apparel, surely it is a transgression now for a sinner to wear a
Christian Profession for a Cloak.  Wolves in Sheeps Cloathing swarm
in England this day:  Wolves both as to Doctrine, and as to
Practice too.  Some men make a Profession, I doubt, on purpose that
they may twist themselves into a Trade; and thence into an Estate;
yea, and if need be, into an Estate Knavishly, by the ruins of
their Neighbour:  let such take heed, for those that do such things
have the greater damnation.

Christian, make thy Profession shine by a Conversation according to
the Gospel:  Or else thou wilt damnifie Religion, bring scandal to
thy Brethren, and give offence to the Enemies; and 'twould be
better that a Millstone was hanged about thy neck, and that thou,
as so adorned, wast cast into the bottom of the Sea, than so to do.

Christian, a Profession according to the Gospel, is, in these
dayes, a rare thing; seek then after it, put it on, and keep it
without spot; and (as becomes thee) white, and clean, and thou
shalt be a rare Christian.

The Prophecy of the last times is, that professing men (for so I
understand the Text) s[h]all be, many of them, base; (2 Tim. 3.)
but continue thou in the things that thou hast learned, not of
wanton men, not of licentious times, but of the Word and Doctrine
of God, that is according to Godliness; and thou shalt walk with
Christ in white.

Now God Almighty give his people Grace, not to hate or malign
Sinners nor yet to choose any of their wayes, but to keep
themselves pure from the blood of all men, by speaking and doing
according to that Name and those Rules that they profess to know,
and love; for Jesus Christs sake.

John Bunyan.



Books lately Printed for and Sold by Nathaniel Ponder at the
Peacock in the Poultrey, neer the Church.



Biblia Sacra, sive Testamentum Vetus, ab Im. Tremellio & Fr. Junio
ex Hebraeo Latine redditum.  Et Testamentum Novum a Theod.  Beza e
Graeco in Latinum versum.  Argumentis Capitum additis versibusque
singulis distinctis, & seorsum expressis. 12 [degree sign].

[Greek text], Or, A Declaration of the Glorious Mystery of the
Person of Christ, God and Man.  With the Infinite Wisdom, Love and
Power of God in the contrivance and constitution thereof.  As also
of the Grounds and Reasons of his Incarnation, the nature of his
Ministry in Heaven, the present State of the Church above thereon,
and the Use of his Person in Religion.  With an Account and
Vindication of the Honour, Worship, Faith, Love, and Obedience due
unto him, in and from the Church.  By John Owen, D.D.

Divine Breathings:  or a Manual of practical Contemplations, in one
Century:  Tending to promote Gospel-Principles, and a good
Conversation in Christ.  Comprizing in brief many of those great
Truths that are to be known and practised by a Christian.  By T.S.

Youth's Comedy, or the Souls Tryals and Triumph:  a Dramatick Poem.
With Divers Meditations intermixt upon several Subjects.  Set forth
to help and encourage those that are seeking a Heavenly Country.
By the Author of Youth's Tragedy.

A Treatise of the Fear of God:  shewing what it is, and how
distinguished from that which is not so.  Also Whence it comes.
Who has it.  What are the Effects.  And What the Priviledges of
those that have it in their hearts.  By John Bunyan.

The Tragical History of Jetzer:  Or, a Faithful Narrative of the
Feigned Visions, Counterfeit Revelations, and false Miracles of the
Dominican Fathers of the Covent of Bern in Switzerland, to
Propagate their Superstitions.  For which Horrid Impieties, the
Prior, Sub-Prior, Lecturer, and Receiver of the said Covent were
Burnt at a Stake, Anno Dom. 1509.  Collected From the Records of
the said City by the Care of Sir William Waller, Knight.
Translated from his French Copy by an Impartial Pen, and now made
Publick for the Information of English Protestants, who may hence
learn, that Catholicks will stick at no Villanies which may Advance
their Designs, nor at any Perjuries that may Conceal them.  With an
Epistle, wherein are some soft and gentle Reflections upon the
Lying, Dying Speeches of the Jesuites lately Executed at Tyburn.
The Second Edition.

The Pilgrims Progress from this World to that which is to come:
Delivered in the Similitude of a Dream.  By John Bunyan.  This
fourth Impression hath the Authors Picture and many Additions.

There is now in the Press, and will be suddenly published, An
Exposition on the 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10th Chapters on the Hebrews:
Being a Third Volume.  By John Owen, D.D.


ERRATA.


Page 127. line 8. for amated read amazed, p. 149. l. 15. for
herbaps r. perhaps, p. 162. l. 3, & 4. for diababolical r.
diabolical, p. 287. l. 9. for, for r. so, p. 304. for reputation r.
repentance.



THE LIFE AND DEATH OF MR. BADMAN
Presented to the World in a Familiar DIALOGUE
Betwixt { Mr. WISEMAN,
        {    And,
        { Mr. ATTENTIVE.



Wiseman.

Good morrow my good Neighbour, Mr. Attentive; whither are you
walking so early this morning? methinks you look as if you were
concerned about something more than ordinary.  Have you lost any of
your Cattel, or what is the matter?

Attentive.  Good Sir, Good morrow to you, I have not as yet lost
ought, but yet you give a right ghess of me, for I am, as you say,
concerned in my heart, but 'tis because of the badness of the
times.  And Sir, you, as all our Neighbours know, are a very
observing man, pray therefore what do you think of them?

Wise.  Why?  I think, as you say, to wit, that they are bad times,
and bad they will be, untill men are better:  for they are bad men
that make bad times; if men therefore would mend, so would the
times.  'Tis a folly to look for good dayes, so long as sin is so
high, and those that study its nourishment so many.  God bring it
down, and those that nourish it to Repentance, and then my good
Neighbour, you will be concerned, not as you are now:  Now you are
concerned because times are so bad; but then you will be so, 'cause
times are so good:  Now you are concerned so as to be perplexed,
but then you will be concerned so as to lift up your voice with
shouting; for I dare say, could you see such dayes they would make
you shout.

Atten.  Ai, so they would, such times I have prayed for, such times
I have longed for:  but I fear they'l be worse before they be
better.

Wise.  Make no Conclusions, man:  for he that hath the hearts of
men in his hand, can change them from worse to better, and so bad
times into good.  God give long life to them that are good, and
especially to those of them that are capable of doing him service
in the world.  The Ornament and Beauty of this lower World, next to
God and his Wonders, are the men that spangle and shine in
godliness.

Now as Mr. Wiseman said this, he gave a great sigh.

Atten.  Amen.  Amen.  But why, good Sir, do you sigh so deeply? is
it for ought else than that for the which as you have perceived, I
my self am concerned?

Wise.  I am concerned with you, for the badness of the times; but
that was not the cause of that sigh, of the which, as I see, you
take notice.  I sighed at the remembrance of the death of that man
for whom the Bell tolled at our Town yesterday.

Atten.  Why?  I trow, Mr. Goodman your Neighbour is not dead.
Indeed I did hear that he had been sick.

Wise.  No, no, it is not he.  Had it been he, I could not but have
been concerned, but yet not as I am concerned now.  If he had died,
I should only have been concerned for that the world had lost a
Light:  but the man that I am concerned for now, was one that never
was good, therefore such an one who is not dead only, but damned.
He died that he might die, he went from Life to Death, and then
from Death to Death, from Death Natural to death Eternal.  And as
he spake this, the water stood in his eyes.

Atten.  Indeed, to goe from a death-bed to Hell is a fearful thing
to think on.  But good Neighbour Wiseman, be pleased to tell me who
this man was, and why you conclude him so miserable in his death?

Wise.  Well, if you can stay, I will tell you who he was, and why I
conclude thus concerning him.

Atten.  My leisure will admit me to stay, and I am willing to hear
you out.  And I pray God your discourse may take hold on my heart,
that I may be bettered thereby.  So they agreed to sit down under a
tree:  Then Mr. Wiseman proceeded as followeth.

Wise.  The man that I mean, is one Mr. Badman; he has lived in our
Town a great while, and now, as I said, he is dead.  But the reason
of my being so concerned at his death, is, not for that he was at
all related to me, or for that any good conditions died with him,
for he was far from them, but for that, as I greatly fear, he hath,
as was hinted before, died two deaths at once.

Atten.  I perceive what you mean by two deaths at once; and to
speak truth, 'tis a fearfull thing thus to have ground to think of
any:  for although the death of the ungodly and sinners is laid to
heart but of few, yet to die in such a state, is more dreadful and
fearful than any man can imagine.  Indeed if a man had no Soul, if
his state was not truely Immortal, the matter would not be so much;
but for a man to be so disposed of by his Maker, as to be appointed
a sensible being for ever, and for him too to fall into the hands
of revenging Justice, that will be always, to the utmost extremity
that his sin deserveth, punishing of him in the dismal dungeon of
Hell, this must needs be unutterably sad, and lamentable.

Wise.  There is no man, I think, that is sensible of the worth of
one Soul, but must, when he hears of the death of unconverted men,
be stricken with sorrow and grief:  because, as you said well, that
mans state is such, that he has a sensible being for ever.  For
'tis sense that makes punishment heavy.  But yet sense is not all
that the Damned have, they have sense and reason too; so then, as
Sense receiveth punishment with sorrow because it feels, and bleeds
under the same, so by Reason, and the exercise thereof, in the
midst of torment, all present Affliction is aggravated, and that
three manner of wayes:

1.  Reason will consider thus with himself; For what am I thus
tormented? and will easily find 'tis for nothing but that base and
filthy thing, Sin; and now will Vexation be mixed with Punishment,
and that will greatly heighten the Affliction.

2.  Reason will consider thus with himself.  How long must this be
my state?  And will soon return to himself this Answer:  This must
be my state for ever and ever.  Now this will greatly increase the
torment.

3.  Reason will consider thus with himself; What have I lost more
than present ease and quiet by my sins that I have committed?  And
will quickly return himself this answer:  I have lost Communion
with God, Christ, Saints and Angels, and a share in Heaven and
eternal Life:  And this also must needs greaten the misery of poor
damned souls.  And this is the case of Mr. Badman.

Atten.  I feel my heart even shake at the thoughts of coming into
such a state.  Hell! who knows that is yet alive, what the torments
of Hell are?  This word Hell gives a very dreadful sound.

Wise.  Ai, so it does in the ears of him that has a tender
Conscience.  But if, as you say, and that truly, the very Name of
Hell, is so dreadful, what is the Place it self, and what are the
Punishments that are there inflicted, and that without the least
intermission, upon the Souls of damned men, for ever and ever.

Atten.  Well, but passing this; my leisure will admit me to stay,
and therefore pray tell me what it is that makes you think that Mr.
Badman is gone to Hell.

Wise.  I will tell you.  But first do you know which of the Badmans
I mean?

Atten.  Why was there more of them than one?

Wise.  O, yes, a great many, both Brothers and Sisters, and yet all
of them the Children of a godly Parent, the more a great deal is
the pity.

Atten.  Which of them therefore was it that died.

Wise.  The eldest, old in years, and old in sin; but the sinner
that dies an hundred years old shall be accursed.

Atten.  Well, but what makes you think he is gone to Hell?

Wise.  His wicked life, and fearful death, specially since the
Manner of his death was so corresponding with his life.

Atten.  Pray let me know the manner of his death, if your self did
perfectly know it.

Wise.  I was there when he died:  But I desire not to see another
such man (while I live) die in such sort as he did.

Atten.  Pray therefore let me hear it.

Wise.  You say you have leisure and can stay, and therefore, if you
please, we will discourse even orderly of him.  First, we will
begin with his Life, and then proceed to his Death:  Because a
relation of the first may the more affect you, when you shall hear
of the second.

Atten.  Did you then so well know his Life?

Wise.  I knew him of a Child.  I was a man, when he was but a boy,
and I made special observation of him from first to last.

Atten.  Pray then let me hear from you an account of his Life; but
be as brief as you can, for I long to hear of the manner of his
death.

Wise.  I will endeavour to answer your desires, and first, I will
tell you, that from a Child he was very bad:  his very beginning
was ominous, and presaged that no good end, was, in likelyhood, to
follow thereupon.  There were several sins that he was given to,
when but a little one, that manifested him to be notoriously
infected with Or[i]ginal corruption; for I dare say he learned none
of them of his Father or Mother; nor was he admitted to go much
abroad among other Children, that were vile, to learn to sin of
them:  Nay, contrariwise, if at any time he did get abroad amongst
others, he would be as the Inventer of bad words, and an example in
bad actions.  To them all he used to be, as we say, the Ring-
leader, and Master-sinner from a Childe.

Atten.  This was a bad Beginning indeed, and did demonstrate that
he was, as you say, polluted, very much polluted with Original
Corruption.  For to speak my mind freely, I do confess, that it is
mine opinion, that Children come polluted with sin into the World,
and that oft-times the sins of their youth, especially while they
are very young, are rather by vertue of Indwelling sin, than by
examples that are set before them by others.  Not but that they
learn to sin by example too, but Example is not the root, but
rather the Temptation unto wickedness.  The root is sin within; for
from within, out of the heart of man proceedeth sin. {20a} {20b}

Wise.  I am glad to hear that you are of this opinion, and to
confirm what you have said by a few hints from the Word.  Man in
his birth is compared to an Ass, (an unclean Beast) and to a
wretched Infant in its blood:  besides, all the first-born of old
that were offered unto the Lord, were to be redeemed at the age of
a month, and that was before they were sinners by imitation.  The
Scripture also affirmeth, {21a} that by the sin of one, Judgement
came upon all; and renders this reason, for that all have sinned:
nor is that Objection worth a rush, That Christ by his death hath
taken away Original Sin.  First, Because it is Scriptureless.
Secondly, Because it makes them incapable of Salvation by Christ;
for none but those that in their own Persons are sinners, are to
have Salvation by him.  Many other things might be added, but
between persons so well agreed as you and I are, these may suffice
at present:  but when an Antagonist comes to deal with us about
this matter, then we have for him often other strong Arguments, if
he be an Antagonist worth the taking notice of. {21b}

Atten.  But, as was hinted before, he used to be the Ring-leading
Sinner, or the Master of mischief among other children; yet these
are but Generals; pray therefore tell me in Particular which were
the sins of his Childhood.

Wise.  I will so.  When he was but a Child, he was so addicted to
Lying, {21c} that his Parents scarce knew when to believe he spake
true; yea, he would invent, tell, and stand to the Lyes that he
invented and told, and that with such an audacious face, that one
might even read in his very countenance the symptoms of an hard and
desperate heart this way.

Atten.  This was an ill beginning indeed, and argueth that he began
to harden himself in sin betimes.  For a lye cannot be knowingly
told and stood in, (and I perceive that this was his manner of way
in Lying) but he must as it were force his own heart into it.  Yea,
he must make his heart {21d} hard, and bold to doe it:  Yea, he
must be arrived to an exceeding pitch of wickedness thus to doe,
since all this he did against that good education, that before you
seemed to hint, he had from his Father and Mother.

Wise.  The want of good Education, as you have intimated, is many
times a cause why Children doe so easily, so soon, become bad;
especially when there is not only a want of that, but bad Examples
enough, as, the more is the pity, there is in many Families; by
vertue of which poor Children are trained up in Sin, and nursed
therein for the Devil and Hell.  But it was otherwise with Mr.
Badman, for to my knowledge, this his way of Lying, was a great
grief to his Parents, for their hearts were much dejected at this
beginning of their Son; nor did there want Counsel and Correction
from them to him, if that would have made him better.  He wanted
not to be told, in my hearing, and that over and over and over,
That all Lyars should have their part in the Lake that burns with
fire and brimstone; and that whosoever loveth and maketh a lye,
should not have any part in the new and heavenly Jerusalem:  {22a}
But all availed nothing with him; when a fit, or an occasion to
lie, came upon him, he would invent, tell, and stand to his Lie (as
steadfastly as if it had been the biggest of truths,) that he told,
and that with that hardening of his heart and face, that it would
be to those that stood by, a wonder.  Nay, and this he would doe
when under the rod of correction which is appointed by God for
Parents to use, that thereby they might keep their Children from
Hell. {22b}

Atten.  Truly it was, as I said, a bad beginning, he served the
Devil betimes; yea he became a Nurse to one of his {22c} Brats, for
a spirit of Lying is the Devils Brat, {22d} for he is a Liar and
the Father of it.

Wise.  Right, he is the Father of it indeed.  A Lie is begot by the
Devil, as the Father, and is brought forth by the wicked heart, as
the Mother:  wherefore another Scripture also saith, Why hath Satan
filled thy heart to lye, {22e} &c.  Yea, he calleth the heart that
is big with a lye, an heart that hath Conceived, that is, by the
Devil.  Why hast thou conceived this thing in thy heart, thou hast
not lied unto men, but unto God.  True, his lye was a lye of the
highest nature, but every lye hath the {22f} same Father and Mother
as had the lie last spoken of.  For he is a lier, and the Father of
it.  A lie then is the Brat of Hell, and it cannot {23a} be in the
heart before the person has committed a kind of spiritual Adultery
with the Devil.  That Soul therefore that telleth a known lie, has
lien with, and conceived it by lying with the Devil, the only
Father of lies.  For a lie has only one Father and Mother, the
Devil and the Heart.  No marvel therefore if the hearts that hatch
and bring forth Lies, be so much of complexion with the Devil.
Yea, no marvel though God and Christ have so bent their Word
against lyers:  a lyer is weded to the Devil himself.

Atten.  It seems a marvellous thing in mine eyes, that since a lye
is the Offspring of the devill, and since a lye brings the soul to
the very den of Devils, to wit, the dark dungeon of hell; that men
should be so desperately wicked as to accustom themselves to so
horrible a thing.

Wise.  It seems also marvellous to me, specially when I observe for
how little a matter some men will study, contrive, make and tell a
lye.  You shall have some that will lye it over and over, and that
for a peny {23b} profit.  Yea, lye and stand in it, although they
know that they lye:  yea, you shall have some men that will not
stick to tell lye after lye, though themselves get nothing thereby;
They will tell lyes in their ordinary discourse with their
Neighbours, also their News, their Jests, and their Tales must
needs be adorned with lyes; or else they seem to bear no good sound
to the ear, nor shew much to the fancie of him to whom they are
told.  But alas, what will these lyers doe, when, for their lyes
they shall be tumbled down into hell, to that Devil that did beget
those lyes in their heart, and so be tormented by fire and
brimstone, with him, and that for ever and ever, for their lyes?

Atten.  Can you not give one some example of Gods Judgements upon
lyers, that one may tell them to lyers when one hears them lye, if
perhaps they may by the hearing thereof, be made afraid, and
ashamed to lye.

Wise.  Examples! why, {23c} Saphira and his wife are examples
enough to put a stop, one would think, to a spirit addicted
thereto, for they both were stricken down dead for telling a lye,
and that by God himself, in the midst of a company of people.  But
if Gods threatning of Liers with Hell-fire, and with the loss of
the Kingdom of Heaven, will not prevail with them to leave off to
lie and make lies, it cannot be imagined that a relation of
temporal Judgements that have swept liers out of the World
heretofore, should do it.  Now, as I said, this Lying was one of
the first sins that Mr. Badman was addicted to, and he could make
them and tell them fearfully.

Atten.  I am sorry to hear this of him, and so much the more
because, as I fear, this sin did not reign in him {24a} alone; for
usually one that is accustomed to lying, is also accustomed to
other evils besides, and if it were not so also with Mr. Badman, it
would be indeed a wonder.

Wise.  You say true, the lier is a Captive slave of more than the
spirit of lying:  and therefore this Mr. Badman, as he was a lier
from a Child, so he was also much given to {24b} pilfer and steal,
so that what he could, as we say, handsomly lay his hands on, that
was counted his own, whether they were the things of his fellow
Children; or if he could lay hold of any thing at a Neighbours
house, he would take it away; you must understand me of Trifles;
for being let but a Child he attempted no great matter, especially
at first.  But yet as he grew up in strength and ripeness of wit,
so he attempted to pilfer and steal things still of more value than
at first.  He took at last great pleasure in robbing of Gardens and
Orchards; and as he grew up, to steal Pullen from the
Neighbourhood:  Yea, what was his {24c} Fathers, could not escape
his fingers, all was Fish that came to his Net, so hardened, at
last, was he in this mischief also.

Atten.  You make me wonder more and more.  What, play the Thief
too!  What play the Thief so soon!  He could not but know, though
he was but a Child, that what he took from others, was none of his
own.  Besides, if his Father was a good man, as you say, it could
not be, but he must also hear from him, that to steal was to
transgress the Law of God, and so to run the hazard of eternal
Damnation.

Wise.  His Father was not wanting to use the means to reclaim him,
often urging, as I have been told, that saying in the Law of Moses,
{24d} Thou shalt not steal:  And also that, This is the Curse that
goeth forth over the face of the whole earth, for every one that
stealeth shall be cut off, &c. {25a}  The light of Nature also,
though he was little, must needs shew him that what he took from
others, was not his own, and that he would not willingly have been
served so himself.  But all was to no purpose, let Father and
Conscience say what they would to him, he would go on, he was
resolved to go on in his wickedness.

Atten.  But his Father would, as you intimate, sometimes rebuke him
for his wickedness; pray how would he carry it then?

Wise.  How! why, like to a Thief that is found.  He would stand
{25b} gloating, and hanging down his head in a sullen, pouching
manner, (a body might read, as we use to say, the picture of Ill-
luck in his face,) and when his Father did demand his answer to
such questions concerning his Villany, he would grumble and mutter
at him, and that should be all he could get.

Atten.  But you said that he would also rob his Father, methinks
that was an unnatural thing.

Wise.  Natural or unnatural, all is one to a Thief.  Beside, you
must think that he had likewise Companions to whom he was, for the
wickedness that he saw in them, more {25c} firmly knit, than either
to Father or Mother.  Yea, and what had he cared if Father and
Mother had died for grief for him.  Their death would have been, as
he would have counted, great release and liberty to him:  For the
truth is, they and their counsel was his Bondage; yea, and if I
forget not, I have heard some say, that when he was, at times,
among his Companions, he would greatly {25d} rejoyce to think that
his Parents were old, and could not live long, and then, quoth he,
I shall be mine own man, to do what I list without their controul.

Atten.  Then it seems he counted that robbing of his Parents was no
crime.

Wise.  None at all, and therefore he fell directly under that
Sentence, Whoso robbeth his Father or his Mother, and saith it is
no transgression, the same is the companion of a destroyer.  And
for that he set so light by them as to their Persons and Counsels,
'twas a sign that at present he was of a very abominable spirit,
{26a} and that some Judgement waited to take hold of him in time to
come.

Atten.  But can you imagin what it was, I mean, in his conceit (for
I speak not now of the suggestions of Satan, by which doubtless he
was put on to do these things,) I say what it should be in his
conceit, that should make him think that this his manner of
pilfering and stealing was no great matter.

Wise.  It was, for that, the things that he stole, were small; to
rob Orchards, and Gardens, and to steal Pullen, and the like, these
he counted {26b} Tricks of Youth, nor would he be beat out of it by
all that his Friends could say.  They would tell him that he must
not covet, or desire, (and yet to desire, is less than to take)
even any thing, the least thing that was his Neighbours, and that
if he did, it would be a transgression of the Law; but all was one
to him:  what through the wicked Talk of his Companions, and the
delusion of his own corrupt heart, he would go on in his pilfering
course, and where he thought himself secure, would talk of, and
laugh at it when he had done.

Atten.  Well, {26c} I heard a man once, when he was upon the Ladder
with the Rope about his Neck, confess (when ready to be turned off
by the Hangman) that that which had brought him to that end, was
his accustoming of himself, when young, to pilfer and steal small
things.  To my best remembrance he told us, that he began the trade
of a Thief by stealing Pins and Points, and therefore did forewarn
all the Youth, that then were gathered together to see him die, to
take heed of beginning, though but with little sins, because by
tampering at first with little ones, way is made for the commission
of bigger.

Wise.  Since you are entred upon Storyes, I also will tell you one,
the which, {26d} though I heard it not with mine own Ears, yet my
Author I dare believe:  {26e} It is concerning one old Tod, that
was hanged about Twenty years agoe, or more, at Hartford, for being
a Thief.  The Story is this:

At {27a} a Summer Assizes holden at Hartfor[d], while the Judge was
sitting upon the Bench, comes this old Tod into the Court, cloathed
in a green Suit, with his Leathern Girdle in his hand, his Bosom
open, and all on a dung sweat, as if he had run for his Life; and
being come in, he spake aloud as follows:  {27b} My Lord, said he,
Here is the veryest Rogue that breaths upon the face of the earth.
I have been a Thief from a Child:  When I was but a little one, I
gave my self to rob Orchards, and to do other such like wicked
things, and I have continued a Thief ever since.  My Lord, there
has not been a Robbery committed thus many years within so many
miles if this place, but I have either been at it, or privy to it.

The Judge thought the fellow was mad, but after some conference
with some of the Justices, they agreed to Indict him; and so they
did of several felonious Actions; to all which he heartily
confessed Guilty, and so was hanged with his Wife at the same time.

Atten.  This is a remarkable Story indeed, and you think it is a
true one.

Wise.  It is not only remarkable, but pat to our purpose.  This
Thief, like Mr. Badman, began his Trade betimes; he began too where
Mr. Badman began, even at robbing of Orchards, and other such
things, which brought him, as you may perceive, from sin to sin,
till at last it brought him to the publick shame of sin, which is
the Gallows.

As for the truth of this Story, the Relator told me that he was at
the same time himself in the Court, and stood within less than two
yards of old Tod, when he heard him aloud to utter the words.

Atten.  These two sins of lying and stealing were a bad sign of an
evil end.

Wise.  So they were, and yet Mr. Badman came not to his end like
old Tod; Though I fear, to as bad, nay, worse than was that death
of the Gallows, though less discerned by spectators; but more of
that by and by.  But you talk of these two sins as if these were
all that Mr. Badman was addicted to in his Youth:  Alas, alas, he
swarmed with sins, even as a Begger does with Vermin, and that when
he was but a Boy.

Atten.  Why what other sins was he addicted to, I mean while he was
but a Child?

Wise.  You need not ask, to what other sins was he, but to what
other sins was he not addicted, that is, of such as suited with his
Age:  for a man may safely say, that nothing that was vile came
amiss to him; if he was but capable to do it.  Indeed some sins
there be that Childhood knows not how to be tampering with; but I
speak of sins that he was capable of committing, of which I will
nominate two or three more.  And,

First, He could not endure the {28a} Lords Day, because of the
Holiness that did attend it; the beginning of that Day was to him
as if he was going to Prison, (except he could get out from his
Father and Mother, and lurk in by-holes among his Companions,
untill holy Duties were over.)  Reading the Scriptures, hearing
Sermons, godly Conference, repeating of Sermons, and Prayer, were
things that he could not away with; and therefore if his Father on
such days, (as often he did, though sometimes notwithstanding his
diligence, he would be sure to give him the slip) did keep him
strictly to the observation of the day, he would plainly shew by
all carriages that he was highly discontent therewith:  he would
sleep at Duties, would talk vainly with his Brothers, and as it
were, think every godly opportunity seven times as long as it was,
gruding till it was over.

Atten.  This his abhorring of that day, was not, I think, for the
sake of the day itself:  for as it is a day, it is nothing else but
as other days of the Week:  But I suppose it were, think every
godly as it was, grudging till it that day, was not, I think) as it
is a day, it is nothing of the Week:  But I suppose that the {28b}
reason of his loathing of it, was, for that God hath put sanctity
and holiness upon it; also because it is the day above all the days
of the week that ought to be spent in holy Devotion, in remembrance
of our Lords Resurrection from the dead.

Wise.  Yes, 'twas therefore, that he was such an enemy to it, even
because more restraint was laid upon him on that day, from his own
ways, than were possible should be laid upon him on all others.

Atten.  Doth not God by instituting of a day unto holy Duties, make
great proof how the hearts and inclinations of poor people do stand
to Holiness of heart, and a Conversation in [h]oly duties?

Wise.  {29a} Yes doubtless; and a man shall shew his Heart and his
Life what they are, more by one Lords-day, than by all the days of
the week besides:  And the reason is, because on the Lords-day
there is a special restraint laid upon men as to Thoughts and Life,
more than upon other days of the week besides.  Also, men are
enjoyned on that day to a stricter performance of holy Duties, and
restraint of worldly business, than upon other days they are;
wherefore, if their hearts incline not naturally to good, now they
will shew it, now they will appear what they are.  The Lords Day is
a kind of an Emblem of the heavenly Sabbath above, and it makes
manifest how the heart stands to the perpetuity of Holiness, more
than to be found in a transient Duty, does.

On other days a man may be in and out of holy Duties, and all in a
quarter of an hour; but now, the Lords Day is, as it were, a day
that enjoyns to one perpetual Duty of Holiness:  Remember that thou
keep holy the Sabbath day, {29b} (which by Christ is not abrogated,
but changed, into the First of the week,) not as it was given in
particular to the Jews, but as it was sanctified by him from the
Beginning of the world; and therefore is a greater proof of the
frame and temper of a mans heart, and does more make manifest to
what he is inclined, than doth his other performance of Duties:
Therefore God puts great difference between them that truly call
(and walk in) this day as holy, and count it Honourable, {29c} upon
the account that now they have an opportunity to shew how they
delight to honour him; {29d} in that they have, not only an Hour,
but a whole Day to shew it in:  I say, he puts great difference
between these, and that other sort that say, When will the Sabbath
be gone, that we may be at our worldly business. {29e}  The first
he calleth a Blessed man, but brandeth the other for an
unsanctified worldling.  And indeed, to delight ourselves in Gods
service upon his Holy days, gives a better proof of a sanctified
Nature, than to grudge at the coming, and to be weary of the holy
duties of such dayes, as Mr. Badman did.

Atten.  There may be something in what you say, for he that cannot
abide to keep one day holy to God, to be sure he hath given a
sufficient proof that he is an unsanctified man; and as such, what
should he do in Heaven? that being the place where a perpetual
Sabath is to be kept to God; {30a} I say, to be kept for ever and
ever.  And for ought I know, one reason why one day in seven, hath
been by our Lord set apart unto holy Duties for men, may be to give
them conviction that there is enmity in the hearts of sinners to
the God of Heaven, for he that hateth Holiness, hateth God himself.
They pretend to love God, and yet love not a holy day, and yet love
not to spend that day in one continued act of holiness to the Lord:
They had as good say nothing as to call him Lord, Lord, and yet not
doe the things that he says.  And this Mr. Badman was such an one:
he could not abide this day, nor any of the Duties of it.  Indeed,
when he could get from his Friends, and so {30b} spend it in all
manner of idleness and profaneness, then he would be pleased well
enough:  but what was this but a turning the day into night, or
other than taking an opportunity at Gods forbidding, to follow our
Callings, to solace and satisfie our lusts and delights of the
flesh.  I take the liberty to speak thus of Mr. Badman, upon a
confidence of what you, Sir, have said of him, is true.

Wise.  You needed not to have made that Apology for your censuring
of Mr. Badman, for all that knew him, will confirm what you said of
him to be true.  He could not abide either that day, or any thing
else that had the stamp or image of God upon it.  Sin, sin, and to
do the thing that was naught, was that which he delighted in, and
that from a little Child.

Atten.  I must say again, I am sorry to hear it, and that for his
own sake, and also for the sake of his Relations, who must needs be
broken to pieces with such doings as these:  For, for these things
sake comes the wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience:
{30c} and doubtless he must be gone to Hell, if he died without
Repentance; and to beget a Child for Hell, is sad for Parents to
think on.

Wise.  Of his Dying, as I told you, I will give you a Relation
anon, but now we are upon his Life, and upon the Manner of his Life
in his Childhood, even of the sins that attended him then, some of
which I have mentioned already; and indeed I have mentioned but
some, for yet there are more to follow, and those not at all
inferiour to what you have already heard.

Atten.  Pray what were they?

Wise.  Why he was greatly given, and that while a Lad, to grievous
{31a} Swearing and Cursing:  yea, he then made no more of Swearing
and Cursing, than I do of telling my fingers.  Yea, he would do it
without provocation thereto.  He counted it a glory to Swear and
Curse, and it was as natural to him, as to eat and drink and sleep.

Atten.  Oh! what a young Villain was this! here is, as the Apostle
says, a yielding of Members as instruments of unrighteousness unto
sin, {31b} indeed!  This is proceeding from evil to evil with a
witness; This argueth that he was a black-mouthed young Wretch
indeed.

Wise.  He was so; and yet, as I told you, he counted, above all,
this kind of sinning, to be {31c} a Badge of his Honour:  He
reckoned himself a mans Fellow when he had learnt to Swear and
Curse boldly.

Atten.  I am perswaded that many do think, as you have said, that
to Swear, is a thing that does bravely become them, and that it is
the best way for a man, when he would put authority, or terrour
into his words, to stuff them full of the sin of Swearing.

Wise.  You say right, else, as I am perswaded, men would not so
usually belch out their blasphemous Oaths, as they do:  they take a
pride in it; they think that to swear is Gentleman-like; and having
once accustomed themselves unto it, they hardly leave it all the
days of their lives.

Atten.  Well, but now we are upon it, pray shew me {31d} the
difference between Swearing and Cursing; for there is a difference,
is there not?

Wise.  Yes:  There is a difference between Swearing and Cursing,
Swearing, vain swearing, such as young Badman accustomed himself
unto.  Now vain and sinful swearing, {31e} Is a light and wicked
calling of God, &c. to witness to our vain and foolish attesting of
things, and those things are of two sorts.

1.  Things that we swear, are, or shall be done.

2.  Things so sworn to, true or false.

1.  Things that we swear, are, or shall be done.  Thou swearest
thou hast done such a thing, that such a thing is so, or shall be
so; for it is no matter which of these it is that men swear about,
if it be done lightly and wickedly, and groundlesly, it is vain,
because it is a sin against the Third Commandement, which says,
Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain. {32a}
For this is a vain using of that Holy and Sacred Name, and so a sin
for which, without sound Repentance, there is not, nor can be
rightly expected, forgiveness.

Atten.  Then it seems, though as to the matter of fact, a man
swears truely, yet if he sweareth lightly and groundlesly, his Oath
is evil, and he by it, under sin.

Wise.  Yes; a man may say, {32b} The Lord liveth, and that is true,
and yet in so saying, swear falsly; because he sweareth vainly,
needlesly, and without a ground.  To swear groundedly and
necessarily, (which then a man does, when he swears as being called
thereto of God,) that is tolerated of the Word:  but this was none
of Mr. Badmans swearing, and therefore that which now we are not
concerned about.

Atten.  I perceive, by the Prophet, that a man may sin in swearing
to a Truth:  They therefore must needs most horribly sin, that
swear to confirm their Jests and Lies; and as they think, the
better to beautifie their foolish talking.

Wise.  They sin with an high hand; for they presume to imagine,
{32c} that God is as wicked as themselves, to wit, that he is an
Avoucher of Lies to be true.  For, as I said before, to swear, is
to call God to witness; and to swear to a Lie, is to call God
himself, to witness that that Lie is true.  This therefore must
needs offend; for it puts the highest affront upon the Holiness and
Righteousness of God, therefore his wrath must sweep them away.
This kind of Swearing is put in with lying, and killing, and
stealing, and committing Adultery; and therefore must not go
unpunished:  {32d} For if God will not hold him guiltless that
taketh his Name in vain, which a man may doe when he swears to a
truth, (as I have shewed before,) how can it be imagined, that he
should hold such guiltless, who, by Swearing, will appeal to God,
if Lies be not true, or that swear out of their frantick and Bedlam
madness.  It would grieve and provoke a sober man to wrath, if one
should swear to a notorious lye, and avouch that that man would
attest it for a truth; and yet thus do men deal with the holy God:
They tell their Jestings, Tales and Lies, and then swear by God
that they are true.  Now this kind of Swearing was as common with
young Badman, as it was to eat when he was an hungred, or to go to
bed when it was night.

Atten.  I have often mused in my mind, what it should be that
should make men so common in the use of the sin of Swearing, since
those that be wise, will believe them never the sooner for that.

Wise.  It cannot be any thing that is good, you may be sure;
because the thing it self is abominable:  {33a} 1.  Therefore it
must be from the promptings of the spirit of the Devil within them.
2.  Also it flows sometimes from hellish Rage, when the tongue hath
set on fire of Hell even the whole course of nature. {33b} 3.  But
commonly Swearing flows from that daring Boldness that biddeth
defiance to the Law that forbids it.  4.  Swearers think also that
by their belching of their blasphemous Oaths out of their black and
polluted mouths, they shew themselves the more valiant men:  5.
And imagine also, that by these outrageous kind of villianies, they
shall conquer those that at such a time they have to do with, and
make them believe their lyes to be true.  6.  They also swear
frequently to get Gain thereby, and when they meet with fools, they
overcome them this way.  But if I might give advice in this matter,
no Buyer should lay out one farthing with him that is a common
Swearer in his Calling; especially with such an Oath-master that
endeavoureth to swear away his commodity to another, and that would
swear his Chapmans money into his own pocket.

Atten.  All these causes of Swearing, so far as I can perceive,
flow from the same Root as doe the Oaths themselves, even from a
hardened and desperate heart.  But pray shew me now how wicked
cursing is to be distinguished from this kind of swearing.

Wise.  {34a} Swearing, as I said, hath immediately to do with the
Name of God, and it calls upon him to be witness to the truth of
what is said:  That is, if they that swear, swear by him.  Some
indeed swear by Idols, as by the Mass, by our Lady, by Saints,
Beasts, Birds, and other creatures; but the usual way of our
profane ones in England, is to swear by God, Christ, Faith, and the
like:  But however, or by whatever they swear, Cursing is
distinguished from Swearing thus.

To {34b} Curse, to Curse profanely, it is to sentence another or
our self, for, or to evil:  or to wish that some evil might happen
to the person or thing under the Curse, unjustly.

It is to sentence for, or to evil, (that is, without a cause):
Thus Shimei cursed David:  He sentenced him for and to evil
unjustly, when he said to him, Come out, come out thou bloody man,
and thou man of Belial.  The Lord hath returned upon thee all the
blood of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou hast reigned, and
the Lord hath delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy
son:  and behold thou art taken in thy mischief, because thou art a
bloody man. {34c}

This David calls a grievous Curse.  And behold, saith he to Solomon
his Son, thou hast with thee Shimei a Benjamite, which cursed me
with a grievous curse in the day when I went to Mahanaim. {34d}

But what was this Curse?  Why, First, It was a wrong sentence past
upon David; Shimei called him Bloody man, man of Belial, when he
was not.  Secondly, He sentenced him to the evil that at present
was upon him, for being a bloody man, (that is, against the house
of Saul,) when that present evil overtook David, for quite another
thing.

And we may thus apply it to the {34e} profane ones of our times who
in their rage and envy, have little else in their mouths but a
sentence against their Neighbour for, and to evil unjustly.  How
common is it with many, when they are but a little offended with
one, to cry, Hang him, Damn him, Rogue!  This is both a sentencing
of him for, and to evil, and is in it self a grievous Curse.

2.  The other kind of Cursing, is to wish that some evil might
happen to, and overtake this or that person or thing:  And this
kind of Cursing, Job counted a grievous sin.  I have not suffered
(says he) my mouth to sin, {35a} by wishing a curse to his soul; or
consequently, to Body or Estate.  This then is a wicked cursing, to
wish that evil might either befall another or our selves:  And this
kind of cursing young Badman accustomed himself unto.

1.  He {35b} would wish that evil might befall others; he would
wish their Necks broken, or that their Brains were out, or that the
Pox, or Plague was upon them, and the like:  All which is a
devilish kind of cursing, and is become one of the common sins of
our age.

2.  He would also as often wish a Curse to himself, saying, Would I
might be hanged, or burned, or that the Devil might fetch me, if it
be not so, or the like.  We count the {35c} Damme Blades to be
great Swearers; but when in their hellish fury they say, God-damme
me, God perish me, or the like, they rather curse than swear; yea,
curse themselves, and that with a Wish that Damnation might light
upon themselves; which wish and Curse of theirs, in a little time,
they will see accomplished upon them, even in Hell-fire, if they
repent not of their sins.

Atten.  But did this young Badman accustom himself to such filthy
kind of language?

Wise.  I think I may say, that nothing was more frequent in his
mouth, and that upon the least provocation.  Yea he was so versed
in such kind of language, that neither {35d} Father, nor Mother,
nor Brother, nor Sister, nor Servant, no nor the very Cattel that
his Father had, could escape these Curses of his.  I say, that even
the bruit Beasts when he drove them, or rid upon them, if they
pleased not his humour, they must be sure to partake of his curse.
{35e} He would wish their Necks broke, their Legs broke, their Guts
out, or that the Devil might fetch them, or the like:  and no
marvel, for he that is so hardy to wish damnation, or other bad
curses to himself, or dearest relations; will not stick to wish
evil to the silly Beast, in his madness.

Atten.  Well, I see still that this Badman was a desperate villain.
But pray, Sir, since you have gone thus far, now shew me whence
this evil of cursing ariseth, and also what dishonour it bringeth
to God; for I easily discern that it doth bring damnation to the
soul.

Wise.  This evil of Cursing ariseth, in general, from the desperate
wickedness of the heart, but particularly from, {36a} {36b} 1.
Envie, which is, as I apprehend, the leading sin to Witchcraft.  2.
It also ariseth from Pride which was the sin of the fallen Angels;
3.  It ariseth too from Scorn and contempt of others:  4.  But for
a man to curse himself, must needs arise from desperate Madness.

The {36c} dishonour that it bringeth to God, is this.  It taketh
away from him his Authority, in whose power it is onely, to Bless
and Curse; not to Curse wickedly, as Mr. Badman, but justly, and
righteously, giving by his Curse to those that are wicked, the due
Reward of their deeds.

Besides, these wicked men, in their wicked cursing of their
Neighbour, &c. do even Curse God himself in his handy work.  Man is
Gods Image, and to curse wickedly the Image of God, is to curse God
himself. {36d}  Therefore as when men wickedly swear, they rend,
and tare Gods Name, and make him, as much as in them lies, the
avoucher and approver of all their wickedness; so he that curseth
and condemneth in this sort his Neighbour, or that wisheth him
evil, curseth, condemneth, and wisheth evil to the Image of God,
and consequently judgeth and condemneth God himself.

Suppose that a man should say with his mouth, I wish that the Kings
Picture was burned; would not this mans so saying, render him as an
Enemy to the Person of the King?  Even so it is with them that, by
cursing, wish evil to their neighbour, or to themselves, they
contemn the Image, even the Image of God himself.

Atten.  But do you think that the men that do thus, do think that
they do so vilely, so abominably?

Wise.  The question is not what men do believe concerning their
sin, but what Gods Word says of it:  If Gods Word says that
Swearing and Cursing are sins, though men should count them for
Vertues, their reward will be a reward for sin, to wit, the
damnation of the soul.

To {37a} curse another, and to swear vainly and falsly, are sins
against the Light of Nature.

1.  To Curse is so, because, whoso curseth another, knows, that at
the same time he would not be so served himself.

2.  To Swear also, is a sin against the same Law:  for Nature will
tell me, that I should not lie, and therefore much less Swear to
confirm it.  Yea, the Heathens have looked upon Swearing to be a
solemn Ordinance of God, and therefore not to be lightly or vainly
used by men, though to confirm a matter of truth. {37b}

Atten.  But I wonder, since Curseing and Swearing are such evils in
the eyes of God, that he doth not make some Examples to others, for
their committing such wickedness.

Wise.  Alas! so he has, a thousand times twice told, as may be
easily gathered by any observing people in every Age and Countrey.
I could present you with several my self; but waving the abundance
that might be mentioned, I will here present you with {37c} two;
One was that dreadful Judgment of God upon one N. P. at Wimbleton
in Surrey; who, after a horrible fit of Swearing at, and Cursing of
some persons that did not please him, suddenly fell sick, and in
little time died raving, cursing and swearing.

But above all take that dreadful Story of Dorothy Mately an
Inhabitant of As[h]over in the County of Darby.

This {37d} Dorothy Mately, saith the Relator, was noted by the
people of the Town to be a great Swearer, and Curser, and Lier, and
Thief; (just like Mr. Badman.)  And the labour that she did usually
follow, was to wash the Rubbish that came forth of the Lead Mines,
and there to get sparks of Lead-Ore; and her usual way of asserting
of things, was with these kind of Imprecations:  I would I might
sink into the earth if it be not so, or I would God would make the
earth open and swallow me up.  Now upon the 23. of March, 1660.
this Dorothy was washing of Ore upon the top of a steep Hill, about
a quarter of a mile from Ashover, and was there taxed by a Lad for
taking of two single Pence out of his Pocket, (for he had laid his
Breeches by, and was at work in his Drawers;) but she violently
denyed it, wishing, That the ground might swallow her up if she had
them:  She also used the same wicked words on several other
occasions that day.

Now one George Hodgkinson of Ashover, a man of good report there,
came accidentally by where this Dorothy was, and stood still a
while to talk with her, as she was washing her Ore; there stood
also a little Child by her Tub-side, and another a distance from
her, calling aloud to her to come away; wherefore the said George
took the Girle by the hand to lead her away to her that called her:
But behold, they had not gone above ten yards from Dorothy, but
they heard her crying out for help; so looking back, he saw the
Woman, and her Tub, and Sive, twirling round, and sinking into the
ground.  Then said the man, Pray to God to pardon thy sin, for thou
art never like to be seen alive any longer.  So she and her Tub
twirled round, and round, till they sunk about three yards into the
Earth, and then for a while staid.  Then she called for help again,
thinking, as she said, that she should stay there.  Now the man
though greatly amazed, did begin to think which way to help her,
but immediately a great stone which appeared in the Earth, fell
upon her head, and brake her Skull, and then the Earth fell in upon
her and covered her.  She was afterwards digged up, and found about
four yards within ground, with the Boys two single Pence in her
pocket, but her Tub and Sive could not be found.

Atten.  You {38a} bring to my mind a sad story, the which I will
relate unto you.  The thing is this; About a bow-shoot from where I
once dwelt, there was a blind Ale-house, and the man that kept it
had a Son whose name was Edward.  This Edward was, as it were, an
half-fool, both in his words, and manner of behaviour.  To this
blind Ale-house certain jovial companions would once or twice a
week come, and this Ned, (for so they called him) his Father would
entertain his guests withall; to wit, by calling for him to make
them sport by his foolish words and gestures.  So when these boon
blades came to this mans house, the Father would call for Ned:  Ned
therefore would come forth; and the villain was devilishly addicted
to cursing, yea to cursing his Father and Mother, and any one else
that did cross him.  And because (though he was an half-fool) he
saw that his practice was pleasing, he would do it with the more
audaciousness.

Well, when these brave fellows did come at their times to this
Tippling-house (as they call it) to fuddle and make merry, then
must Ned be called out; and because his Father was best acquainted
with Ned, and best knew how to provoke him, therefore He would
usually ask him such questions, or command him such business, as
would be sure to provoke him indeed.  Then would he (after his
foolish manner) Curse his Father most bitterly; at which the old
man would laugh, (and so would the rest of the guests, as at that
which pleased them best) still continuing to ask, that Ned still
might be provoked to curse, that they might still be provoked to
laugh.  This was the mirth with which the old man did use to
entertain his guests.

The curses wherewith this Ned did use to curse his father, and at
which the old man would laugh, were these, and such like:  The
Devil take you; The Devil fetch you:  He would also wish him
Plagues and Destructions many.  Well, so it came to pass, through
the righteous Judgement of God, that Neds Wishes and Curses were in
a little time fuelled upon his Father; for not many months passed
between them after this manner, but the Devil did indeed take him,
possess him, and also in few days carried him out of this world by
death; I say, Satan did take him and possess him:  I mean, so it
was judged by those that knew him, and had to do with him in that
his lamentable condition.  He could feel him like a live thing goe
up and down in his body, but when tormenting time was come (as he
had often tormenting fits) then he would lye like an hard bump in
the soft place of his chest, (I mean, I saw it so,) and so would
rent and tare him, and make him roar till he died away.

I told you before, that I was an ear and eye witness of what I here
say; and so I was.  I have heard Ned in his Roguery, cursing his
Father, and his Father laughing thereat most heartily; still
provoking of Ned to curse, that his mirth might be encreased.  I
saw his Father also, when he was possessed, I saw him in one of his
fits, and saw his flesh (as 'twas thought) by the Devil, gathered
up on an heap, about the bigness of half in Egge; to the
unutterable torture and afflict[i]on of the old man.  There was
also one Freeman, (who was more than an ordinary Doctor) sent for,
to cast out this Devil; and I was there when he attempted to do it.
The manner whereof was this.  They had the possessed into an out-
room, and laid him on his belly upon a Form, with his head hanging
over the Forms end; then they bound him down thereto:  which done,
they set a pan of Coals under his mouth, and put something therein
which made a great smoak; by this means (as 'twas said) to fetch
out the Devil.  There therefore they kept the man till he was
almost smothered in the smoak, but no Devil came out of him; at
which Freeman was somewhat abashed, the man greatly afflicted, and
I made to go away wondering and fearing.  In a little time
therefore that which possessed the man, carried him out of the
World, according to the cursed Wishes of his Son.  And this was the
end of this hellish mirth.

Wise.  These were all sad Judgements.

Atten.  These were dreadful Judgments indeed.

Wise.  Ai, and they look like the Threatning of that Text, (though
chiefly it concerned Judas,) As he loved cursing, so let it come
unto him; as he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from
him.  As he cloathed himself with cursing as with a garment, so let
it come into his bowels like water, and as oyl into his bones.
{40a}

Atten.  It is a fearful thing for Youth to be trained up in a way
of Cursing and Swearing.

Wise.  Trained up in them! that I cannot say Mr. Badman was, for
his Father hath oft-times in my hearing, bewailed the badness of
his Children, and of this naughty Boy in particular.  I believe
that the wickedness of his Children made him (in the thoughts of
it) goe many a Night with heavy heart to bed, and with as heavy an
one to rise in the Morning.  But all was one to his graceless Son,
neither wholsom counsel, nor fatherly sorrow, would make him mend
his Manners.

There {40b} are some indeed that do train up their Children to
swear, curse, lye and steal, and great is the misery of such poor
Children whose hard hap it is to be ushered into the world by, and
to be under the tuition too of such ungodly Parents.  It had been
better for such Parents, had they not begat them, and better for
such Children had they not been born.  O! methinks for a Father or
a Mother to train up a Child in that very way that leadeth to Hell
and Damnation, what thing so horrible!  But Mr. Badman was not by
his Parents so brought up.

Atten.  But methinks, since this Young Badman would not be ruled at
home, his Father should have tryed what good could have been done
of him abroad, by putting him out to some man of his acquaintance,
that he knew to be able to command him, and to keep him pretty hard
to some employ:  So should he, at least, have been prevented of
time to do those wickednesses that could not be done without time
to do them in.

Wise.  Alas, his Father did so, {41a} he put him out betimes to one
of his own Acquaintance, and entreated him of all love, that he
would take care of Son, and keep him from extravagant wayes.  His
Trade also was honest and commodious; he had besides a full Employ
therein, so that this young Badman had no vacant seasons nor idle
hours yielded him by his Calling, therein to take opportunities to
do Badly:  but all was one to him, as he had begun to be vile in
his Fathers house, even so he continued to be when he was in the
house of his Master.

Atten.  I have known some Children, who though they have been very
Bad at home, yet have altered much when they have been put out
abroad; especially when they have fallen into a Family, where the
Governours thereof have made conscience of maintaining of the
Worship and Service of God therein; but perhaps that might be
wanting in Mr. Badmans Masters house.

Wise.  Indeed some Children do greatly mend, when put under other
mens Roofs; but, as I said, this naughty boy did not so; nor did
his badness continue, because he wanted a Master that both could
and did correct it:  For his {41b} Master was a very good man, a
very devout person; one that frequented the best Soul-means, that
set up the Worship of God in his Family, and also that walked
himself thereafter.  He was also a man very meek and merciful, one
that did never overdrive young Badman in business, nor that kept
him at it at unseasonable hours.

Atten.  Say you so!  This is rare:  I for my part can see but few
that can parallel, in these things, with Mr. Badmans Master.

Wise.  Nor I neither, (yet Mr. Badman had such an one;) for, for
the most past, {42a} Masters are now a days such as mind nothing
but their worldly concerns, and if Apprentices do but answer their
commands therein, Soul and Religion may go whither they will.  Yea,
I much fear, that there have been many towardly Lads put out by
their parents to such Masters, that have quite undone them as to
the next world.

Atten.  The more is the pity.  But pray, now you have touched upon
this subject, shew me how many wages a Master may be the ruin of
his poor Apprentice.

Wise.  Nay, I cannot tell you of all the wayes, yet some of them I
will mention.

Suppose then that a towardly Lad be put to be an Apprentice with
one that is reputed to be a Godly man, yet that Lad may be ruined
many wayes; that is, if his Master be not circumspect in all things
that respect both God and man, and that before his Apprentice.

1.  If {42b} he be not moderate in the use of his Apprentice; if he
drives him beyond his strength; if he holds him to work at
unseasonable hours; if he will not allow him convenient time to
read the Word, to Pray, &c.  This is the way to destroy him; that
is, in those tender begin[n]ings of good thoughts, and good
beginnings about spiritual things.

2.  If he suffers his house to be scattered with profane and wicked
Books, such as stir up to lust, to wantonness, such as teach idle,
wanton, lascivious discourse, and such as has a tendency to provoke
to profane drollery and Jesting; and lastly, such as tend to
corrupt, and pervert the Doctrine of Faith and Holiness.  All these
things will eat as doth a canker, and will quickly spoil, in Youth,
&c. those good beginnings that may be putting forth themselves in
them.

3.  If there be a mixture of Servants, that is, if some very bad be
in the same place, that's a way also to undo such tender Lads; for
they that are bad and sordid Servants, will be often (and they have
an opportunity too, to be) distilling and fomenting of their
profane and wicked words and tricks before them, and these will
easily stick in the flesh and minds of Youth, to the corrupting of
them.

4.  If the Master have one Guise for abroad, and another for home;
that is, if his Religion hangs by in his house as his Cloak does,
and he be seldom in it, except he be abroad; this, young beginners
will take notice of, and stumble at.  We say, Hedges have eyes, and
little Pitchers have ears; and indeed, {43a} Children make a
greater inspection into the Lives of Fathers, Masters, &c. than
oft-times they are aware of:  And therefore should Masters be
carefull, else they may soon destroy good beginnings in their
Servants.

5.  If the Master be unconscionable in his Dealing, and trades with
lying words; or if bad Commodities be avouched to be good, or if he
seeks after unreasonable gain, or the like; his servant sees it,
and it is enough to undo him.  Elies Sons being bad before the
congregation, made Men despise the sacrifices of the Lord. {43b}

But these things by the by, only they may serve for a hint to
Masters to take heed that they take not Apprentices to destroy
their Souls.  But young Badman had none of these hinderances; {43c}
His father took care, and provided well for him, as to this:  He
had a good Master, he wanted not good Books, nor good Instruction,
nor good Sermons, nor good Examples, no nor good fellow-Servants
neither:  but all would not doe.

Atten.  'Tis a wonder, that in such a Family, amidst so many
spiritual helps, nothing should take hold of his heart!  What! not
good Books, nor good Instructions, nor good Sermons, nor good
Examples, nor good fellow-Servants, nor nothing do him good!

Wise.  You talk, he minded none of these things; nay, all these
were {43d} abominable to him.

1.  For good Books, they might lie in his Masters house till they
rotted for him, he would not regard to look into them; but,
contrary-wise, would get all the bad and abominable Books that he
could, as beastly Romances, and books full of Ribbauldry, even such
as immediately tended to set all fleshly lusts on fire.  True, he
durst not be known to have any of these, to his Master; therefore
would he never let them be seen by him, but would keep them in
close places, and peruse them at such times, as yielded him fit
opportunities thereto.

2.  For good Instruction, he liked that, much as he liked good
books; his care was to hear but little thereof, and to forget what
he heard as soon as 'twas spoken.  Yea, I have heard some that knew
him then, say, that one might evidently discern by the shew of his
countenance and gestures, that good counsel was to him like {44a}
little-ease, even a continual torment to him; nor did he ever count
himself at liberty, but when farthest off of wholsom words.  He
would hate them that rebuked him, and count them his deadly
enemies.

3.  For good Example; which was frequently set him by his Master,
both in Religious and Civil matters; these, young Badman would
laugh at, and would also make a byword of them, when he came in
place where he with safety could.

4.  His Master indeed would make him go with him to Sermons, and
that where he thought the best Preachers were, but this ungodly
young man, what shall I say, was (I think) a Master of Art in all
mischief; he had these wicked ways to hinder himself of hearing,
let the Preacher thunder never so loud.

1.  His {44b} way was, when come into the place of hearing, to sit
down in some corner, and then to fall fast asleep.

2.  Or else to fix his adulterous eyes upon some beautifull Object
that was in the place, and so all Sermon-while, therewith be
feeding of his fleshly lusts.

3.  Or, if he could get near to some that he had observed would fit
his humour, he would be whispering, gigling, and playing with them,
till such time as Sermon was done.

Atten.  Why! he was grown to a prodigious height of wickedness.

Wise.  He was so, and that which aggravates all, was, this was his
practice as soon as he was come to his Master, he was as ready at
all these things, as if he had, before he came to his Master,
served an Apprentiship to learn them.

Atten.  There could not but be added (as you relate them) Rebellion
to his sin.  Methinks it is as if he had said, I will not hear, I
will not regard, I will not mind good, I will not mend, I will not
turn, I will not be converted.

Wise.  You {45a} say true, and I know not to whom more fitly to
compare him, {45b} than to that man, who when I my self rebuked him
for his wickedness, in this great huff replied; What would the
Devil do for company, if it was not for such as I.

Atten.  Why did you ever hear any man say so.

Wise.  Yes, that I did; and this young Badman was as like him, as
an Egg is like an Egg.  Alas! the Scripture makes mention of many
that by their actions speak the same.  They say unto God, Depart
from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways; Again, They
refuse to hearken, and pull away their shoulder, and stop their
ears; yea, they make their hearts hard as an Adamant-stone, lest
they should hear the Law, and the words that the Lord of Host[s]
hath sent. {45c}  What are all these but such as Badman, and such
as the young man but now mentioned?  That young man was my Play-
fellow when I was solacing my self in my sins:  I may make mention
of him to my shame; but he has a great many fellows.

Atten.  Young Badman was like him indeed, and he trod his steps, as
if his wickedness had been his very Copy; I mean, as to his
desperateness:  for had he not been a desperate one, he would never
have made you such a reply, when you was rebuking of him for his
sin.  But when did you give him such a rebuke?

Wise.  A while after God had parted him and I, by Calling of me (as
I hope) by his Grace, still leaving him in his sins; and so far as
I could ever gather, as he lived, so he died, even as Mr. Badman
did:  but we will leave him, and return again to our discourse.

Atten.  Ha, poor obstinate sinners! doe they think that God cannot
be even with them?

Wise.  I do not know, what they think, but I know that God hath
said, That as He cried, and they would not hear, so they shall
crie, and I will not hear, saith the Lord.  {45d} Doubtless there
is a time a coming, when Mr. Badman will crie for this.

Atten.  But I wonder that he should be so expert in wickedness, so
soon! alas, he was but a Stripling, I suppose, he was, as yet, not
Twenty.

Wise.  No, nor Eighteen neither:  but (as with Ishmael, and with
the Children that mocked the Prophet) the seeds of sin did put
forth themselves betimes in him. {46a}

Atten.  Well, he was as wicked a young man as commonly one shall
hear of.

Wise.  You will say so, when you know all.

Atten.  All, I think here is a great All; but if there is more
behind, pray let us hear it.

Wise.  Why, then I will tell you, that he had not been with his
Master much above a year and a half, but he came {46b} acquainted
with three young Villains (who here shall be nameless,) that taught
him to adde to his sin, much of like kind; and he as aptly received
their Instructions.  One of them was chiefly given to Uncleanness,
another to Drunkenness; and the third to Purloining, or stealing
from his Master.

Atten.  Alas poor Wretch, he was bad enough before, but these, I
suppose, made him much worse.

Wise.  That they made him worse you may be sure of, for they taught
him to be an Arch, a chief one in all their wayes.

Atten.  It was an ill hap that he ever came acqu[a]inted with them.

Wise.  You must rather word it thus.  It {46c} was the Judgement of
God that he did; that is, he came acquainted with them, through the
anger of God.  He had a good Master, and before him a good Father:
By these he had good counsel given him for Months and Years
together; but his heart was set upon mischief, he loved wickedness
more than to do good, even untill his Iniquity came to be hateful;
therefore, from the anger of God it was, that these companions of
his, and he, did at last so acquaint together.  Sayes Paul, They
did not like to retain God in their knowledge; {46d} and what
follows? wherefore, God gave them over, or up to their own hearts
lusts.  And again, As for such as turn aside to their own crooked
wayes, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity.
{46e}  This therefore was Gods hand upon him, that he might be
destroyed, be damned; because he received not the love of the Truth
that he might be saved.  He chose his Delusions and Deluders for
him, even the company of base men, of Fools, that he might be
destroyed. {46f} {47a}

Atten.  I cannot but think indeed, that it is a Great Judgment of
God for a man to be given up to the company of vile men; for what
are such but the Devils {47b}  Decoyes, even those by whom he
drawes the simple into the Net?  A Whoremaster, a Drunkard, a
Thiefe, what are they but the Devils baits, by which he catcheth
others?

Wise.  You say right; but this young Badman was no simple one, if
by simple, you mean one uninstructed; for he had often good counsel
given him:  but if by simple, you mean, him that is a Fool as to
the true Knowledge of, and Faith in Christ, then he was a simple
one indeed:  for he chose death, rather than life, and to live in
continual opposition to God, rather than to be Reconciled unto him;
according to that saying of the wise man; The fooles hated
knowledge, and did not choose the Fear of the Lord:  {47c} and what
Judgement more dreadfull can a fool be given up to, than to be
delivered into the hands of such men, that have skill to do
nothing, but to ripen sin, and hasten its finishing unto damnation?
And therefore men should be afraid of offending God, because he can
in this manner punish them for their sins.  I {47d} knew a man that
once was, as I thought, hopefully awakened about his Condition;
yea, I knew two that were so awakened; but in time they began to
draw back, and to incline again to their lusts; wherefore, God gave
them up to the company of three or four men, that in less than
three years time brought them roundly to the Gallows, where they
were hanged like Dogs, because they refused to live like honest
men. {47e}

Atten.  But such men do not believe, that thus to be given up of
God, is in Judgement and anger; they rather take it to be their
liberty, and do count it their happiness; they are glad that their
Cord is loosed, and that the reins are in their neck; they are glad
that they may sin without controul, and that they may choose such
company as can make them more expert in an evil way.

Wise.  Their Judgement is therefore so much the greater, because
thereto is added blindness of Mind, and hardness of Heart in a
wicked way.  They are turned up to the way of Death, but must not
see to what place they are going:  They must go as the Ox to the
slaughter, and as the Fool to the Correction of the Stocks, {48a}
till a Dart strikes through their Liver, not knowing that it is for
their life.  This, I say, makes their Judgement double, they are
given up of God, for a while to sport themselves with that which
will assuredly make them mourn at last, when their flesh and their
body is consumed. {48b}  These are those that Peter {48c} speaks
of, that shall utterly perish in their own corruptions; these, I
say, who count it pleasure to ryot in the day-time, and that sport
themselves with their own deceivings, are, as natural bruit beasts,
made to be taken and destroyed.

Atten.  Well, but I pray now concerning these three Villains that
were young Badmans companions:  Tell me more particularly how he
carried it then.

Wise.  How he carried it! why, he did as they.  I intimated so much
before, when I said, they made him an arch, a chief one in their
ways.

First, He became a Frequenter of {48d} Taverns and Tippling-houses,
and would stay there untill he was even as drunk as a Beast.  And
if it was so, that he could not get out by day, he would, be sure,
get out by night.  Yea, he became so common a Drunkard, at last,
that he was taken notice of to be a Drunkard even by all.

Atten.  This was Swinish, for Drunkenness, is so beastly a sin, a
sin so much against Nature, that I wonder that any that have but
the appearance of Men, can give up themselves to so beastly (yea,
worse than beastly) a thing.

Wise.  It is a Swinish vanity indeed.  I will tell you another
Story. {48e} {48f}  There was a Gentleman that had a Drunkard to be
his Groom, and coming home one night very much abused with Beer,
his Master saw it.  Well (quoth his Master within himself,) I will
let thee alone to night, but to morrow morning I will convince thee
that thou art worse than a Beast, by the behaviour of my Horse.  So
when morning was come, he bids his man goe and water his Horse, and
so he did; but coming up to his Master, he commands him to water
him again; so the fellow rid into the water the second time, but
his masters horse would now drink no more, so the fellow came up
and told his Master.  Then said his Master, Thou drunken sot, thou
art far worse than my Horse, he will drink but to satisfie nature,
but thou wilt drink to the abuse of nature; he will drink but to
refresh himself, but thou to thy hurt and dammage; He will drink,
that he may be more serviceable to his Master, but thou, till thou
art uncapable of serving either God or Man.  O thou Beast, how much
art thou worse than the horse that thou ridest on.

Atten.  Truly I think that his Master served him right; for in
doing as he did, he shewed him plainly, as he said, that he had not
so much government of himself as his horse had of himself, and
consequently that his beast did live more according to the Law of
his nature by far, than did his man.  But pray go on with what you
have further to say.

Wise.  Why, I say, that there are {49a} four things, which if they
were well considered, would make drunkenness to be abhorred in the
thoughts of the Children of men.

1.  It greatly tendeth to impoverish and beggar a man.  The
Drunkard, says Solomon, shall come to poverty. {49b}  Many that
have begun the world with Plenty, have gone out of it in Rags;
through drunkenness.  Yea, many Children that have been born to
good Estates, have yet been brought to a Flail & a Rake, through
this beastly sin of their Parents.

2.  This sin of Drunkenness, it bringeth upon the Body, many,
great, and incurable Diseases, by which Men do in little time come
to their end, and none can help them.  So, because they are
overmuch wicked, therefore they dye before their time. {49c}

3.  Drunkenness, is a sin that is often times attended with
abundance of other evils.  Who hath woe?  Who hath sorrow?  Who
hath contention?  Who hath babblings?  Who hath wounds without
cause?  Who hath redness of the eyes?  They that tarry long at the
Wine, they that go to seek mixt wine. {49d}  That is, the Drunkard.

4.  By Drunkenness, Men do often times shorten their dayes; goe out
of the Ale-house drunk, and break their Necks before they come
home.  Instances not a few might be given of this, but this is so
manifest, a man need say nothing.

Atten.  But {50a} {50b} that which is worse than all is, it also
prepares men for everlasting burnings.

Wise.  Yea, and it so stupifies and besotts the soul, that a man
that is far gone in Drunkenness, is hardly ever recovered to God.
Tell me, when did you see an old drunkard converted?  No, no, such
an one will sleep till he dies, though he sleeps on the top of a
{50c} Mast, let his dangers be never so great and Death and
damnation never so near, he will not be awaked out of his sleep.
So that if a man have any respect either to Credit, Health, Life or
Salvation, he will not be a drunken man.  But the truth is, where
this sin gets the upper hand, men are, as I said before, so
intoxicated and bewitched with the seeming pleasures, and sweetness
thereof; that they have neither heart nor mind to think of that
which is better in itself; and would, if imbraced, do them good.

Atten.  You said that drunkenness tends to poverty, yet some make
themselves rich by drunken bargains.

Wise.  I {50d} said so, because the Word says so.  And as to some
mens getting thereby, that is indeed but rare, and base:  yea, and
base will be the end of such gettings.  The Word of God is against
such wayes, and the curse of God will be the end of such doings.
An Inheritance may sometimes thus be hastily gotten at the
beginning, but the end thereof shall not be blessed.  Hark what the
Prophet saith; Wo to him that coveteth an evil covetousness, that
he may set his nest on high. {50e}  Whether he makes drunkenness,
or ought else, the engine and decoy to get it; for that man doth
but consult the shame of his own house, the spoiling of his family,
and the damnation of his Soul; for that which he getteth by working
of iniquity, is but a getting by the devices of Hell; Therefore he
can be no gainer neither for himself or family, that gains by an
evil course.  But this was one of the sins that Mr. Badman was
addicted to after he came acquainted with these three fellows, nor
could all that his Master could do break him of this Beastly sin.

Atten.  But where, since he was but an Apprentice, could he get
Money to follow this practice, for drunkenness, as you have
intimated, is a very costly sin.

Wise.  His Master {51a} paid for all.  For, (as I told you before)
as he learned of these three Villains to be a Beastly Drunkard; so
he learned of them to pilfer and steal from his Master.  Sometimes
he would sell off his Masters Goods, but keep the Money, that is
when he could; also sometimes he would beguile his Master by taking
out of his Cashbox:  and when he could do neither of these, he
would convey away of his Masters wares, what he thought would be
least missed, and send or carry them to such and such houses, where
he knew they would be laid up to his use, and then appoint set
times there, to meet and make merry with these fellowes.

Atten.  This, was as bad, nay, I think, worse than the former; for
by thus doing, he did, not only run himself under the wrath of God,
but has endangered the undoing of his Master and his Familie.

Wise.  Sins go not alone, but follow one the other as do the links
of a Chain; he that will be a drunkard, must have money either of
his own, or of some other mans; either of his Fathers, Mothers,
Masters, or at the high-way, or some way.

Atten.  I fear that many an honest man is undone by such kind of
servants.

Wise.  I am of the same mind with you, but {51b} this should make
the dealer the more wary what kind of Servants he keeps, and what
kind of Apprentices he takes.  It should also teach him to look
well to his Shop himself, also to take strict account of all things
that are bought and sold by his Servants.  The Masters neglect
herein may embolden his servant to be bad, and may bring him too in
short time to rags and a morsel of Bread.

Atten.  I am afraid that there is much of this kind of pilfering
among servants in these bad dayes of ours.

Wise.  Now, while it is in my mind, I will tell you a story. {51c}
When I was in prison, there came a woman to me that was under a
great deal of trouble.  So I asked her (she being a stranger to me)
what she had to say to me.  She said, she was afraid she should be
damned.  I asked her the cause of those fears.  She told me that
she had sometime since lived with a Shop-keeper at Wellingborough,
and had robbed his box in the Shop several times of Money, to the
value of more than now I will say; and pray, says she, tell me what
I shall do.  I told her, I would have her go to her Master, and
make him satisfaction:  She said, she was afraid; I asked her why?
She said, she doubted he would hang her.  I told her, that I would
intercede for her life, and would make use of other friends too to
do the like; But she told me, she durst not venture that.  Well,
said I, shall I send to your Master, while you abide out of sight,
and make your peace with him, before he sees you; and with that, I
asked her her Masters name.  But all that she said in answer to
this, was, Pray let it alone till I come to you again.  So away she
went, and neither told me her Masters Name, nor her own:  This is
about ten or twelve years since, and I never saw her again.  I tell
you this story for this cause; to confirm your fears, that such
kind of servants too many there be; and that God makes them
sometimes like old Tod, of whom mention was made before, (through
the terrors that he layes upon them) to betray themselves.

I could tell you of another, {52a} that came to me with a like
relation concerning her self, and the robbing of her Mistress; but
at this time let this suffice.

Atten.  But what was that other Villain addicted to, I mean, young
Badmans third companion?

Wise.  Uncleanness. {52b}  I told you before, but it seems you
forgot.

Atten.  Right, it was Uncleanness.  Uncleanness is also a filthy
sin.

Wise.  It is so; and yet it is one of the most reigning sins in our
day.

Atten.  So they say, and that too among those that one would think
had more wit, even among the great ones.

Wise.  The more is the pity:  for usually Examples that are set by
them that are great and chief, {52c} spread sooner, and more
universally, then do the sins of other men; yea, and when such men
are at the head in transgressing, sin walks with a bold face
through the Land.  As Jeremiah saith of the Prophets, so may it be
said of such, From them is profaneness gone forth into all the
land; that is, with bold and audacious face, Jer. 23.  15.

Atten.  But pray let us return again to Mr. Badman and his
companions.  You say one of them was very vile in the commission of
Uncleanness.

Wise.  Yes, so I say; not but that he was a Drunkard and also
Thievish, but he was most arch in this sin of Uncleanness:  This
Roguery was his Master-piece, for he was a Ringleader to them all
in the beastly sin of Whoredom.  He was also best acquainted with
such houses where they were, and so could readily lead the rest of
his Gang unto them.  The Strumpets also, because they knew this
young Villain, would at first discover themselves in all their
whorish pranks to those that he brought with him.

Atten.  That is a deadly thing:  I mean, it is a deadly thing to
young men, when such beastly queans, shall, with words and
carriages that are openly tempting, discover themselves unto them;
It is hard for such to escape their Snare.

Wise.  That is true, therefore the Wise mans counsel is the best:
Come not near the door of her house; {53a} for they are (as you
say) very tempting, as is seen by her in the Proverbs.  I looked
(says the Wise man) through my casement, and beheld among the
simple ones, I discerned a young man void of understanding, passing
through the streets near her corner, and he went the way to her
house:  In the twilight, in the evening, in the black and dark
night.  And behold, there met him a Woman, with the attire of an
harlot, and subtle of heart; ({53c} she is loud and stubborn, her
feet abide not in her house.  Now she is without, now she is in the
street, and lieth in wait at every corner.)  So she caught him, and
kiss'd him, and with an impudent face said unto him:  I have peace
offerings with me; this day have I payed my vows.  Therefore came I
forth to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face, and I have found
thee.  I have decked my bed with coverings of Tapestry, with carved
works, with fine Linnen of AEgypt:  I have perfumed my bed with
Myrrhe, Aloes, and Cinnamon; come let us take our fill of love
untill the Morning, let us solace our selves with loves. {53b}
Here was a bold Beast:  And indeed, the very eyes, hands, words and
ways of such, are all snares and bands to youthful, lustful
fellows:  And with these was young Badman greatly snared.

Atten.  This sin of Uncleanness {54a} is mightily cried out against
both by Moses, the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles; and yet, as
we see, for all that, how men run head-long to it!

Wise.  You have said the truth, and I will adde, that God, to hold
men back from so filthy a sin, has set such a stamp of his
Indignation upon it, and commanded such evil effects to follow it,
that were not they that use it bereft of all Fear of God, and love
to their own health, they could not but stop and be afraid to
commit it.  For, besides the eternal Damnation that doth attend
such in the next world, (for these have no Inheritance in the
Kingdom of Christ and of God, Ephes. 5.) the evil effects thereof
in this world are dreadfull.

Atten.  Pray skew me some of them, that as occasion offereth it
self, I may shew them to others for their good.

Wise.  So I will.  1. {54b} It bringeth a man (as was said of the
sin before) to want and poverty; for by means of a Whorish woman, a
man is brought to a piece of bread.  The reason is, for that an
Whore will not yield without hire; and men when the Devil and Lust
is in them, and God and his Fear far away from them, will not
stick, so they may accomplish their desire, to lay their Signet,
their Bracelets, and their Staff to pledge, {54c} rather than miss
of the fulfilling of their lusts.  2.  Again, by this sin men
diminish their strength, and bring upon themselves, even upon the
Body, a multitude of Diseases.  This King Lemuel's Mother warned
him of.  What my Son, said she, and what the son of my womb, and
what the Son of my Vows:  Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy
ways to that which destroyeth Kings. {54d} This sin is destructive
to the Body.  Give me leave to tell you another story.  I {54e}
{54f} have heard of a great man that was a very unclean person, and
he had lived so long in that sin, that he had almost lost his
sight.  So his Physicians were sent for, to whom he told his to
Disease; but they told him, that they could do him no good, unless
he would forbear his Women.  Nay then, said he, farewell sweet
Sight.  Whence observe, that this sin, as I said, is destructive to
the Body; and also, that some men be so in love therewith, that
they will have it, though it destroy their body.

Atten.  Paul says also, that he that sins this sin, sins against
his own Body.  But what of that? he that will run the hazard of
eternal Damnation of his Soul, but he will commit this sin, will
for it run the hazard of destroying his Body.  If young Badman
feared not the Damnation of his Soul, do you think that the
consideration of impairing of his Body, would have deterred him
therefrom?

Wise.  You say true.  But yet, methinks, there are still such bad
effects follow, often, upon the commission of it, that if men would
consider them, it would put, at least, a stop to their career
therein.

Atten.  What other evil effects attend this sin?

Wise.  Outward shame and disgrace, and that in these particulars:
{55a}

First, There often follows this foul sin, the Foul Disease, now
called by us the Pox.  A disease so nauseous and stinking, so
infectious to the whole body (and so intailed to this sin) that
hardly are any common with unclean Women, but they have more or
less a touch of it to their shame.

Atten.  That is a foul disease indeed:  I knew {55b} a man once
that rotted away with it; and another that had his Nose eaten off,
and his Mouth almost quite sewed up thereby.

Wise.  It is a Disease, that where it is, it commonly declares,
that the cause thereof is Uncleanness.  It declares to all that
behold such a man, that he is an odious, a beastly, unclean person.
This is that strange punishment that Job speaks of, that is
appointed to seize on these workers of Iniquity. {55c}

Atten.  Then it seems you think that the strange punishment that
Job there speaks of, should be the foul disease.

Wise.  I have thought so indeed, and that for this reason:  We see
that this Disease is entailed as I may say, to this most beastly
sin, nor is there any disease so entailed to any other sin, as this
to this.  That this is the sin to which the strange Punishment is
entailed, you will easily perceive when you read the Text.  I made
a covenant with mine eyes, said Job, why should I think upon a
Maid?  For what portion is there (for that sin) from above, and
what Inheritance of the Almighty from on high?  And then he answers
himself; Is not destruction to the wicked, and a strange punishment
to the workers of iniquity?  This strange Punishment is the Pox.

Also I think that this foul Disease is that which Solomon intends,
when he saith, (speaking of this unclean and beastly creature) A
wound and dishonour shall he get, and his reproach shall not be
turned away. {56a} A Punishment Job calls it, a Wound and
Dishonour, Solomon calls it; and they both do set it as a Remark
upon this sin; Job calling it a strange punishment, and Solomon a
reproach that shall not be turned away from them that are common in
it.

Atten.  What other things follow upon the commission of this
beastly sin?

Wise.  Why, often-times it is attended with Murder, with the murder
of the Babe begotten on the defiled bed.  How common it is for the
Bastard-getter and Bastard-bearer, to consent together to murder
their Children, will be better known at the day of Judgement; yet
something is manifest now.

I will tell you another story. {56b}  An ancient man, one of mine
acquaintance, a man of good credit in our Countrey, had a Mother
that was a Midwife:  who was mostly imployed in laying great
persons.  To this womans house, upon a time, comes a brave young
Gallant on horseback, to fetch her to lay a young Lady.  So she
addresses herself to go with him; wherefore, he takes her up behind
him, and away they ride in the night.  Now they had not rid far,
but the Gentleman litt off his horse, and taking the old Midwife in
his arms from the horse, turned round with her several times, and
then set her up again; then he got up, and away they went till they
came at a stately house, into which he had her, and so into a
Chamber where the young Lady was in her pains:  He then bid the
Midwife do her Office, and she demanded help, but he drew out his
Sword and told her, if she did not make speed to do her Office
without, she must look for nothing but death.  Well, to be short,
this old Midwife laid the young Lady, and a fine sweet Babe she
had; Now there was made in a Room hard by, a very great Fire:  so
the Gentleman took up the Babe, went and drew the coals from the
stock, cast the Child in, and covered it up, and there was an end
of that.  So when the Midwife had done her work, he paid her well
for her pains, but shut her up in a dark room all day, and when
night came, took her up behind him again, and carried her away,
till she came almost at home; then he turned her round, and round,
as he did before, and had her to her house, set her down, bid her
Farewell, and away he went:  And she could never tell who it was.

This Story the Midwifes son, who was a Minister, told me; and also
protested that his mother told it him for a truth.

Atten.  Murder doth often follow indeed, as that which is the fruit
of this sin:  but sometimes God brings even these Adulterers, and
Adulteresses to shameful ends.  I heard {57a} of one, (I think, a
Doctor of Physick) and his Whore, who had had three or four
Bastards betwixt them, and had murdered them all, but at last
themselves were hanged for it, in or near to Colchester.  It came
out after this manner:  The Whore was so afflicted in her
conscience abort it, that she could not be quiet untill she had
made it known:  Thus God many times makes the actors of wickedness
their own accusers, and brings them by their own tongues to
condigne punishment for their own sins.

Wise.  There has been many such instances, but we will let that
pass.  I was once in the presence of a Woman, a married woman, that
lay sick of the sickness whereof she died; and being smitten in her
conscience for the sin of Uncleanness, which she had often
committed with other men, I heard {57b} her (as she lay upon her
Bed) cry out thus:  I am a Whore, and all my Children are Bastards:
And I must go to Hell for my sin; and look, there stands the Devil
at my beds feet to receive my Soul when I die.

Atten.  These are sad storyes, tell no more of them now, but if you
please shew me yet some other of the evil effects of this beastly
sin.

Wise.  This sin is such a snare to the Soul, that unless a miracle
of Grace prevents, it unavoidably perishes in the enchanting and
bewitching pleasures of it.  This is manifest by these, and such
like Texts.

The Adulteress will hunt for the precious life.  Whoso committeth
adultery with a woman, lacketh understanding, and he that doth it
destroys his own soul. {57c}  An Whore is a deep ditch, and a
strange woman is a narrow pit.  Her house inclines to death, and
her pathes unto the dead.  None that go in unto her return again,
neither take they hold of the path of life.  She hath cast down
many wounded; yea many strong men have been slain by her, her house
is the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death. {58a}

Atten.  These are dreadful sayings, and do shew the dreadful state
of those that are guilty of this sin.

Wise.  Verily so they doe.  But yet that which makes the whole more
dreadful, is, That men are given up to this sin, because they are
abhorred of God, and because abhorred, therefore they shall fall
into the commission of it; and shall live there.  The mouth (that
is, the flattering Lips) of a strange woman is a deep pit, the
abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein. {58b}  Therefore it saith
again of such, that they have none Inheritance in the Kingdom of
Christ and of God. {58c}

Atten.  Put all together, and it is a dreadful thing to live and
die in this transgression.

Wise.  True.  But suppose, that instead of all these Judgments,
this sin had attending of it all the felicities of this life, and
no bitterness, shame, or disgrace mixed with it, yet one hour in
Hell will spoil all.  O! this Hell, Hell-fire, Damnation in Hell,
it is such an inconceivable punishment, that were it but throughly
believed, it would nip this sin, with others, in the head.  But
here is the mischief, those that give up themselves to these
things, do so harden themselves in Unbelief and Atheism about the
things, the punishments that God hath threatned to inflict upon the
committers of them, that at last they arrive to, almost, an
absolute and firm belief that there is no Judgment to come
hereafter:  Else they would not, they could not, no not attempt to
commit this sin, by such abominable language as some do.

I heard {58d} of one that should say to his Miss, when he tempted
her to the committing of this sin, If thou wilt venture thy Body, I
will venture my Soul. {58e}  And I my self heard another say, when
he was tempting of a Maid to commit uncleanness with him, (it was
in Olivers dayes) That if she did prove with Child, he would tell
her how she might escape punishment, (and that was then somewhat
severe,) Say (saith he) when you come before the Judge, That you
are with Child by the Holy Ghost.  I heard {59a} him say thus, and
it greatly afflicted me; I had a mind to have accused him for it
before some Magistrate; but he was a great man, and I was poor, and
young:  so I let it alone, but it troubled me very much.

Atten.  'Twas the most horrible thing that ever I heard in my life.
But how far off are these men from that Spirit and Grace that dwelt
in Joseph!

Wise.  Right; when Joseph's Mistress tempted him, yea tempted him
daily; {59b} yea, she laid hold on him, and said with her Whores
forehead, Come lie with me, but he refused:  He hearkned not to lie
with her, or to be with her.  Mr. Badman would have taken the
opportunity.

And a little to comment upon this of Joseph. {59c}

1.  Here is a Miss, a great Miss, the Wife of the Captain of the
Guard, some beautiful Dame, I'le warrant you.

2.  Here is a Miss won, and in her whorish Affections come over to
Joseph, without his speaking of a word.

3.  Here is her unclean Desire made known; Come lie with me, said
she.

4.  Here was a fit opportunity.  There was none of the men of the
house there within.

5.  Joseph was a young man, full of strength, and therefore the
more in danger to be taken.

6.  This was to him, a Temptation, from her, that lasted days.

7.  And yet Joseph refused, 1.  Her daily Temptation; 2.  Her daily
Solicitation:  3.  Her daily Provocation, heartily, violently and
constantly.  For when she caught him by the Garment, saying, Lie
with me, he left his Garment in her hand, and gat him out.  Ay, and
although contempt, treachery, slander, accusation, imprisonment,
and danger of death followed, (for an Whore careth not what
mischief she does, when she cannot have her end) yet Joseph will
not defile himself, sin against God, and hazard his own eternal
salvation.

Atten.  Blessed Joseph!  I would thou hadst more fellows!

Wise.  Mr. Badman has more fellows than Joseph, else there would
not be so many Whores as there are:  For though I doubt not but
that that Sex is bad enough this way, yet I verify believe that
many of them are made Whores at first by the flatteries of Badmans
fellows.  Alas! there is many a woman plunged into this sin at
first even by promises of Marriage. {60a}  I say, by these promises
they are flattered, yea, forced into a consenting to these
Villanies, and so being in, and growing hardened in their hearts,
they at last give themselves up, even as wicked men do, to act this
kind of wickedness with greediness.  But Joseph you see, was of
another mind, for the Fear of God was in him.

I will, before I leave this, tell you here two notable storyes; and
I wish Mr. Badmans companions may hear of them.  They are found in
Clarks Looking-glass for Sinners; and are these.

Mr. Cleaver (says Mr. Clark) reports of one whom he knew, that had
committed the act of Uncleanness, whereupon he fell into such
horror of Conscience that he hanged himself; leaving it thus
written in a paper. Indeed, (saith he) I acknowledge it to be
utterly unlawful for a man to kill himself, but I am bound to act
the Magistrates part, because the punishment of this sin is death.

Clark doth also in the same page make mention of two more, who as
they were committing Adultery in London, were immediately struck
dead with fire from Heaven, in the very Act.  Their bodyes were so
found, half burnt up, and sending out a most loathsom savour.

Atten.  These are notable storyes indeed.

Wise.  So they are, and I suppose they are as true as notable.

Atten.  Well, but I wonder, if young Badmans Master knew him to be
such a Wretch, that he would suffer him in his house.

Wise.  They liked one another even as {60c} fire and water doe.
Young Badmans wayes were odious to his Master, and his Masters
wayes were such as young Badman could not endure.  Thus in these
two, was fulfilled that saying of the Holy Ghost:  An unjust man is
an abomination to the just, and he that is upright in the way is
abomination to the wicked. {60d}

The good mans wayes, Mr. Badman could not abide, nor could the good
man abide the bad wayes of his base Apprentice.  Yet would his
Master, if he could, have kept him, and also have learnt him his
trade.

Atten.  If he could! why he might, if he would, might he not?

Wise.  Alas, Badman ran away {61a} from him once and twice, and
would not at all be ruled.  So the next time he did run away from
him, he did let him go indeed.  For he gave him no occasion to run
away, except it was by holding of him as much as he could (and that
he could do but little) to good and honest rules of life.  And had
it been ones own case, one should have let him go.  For what should
a man do, that had either regard to his own Peace, his Childrens
Good, or the preservation of the rest of his servants from evil,
but let him go?  Had he staid, the house of Correction had been
most fit for him, but thither his Master was loth to send him,
because of the love that he bore to his Father.  An house of
correction, I say, had been the fittest place for him, but his
Master let him go.

Atten.  He ran away you say, but whither did he run?

Wise.  Why, to one of his own trade, {61b} and also like himself.
Thus the wicked joyned hand in hand, and there he served out his
time.

Atten. Then, sure, he had his hearts desire, when he was with one
so like himself.

Wise.  Yes.  So he had, but God gave it him in his anger.

Atten.  How do you mean?

Wise.  I mean as before, that for a wicked man to be by the
Providence of God, turned out of a good mans doors, into a wicked
mans house to dwell, is a sign of the Anger of God. {61c}  For God
by this, and such Judgements, says thus to such an one:  Thou
wicked one, thou lovest not me, my wayes, nor my people; Thou
castest my Law and good Counsel behinde thy back:  Come, I will
dispose of thee in my wrath; thou shalt be turned over to the
ungodly, thou shalt be put to school to the Devil, I will leave
thee to sink and swim in sin, till I shall visit thee with Death
and Judgment.  This was therefore another Judgment that did come
upon this young Badman.

Atten.  You have said the truth, for God by such a Judgment as
this, in effect says so indeed; for he takes them out of the hand
of the just, and binds them up in the hand of the wicked, and
whither they then shall be carried, a man may easily imagin.

Wise.  It is one of the saddest tokens of Gods anger that happens
to such kind of persons:  And that for several reasons. {62a}

1.  Such an one, by this Judgment, is put out out of the way, and
from under the means which ordinarily are made use of to do good to
the soul.  For a Family where Godliness is professed, and
practised, is Gods Ordinance, the place which he has appointed to
teach young ones the way and fear of God. {62b}  Now to be put out
of such a Family into a bad, a wicked one, as Mr. Badman was, must
needs be in Judgment, and a sign of the anger of God.  For in
ungodly Families men learn to forget God, to hate goodness, and to
estrange themselves from the wayes of those that are good.

2.  In Bad Families, they have continually fresh Examples, and also
incitements to evil, and fresh encouragements to it too.  Yea
moreover, in such places evil is commended, praised, well-spoken
of, and they that do it, are applauded; and this, to be sure, is a
drowning Judgement.

3.  Such places are the very haunts and Walks of the infernal
Spirits, who are continually poysoning the Cogitations and Minds of
one or other in such Families, that they may be able to poyson
others.  Therefore observe it, usually in wicked Families, some
one, or two, are more arch for wickedness then are any other that
are there.  Now such are Satans Conduit-pipes; for by them he
conveighs of the spawn of Hell, through their being crafty in
wickedness, into the Ears and Souls of their Companions.  Yea, and
when they have once conceived wickedness, they travel with it, as
doth a woman with Child, till they have brought it forth; Behold,
he travelleth with iniquity, and hath conceived mischief, and
brought forth falshood. {62c}  Some men, as here is intimated in
the Text, and as was hinted also before, have a kind of mystical,
but hellish copulation with the Devil, who is the Father, and their
Soul the Mother of sin and wickedness; and they, so soon as they
have conceived by him, finish, by bringing forth sin, both it, and
their own damnation. {62d}

Atten.  How {63a} much then doth it concern those Parents that love
their Children, to see, that if they go from them, they be put into
such Families as be good, that they may learn there betimes to
eschew evil, and to follow that which is good?

Wise.  It doth concern them indeed; and it doth also concern them
{63b} that take Children into their Families, to take heed what
Children they receive.  For a man may soon by a Bad boy, be
dammaged both in his Name, Estate, and Family, and also hindred in
his Peace and peaceable pursuit after God and godliness; I say, by
one such Vermin as a wicked and filthy Apprentice.

Atten.  True, for one Sinner destroyeth much good, and a poor man
is better than a Lier.  But many times a man cannot help it; for
such as at the beginning promise very fair, are by a little time
proved to be very Rogues, like young Badman.

Wise.  That is true also, but when a man has done the best he can
to help it, he may with the more confidence expect the Blessing of
God to follow, or he shall have the more peace, if things go
contrary to his desire.

Atten.  Well, but did Mr. Badman and his Master agree so well?  I
mean his last Master, since they were Birds of a Feather, I mean,
since they were so well met for wickedness.

Wise.  This second Master, was, as before I told you, bad enough,
but yet he would often fall out {63c} with young Badman his
Servant, and chide, yea and some times beat him too, for his
naughty doings.

Atten.  What! for all he was so bad himself!  This is like the
Proverb, The Devil corrects Vice.

Wise.  I will assure you, 'tis as I say.  For you must know, that
Badmans wayes suited not with his Masters gains.  Could he have
done as the Damsel that we read of Acts 16. {63d} did, to wit, fill
his Masters Purse with his badness, he had certainly been his
White-boy, but it was not so with young Badman; and therefore,
though his Master and he did suit well enough in the main, yet in
this and that point they differed.  Young Badman {63e} was for
neglecting of his Masters business, for going to the Whore-house,
for beguiling of his Master, for attempting to debauch his
Daughters, and the like:  No marvel then if they disagreed in these
points.  Not so much for that his Master had an antipathy against
the fact it self, for he could do so when he was an Apprentice; but
for that his servant by his sin made spoil of his Commodities, &c.
and so damnified his Master.

Had (as I said before) young Badmans wickedness, had only a
tendency to his Masters advantage; as could he have sworn, lied,
cousened, cheated, and defrauded customers for his Master, (and
indeed sometimes he did so) but had that been all that he had done,
he had not had, no not a wry word from his Master:  But this was
not always Mr. Badmans way.

Atten.  That was well brought in, even the Maid that we read of in
the Acts, and the distinction was as clear betwixt the wickedness,
and wickedness of servants.

Wise.  Alas! men that are wicked themselves, yet greatly hate it in
others, not simply because it is wickedness, but because it
opposeth their interest.  Do you think that that Maids master would
have been troubled at the loss of her, if he had not lost, with
her, his gain:  No, I'le warrant you; she might have gone to the
Devil for him:  But when her master saw that the hope of his gain
was gone, then, then he fell to persecuting Paul. {64a}  But Mr.
Badmans master did sometimes lose by Mr. Badmans sins, and then
Badman and his master were at odds.

Atten.  Alas poor Badman!  Then it seems thou couldest not at all
times please thy like.

Wise.  No, he could not, and the reason I have told you.

Atten.  But do not bad Masters condemn themselves in condemning the
badness of their servants. {64b}

Wise.  Yes; {64c} in that they condemn that in another which they
either have, or do allow in themselves.  And the time will come,
when that very sentence that hath gone out of their own mouths
against the sins of others, themselves living and taking pleasure
in the same, shall return with violence upon their own pates.  The
Lord pronounced Judgment against Baasha, as for all his evils in
general, so for this in special, because he was like the house of
Jeroboam, and yet killed him. {64d}  This is Mr. Badmans Masters
case, he is like his man, and yet he beats him.  He is like his
man, and yet he rails at him for being bad.

Atten.  But why did not young Badman run away from this Master, as
he ran away from the other?

Wise.  He did not.  And if I be not mistaken, the reason {65a} why,
was this.  There was Godliness in the house of the first, and that
young Badman could not endure.  For fare, for lodging, for work,
and time, he had better, and more by this Masters allowance, than
ever he had by his last; but all this would not content, because
Godliness was promoted there.  He could not abide this praying,
this reading of Scriptures, and hearing, and repeating of Sermons:
he could not abide to be told of his transgressions in a sober and
Godly manner.

Atten.  There is a great deal in the Manner of reproof, wicked men
both can, and cannot abide to hear their transgressions spoken
against.

Wise.  There is a great deal of difference indeed.  This last
Master of Mr. Badmans, would tell Mr. Badman of his sins in Mr.
Badmans own dialect; he would swear, and curse, and damn, when he
told him of his sins, and this he could bear better, {65b} than to
be told of them after a godly sort.  Besides, that last Master
would, when his passions and rage was over, laugh at and make merry
with the sins of his servant Badman:  And that would please young
Badman well.  Nothing offended Badman but blows, and those he had
but few of now, because he was pretty well grown up.  For the most
part when his Master did rage and swear, he would give him Oath for
Oath, and Curse for Curse, at least secretly, let him go on as long
as he would.

Atten.  This was hellish living.

Wise.  'Twas hellish living indeed:  And a man might say, that with
this Master, young Badman compleated himself {65c} yet more and
more in wickedness, as well as in his trade:  for by that he came
out of his time, what with his own inclination to sin, what with
his acquaintance with his three companions, and what with this last
Master, and the wickedness he saw in him; he became a sinner in
grain.  I think he had a Bastard laid to his charge before he came
out of his time.

Atten.  Well, but it seems he did live to come out of his time,
{66a} but what did he then?

Wise.  Why, he went home to his Father, and he like a loving and
tender-hearted Father received him into his house.

Atten.  And how did he carry it there?

Wise.  Why, the reason why he went home, {66b} was, for Money to
set up for himself, he staied but a little at home, but that little
while that he did stay, he refrained himself {66c} as well he
could, and did not so much discover himself to be base, for fear
his Father should take distaste, and so should refuse, or for a
while forbear to give him money.

Yet even then he would have his times, and companions, and the fill
of his lusts with them, but he used to blind all with this, he was
glad to see his old acquaintance, and they as glad to see him, and
he could not in civility but accomodate them with a bottle or two
of Wine, or a dozen or two of Drink.

Atten.  And did the old man give him money to set up with?

Wise.  Yes, above two hundred pounds.

Atten.  Therein, I think, the old man was out.  Had I been his
Father, I would have held him a little at staves-end, till I had
had far better proof of his manners to be good; (for I perceive
that his Father did know what a naughty boy he had been, both by
what he used to do at home, and because he changed a good Master
for a bad, &c.)  He should not therefore have given him money so
soon.  What if he had pinched a little, and gone to Journey-work
for a time, that he might have known what a penny was, by his
earning of it?  Then, in all probability, he had known better how
to have spent it:  Yea, and by that time perhaps, have better
considered with himself, how to have lived in the world.  Ay, and
who knows but he might have come to himself with the Prodigal, and
have asked God and his Father forgiveness for the villanies that he
had committed against them. {66d}

Wise.  If his Father could also have blessed this manner of dealing
to him, and have made it effectual for the ends that you have
propounded; then I should have thought as you.  But alas, alas, you
talk as if you never knew, or had at this present forgot what the
bowels and compassions of a Father are.  Why did you not serve your
own son so?  But 'tis evident enough, that we are better at giving
good counsel to others, than we are at taking good counsel our
selves. {67a}  But mine honest neighbour, suppose that Mr. Badmans
Father had done as you say, and by so doing had driven his son to
ill courses, what had he bettered either himself or his son in so
doing?

Atten.  That's true, but it doth not follow, that if the Father had
done as I said, the son would have done as you suppose.  But if he
had done as you have supposed, what had he done worse than what he
hath done already? {67b}

Wise.  He had done bad enough, that's true.  But suppose his Father
had given him no Money, and suppose that young Badman had taken a
pett thereat, and in an anger had gone beyond Sea, and his Father
had neither seen him, nor heard of him more.  Or suppose that of a
mad and headstrong stomach he had gone to the High-way for money,
and so had brought himself to the Gallows, and his Father and
Family to great contempt, or if by so doing he had not brought
himself to that end, yet he had added to all his wickedness, such
and such evils besides:  And what comfort could his Father have had
in this?

Besides, when his Father had done for him what he could, with
desire to make him an honest man, he would then, whether his son
had proved honest or no, have laid down his head with far more
peace, than if he had taken your Counsel.

Atten.  Nay I think I should not a been forward to have given
advice in the cause; but truly you have given me such an account of
his vilianies, that the hearing thereof has made me angry with him.

Wise.  In an angry mood we may soon out-shoot our selves, but poor
wretch, as he is, he is gone to his place.  But, as I said, when a
good Father hath done what he can for a bad Child, and that Child
shall prove never the better, he will lie down with far more peace,
than if through severity, he had driven him to inconveniencies.

I remember that I have heard of a good woman, that had (as this old
man) a bad and ungodly {68a} son, and she prayed for him,
counselled him, and carried it Motherly to him for several years
together; but still he remained bad.  At last, upon a time, after
she had been at prayer, as she was wont, for his conversion, she
comes to him, and thus, or to this effect, begins again to admonish
him.  Son, said she, Thou hast been and art a wicked Child, thou
hast cost me many a prayer and tear, and yet thou remainest wicked.
Well, I have done my duty, I have done what I can to save thee; now
I am satisfied, that if I shall see thee damned at the day of
Judgment, I shall be so far off from being grieved for thee, that I
shall rejoyce to hear the sentence of thy damnation at that day:
And it converted him.

I tell you, that if Parents carry it lovingly towards their
Children, mixing their Mercies with loving Rebukes and their loving
Rebukes with Fatherly and Motherly Compassions, they are more
likely to save their Children, than by being churlish and severe
toward them:  but if they do not save them, if their mercy doth
them no good, yet it will greatly ease them at the day of death, to
consider; I have done by love as much as I could, to save and
deliver my child from Hell.

Atten.  Well I yield.  But pray let us return again to Mr. Badman:
You say, that his Father gave him a piece of money that he might
set up for himself.

Wise.  Yes, his Father did give him a piece of money, and he did
set up, {68b} and almost as soon set down again:  for he was not
long set up, but by his ill managing of his matters at home,
together with his extravagant expences abroad, he was got so far
into debt, and had so little in his shop to pay, that he was hard
put to it to keep himself out of prison.  But when his Creditors
understood that he was about to marry, and in a fair way to get a
rich Wife, they said among themselves, We will not be hasty with
him, if he gets a rich Wife he will pay us all.

Atten.  But how could he so quickly run out, for I perceive 'twas
in little time, by what you say?

Wise.  'Twas in little time indeed, I think he was not above two
years and a half in doing of it:  but the reason {69a} is apparent;
for he being a wild young man, and now having the bridle loose
before him, and being wholly subjected to his lusts and vices, he
gave himself up to the way of his heart, and to the sight of his
eye, forgetting that for all these things God will bring him to
Judgment; {69b} and he that doth thus, you may be sure, shall not
be able long to stand on his leggs.

Besides, he had now an addition of {69c} new companions; companions
you must think, most like himself in Manners, and so such that
cared not who sunk, if they themselves might swim.  These would
often be haunting of him, and of his shop too when he was absent.
They would commonly egg him to the Ale-house, but yet make him
Jack-pay-for-all; They would be borrowing also money of him, but
take no care to pay again, except it was with more of their
company, which also he liked very well; and so his poverty came
like one that travelleth, and his want like an armed man.

But all the while they studied his temper; {69d} he loved to be
flattered, praised and commanded for Wit, Manhood, and Personage;
and this was like stroking him over the face.  Thus they Collogued
with him, and got yet more and more into him, and so (like Horse-
leaches) they drew away that little that his father had given him,
and brought him quickly down, almost to dwell next dore to the
begger.

Atten.  Then was the saying of the wise man fulfilled, He that
keepeth company with harlots, and a companion of fools, shall be
destroyed. {69e}

Wise.  Ay, and that too, A companion of riotous persons shameth his
father; {69f} For he, poor man, had both grief and shame, to see
how his son (now at his own hand) behaved himself in the enjoyment
of those good things, in and under the lawfull use of which he
might have lived to Gods glory, his own comfort, and credit among
his neighbours.  But he that followeth vain persons, shall have
poverty enough. {69g}  The way that he took, led him directly into
this condition; for who can expect other things of one that follows
such courses?  Besides, when he was in his Shop, he could not abide
to be doing; He was naturally given to Idleness:  He loved to live
high, but his hands refused to labour; and what else can the end of
such an one be, but that which the wise man saith?  The Drunkard
and the Glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsiness shall cloath
a man with rags. {70a}

Atten.  But now, methinks, when he was brought thus low, he should
have considered the hand of God that was gone out against him, and
should have smote upon the breast, and have returned.

Wise.  Consideration, good consideration was far from him, he was
as stout and proud now, as ever in all his life, and was as high
too in the pursuit of his sin, as when he was in the midst of his
fulness; only he went now {70b} like a tyred Jade, the Devil had
rid him almost off of his leggs.

Atten.  Well, but what did he do when all was almost gone?

Wise.  Two things were now his play. {70c} 1.  He bore all in hand
by Swearing, and Cracking and Lying, that he was as well to pass,
as he was the first day he set up for himself, yea that he had
rather got than lost; and he had at his beck some of his Companions
that would swear to confirm it as fast as he.

Atten.  This was double wickedness, 'twas a sin to say it, and
another to swear it.

Wise.  That's true, but what evil is that that he will not doe,
that is left of God, as I believe Mr. Badman was?

Atten.  And what was the other thing?

Wise.  Why, that which I hinted before, he was for looking out for
a rich Wife:  {70d} and now I am come to some more of his invented,
devised, designed, and abominable Roguery, such that will yet
declare him to be a most desperate sinner.

The thing was this:  A Wife he wanted, or rather Money; for as for
a woman, he could have Whores enow at his whistle.  But, as I said,
he wanted Money, and that must be got by a Wife, or no way; nor
could he so easily get a Wife neither, except he became an Artist
at the way of dissembling; nor would dissembling do among that
people that could dissemble as well as he.  But there dwelt a Maid
not far from him, that was both godly, {70e} and one that had a
good Portion, but how to get her, there lay all the craft. {71a}
Well, he calls a Council of some of his most trusty and cunning
Companions, {71b} and breaks his mind to them; to wit, that he had
a mind to marry:  and he also told them to whom; But, said he, how
shall I accomplish my end, she is Religious, and I am not?  Then
one of them made reply, saying, Since she is Religious, you must
pretend to be so likewise, and that for some time before you go to
her:  Mark therefore whither she goes daily to hear, and do you go
thither also; but there you must be sure to behave your self
soberly, and make as if you liked the Word wonderful well; stand
also where she may see you, and when you come home, be sure that
you walk the street very soberly, and go within sight of her:  This
done for a while, then go to her, and first talk of how sorry you
are for your sins, and shew great love to the Religion that she is
of; still speaking well of her Preachers and of her godly
acquaintance, bewailing your hard hap, that it was not your lot to
be acquainted with her and her fellow-Professors sooner; and this
is the way to get her.  Also you must write down Sermons, talk of
Scriptures, and protest that you came a wooing to her, only because
she is Godly, and because you should count it your greatest
happiness if you might but have such an one:  As for her Money,
slight it, it will be never the further off, that's the way to come
soonest at it, for she will be jealous at first that you come for
her Money; you know what she has, but make not a word about it.  Do
this, and you shall see if you do not intangle the Lass.

Thus was the snare laid for this poor honest Maid, and she was
quickly catched in his pit.

Atten.  Why, did he take this counsel?

Wise.  Did he! yes, and after a while, went as boldly to her, {71c}
and that under a Vizzard of Religion, as if he had been for Honesty
and Godliness, one of the most sincere and upright-hearted in
England.  He observed all his points, and followed the advice of
his Counsellers, and quickly obtained her too; for natural parts he
had, he was tall, and fair, and had plain, but very good Cloaths on
his back; and his Religion was the more easily attained; for he had
seen something in the house of his Father, and first Master, and so
could the more readily put himself into the Form and Shew thereof.

So he appointed his day, and went to her, as that he might easily
do, for she had neither father nor mother to oppose.  Well, when he
was come, and had given her a civil Complement, {72a} to let her
understand why he was come, then he began and told her, That he had
found in his heart a great deal of love to her Person; and that, of
all the Damosels in the world he had pitched upon her, if she
thought fit, to make her his beloved wife.  The reasons, as he told
her, why he had pitched upon her were, her Religious and personal
Excellencies; and therefore intreated her to take his condition
into her tender and loving consideration.  As for the world, quoth
he, I have a very good trade, and can maintain my self and Family
well, while my wife sits still on her seat; I have got thus, and
thus much already, and feel money come in every day, but that is
not the thing that I aim at, 'tis an honest and godly Wife.  Then
he would present her with a good Book or two, pretending how much
good he had got by them himself.  He would also be often speaking
well of godly Ministers, especially of those that he perceived she
liked, and loved most.  Besides, he would be often telling of her,
what a godly Father he had, and what a new man he was also become
himself; and thus did this treacherous Dealer, deal with this
honest and good Girl, to her great grief and sorrow, as afterward
you shall hear.

Atten.  But had the maid no friend to looke after her?

Wise.  Her Father and Mother were dead, and that he knew well
enough, and so she was the more easily overcome by his naughty
lying tongue.  But if she had never so many friends, she might have
been beguiled by him.  It is too much the custom of young people
now, to think themselves wise enough to make their own Choyce, and
that they need not ask counsel of those that are older and also
wiser then they:  {72b} but this is a great fault in them, and many
of them have paid dear for it.  Well, to be short, in little time
Mr. Badman obtains his desire, {73a} gets this honest Girl and her
money, is married to her, brings her home, makes a Feast,
entertains her royally, but her Portion must pay for all.

Atten.  This was wonderfull deceitfull doings, a man shall seldom
hear of the like.

Wise.  By this his doing, he shewed how little he feared God, {73b}
and what little dread he had of his Judgments.  For all this
carriage, and all these words were by him premeditated evil, he
knew he lyed, he knew he dissembled; yea, he knew that he made use
of the name of God, of Religion, good Men, and good Books, but as a
stalking-Horse, thereby the better to catch his game.  In all this
his glorious pretense of Religion, he was but a glorious painted
Hypocrite, and hypocrisie is the highest sin that a poor carnal
wretch can attain unto; it is also a sin that most dareth God, and
that also bringeth the greater damnation.  Now was he a whited
Wall, now was he a painted Sepulchre; {73c} now was he a grave that
appeared not; for this poor honest, godly Damosel, little thought
that both her peace, and comfort, and estate, and liberty, and
person, and all, were going to her burial, {73d} when she was going
to be married to Mr. Badman; And yet so it was, she enjoyed her
self but little afterwards; she was as if she was dead and buried,
to what she enjoyed before.

Atten.  Certainly some wonderfull Judgment of God must attend and
overtake such wicked men as these.

Wise.  You may be sure that they shall have Judgment to the full,
for all these things, when the day of Judgment is come.  But as for
Judgment upon them in this life, it doth not alwayes come, no not
upon those that are worthy thereof.  They that tempt God are
delivered, and they that work wickedness are set up:  {73e}  But
they are reserved to the day of wrath, and then for their
wickedness, God will repay them to their faces. {73f}  The wicked
is reserved to the day of destruction, they shall be brought forth
to the day of wrath; who shall declare his way to his face? and who
shall repay him what he hath done? yet shall he be brought to the
grave, and remain in the tomb. {73g}  That is, ordinarily they
escape God's hand in this life, save only a few Examples are made,
that others may be cautioned, and take warning thereby:  But at the
day of Judgment they must be rebuked for their evil with the lashes
of devouring fire.

Atten.  Can you give me no examples of Gods wrath upon men that
have acted this tragical wicked deed Mr. Badman.

Wise.  Yes; {74a} Hamor and Shechem, and all the men of their City,
for attempting to make God and Religion the stalking-Horse to get
Jacobs daughters to wife, were together slain with the edge of the
sword.  A Judgment of God upon them, no doubt, for their
dissembling in that matter.  All manner of lying and dissembling is
dreadfull, but to make God and Religion a Disguise, therewith to
blind thy Dissimulation from others eyes, is highly provoking to
the Divine Majesty.

I knew {74b} one that dwelt not far off from our Town, that got him
a wife as Mr. Badman got his; but he did not enjoy her long:  for
one night as he was riding home (from his companions, where he had
been at a neighbouring Town) his horse threw him to the ground,
where he was found dead at break of day; frightfully and lamentably
mangled with his fall, and besmeared with his own blood.

Atten.  Well, but pray return again to Mr. Badman, how did he carry
it to his wife, after he was married to her?

Wise.  Nay, let us take things along as we go.  He had not been
married but a little while, but his Creditors came upon him {74c}
for their money:  He deferred them a little while, but at last
things were come to that point, that pay he must, or must do worse;
so he appointed them a time, and they came for their money, and he
payed them down with her money before her eyes, for those goods
that he had profusely spent among his Whores long before, (besides
the portion that his Father gave him) to the value of two hundred
pounds.

Atten.  This beginning was bad; but what shall I say? 'twas like
Mr. Badman himself.  Poor woman, this was but a bad beginning for
her, I fear it filled her with trouble enough, as I think such a
beginning would have done, one, perhaps much stronger than she.

Wise.  Trouble, ay, you may be sure of it, but now 'twas too late
to repent, {75a} she should have looked better to herself, when
being wary would have done her good; her harms may be an advantage
to others, that will learn to take heed thereby; but for her self,
she must take what follows, even such a life now as Mr. Badman her
Husband will lead her, and that will be bad enough.

Atten.  This beginning was bad, and yet I fear it was but the
beginning of bad.

Wise.  You may he sure, that it was but the beginning of badness,
for other evils came on apace; as for instance:  it was but a
little while after he was married, {75b} but he hangs his Religion
upon the hedge, or rather dealt with it as men deal with their old
Cloaths, who cast them off, or leave them to others to wear, for
his part he would be Religious no longer.

Now therefore he had pulled off his Vizzard, and began to shew
himself in his old shape, a base, wicked, debauched fellow, (and
now the poor woman saw that she was betrayed indeed;) now also his
old Companions begin to flock about him, and to haunt his house and
Shop as formerly:  And who with them but Mr. Badman? and who with
him again but they?

Now those good people that used to company with his Wife, began to
be ama[t]ed and discouraged; {75c} also he would frown and gloat
upon them, as it he abhorred the appearance of them:  so that in
little time he drove all good company from her, and made her sit
solitary by herself.  He also began now to go out a nights to those
Drabs {75d} who were his Familiars before, with whom he would stay
somtimes till midnight, and sometimes till almost morning, and then
would come home as drunk as a Swine; and this was the course of Mr.
Badman.

Now, when he came home in this case, if his wife did but speak a
word to him, about where he had been, and why he had so abused
himself, though her words were spoken in never so much meekness and
love, then she was Whore, {76a} and Bitch, and Jade; and 'twas well
if she miss'd his fingers and heels.  Sometimes also he would bring
his Puncks home to his house, and wo be to his wife when they were
gone, if she did not entertain them with all varieties possible,
and also carry it lovingly to them.

Thus this good woman was made by Badman her Husband, to possess
nothing but disappointments as to all that he had promised her, or
that she hoped to have at his hands.

But that that added pressing weight to all her sorrow, was, that,
as he had cast away all Religion himself, so he attempted, if
possible, to make her do so too. {76b}  He would not suffer her to
go out to the Preaching of the Word of Christ, nor to the rest of
his Appointments, for the health and salvation of her Soul:  he
would now taunt at, and reflectingly speak of her Preachers; {76c}
and would receive, yea raise scandals of them, to her very great
grief and affliction.

Now she scarce durst go to an honest Neighbours house, or have a
good Book in her hand; specially when he had his companions in his
house, or had got a little drink in his head.  He would also, when
he perceived that she was dejected, speak tauntingly, {76d} and
mockingly to her in the presence of his Companions, calling of her
his Religious Wife, his demure Dame, and the like; also he would
make a sport of her among his wanton ones abroad.

If she did ask him (as sometimes she would) to let her go out to a
Sermon, he would in a currish manner reply, Keep at home, keep at
home, and look to your business, we cannot live by hearing of
Sermons. {76e}  If she still urged that he would let her goe, then
he would say to her, Goe if you dare.  He would also charge her
with giving of what he had to her Ministers, when, vile wretch, he
had spent it on his vain Companions before.

This was the life that Mr. Badmans good wife lived, within few
months after he had married her.

Atten.  This was a disappointment indeed.

Wise.  A disappointment indeed, as ever, I think, poor woman had.
One would think that the Knave might a little let her have had her
will, since it was nothing but to be honest, and since she brought
him so sweet, so lumping a Portion, for she brought hundreds into
his house:  I say, one would think he should have let her had her
own will a little, since she desired it only in the Service and
Worship of God:  but could she win him to grant her that? no, not a
bit if it would have saved her life.  True, sometimes she would
steal out when he was from home, on a Journey, or among his drunken
companions, but with all privacy imaginable; {77a} and, poor woman,
this advantage she had, she carried it so to all her Neighbours,
that, though many of them were but carnal, yet they would not
betray her, or tell of her going out to the Word, if they saw it,
but would rather endeavour to hide it from Mr. Badman himself.

Atten.  This carriage of his to her, was enough to break her heart.

Wise.  It was enough to do it indeed, yea it did effectually do it.
It killed her in time, yea it was all the time a killing of her.
She would often-times when she sate by her self, thus mournfully
bewail her condition:  {77b} Wo is me that I sojourn in Meshech,
and that I dwell in the tents of Kedar; my soul hath long time
dwelt with him that hateth peace. {77c}  O what shall be given unto
thee, thou deceitful tongue? or what shall be done unto thee, thou
false tongue?  I am a Woman grieved in spirit, my Husband has
bought me and sold me for his lusts:  'Twas not me, but my Money
that he wanted:  O that he had had it, so I had had my liberty!

This she said, not of contempt of his Person, but of his
Conditions, and because she saw that by his hypocritical tongue, he
had brought her not only almost to beggery, but robbed her of the
Word of God.

Atten.  It is a deadly thing, I see, to be unequally yoaked with
Unbelievers.  If this woman had had a good Husband, how happily
might they have lived together!  Such an one would have prayed for
her, taught her, and also would have encourages her in the Faith,
and ways of God:  But now, poor creature, instead of this, there is
nothing but the quite contrary.

Wise.  It is a deadly thing indeed, and therefore, by the Word of
God his people are forbid to be joyned in marriage with them. {77d}
Be not, saith it, unequally yoaked together with unbelievers; for
what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what
communion hath light with darkness?  And what Concord hath Christ
with Belial? or what part hath he that believeth with an Infidel?
And what agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols? {78a}  There
can be no agreement where such Matches are made, even God himself
hath declared the contrary, from the beginning of the world.  I
(says he) will put enmity betwixt thee and the woman, betwixt thy
seed and her seed. {78b}  Therefore he saith in another place, they
can mix no better than Iron and Clay.  I say, they cannot agree,
they cannot be one, and therefore they should be aware at first,
and not lightly receive such into their affections.  God has often
made such Matches bitter, especially to his own.  Such matches are,
as God said of Elie's Sons that were spared, to consume the eyes,
and to grieve the heart.  Oh the wailing, and lamentation that they
have made that have been thus yoaked, especially if they were such
as would be so yoaked, against their light, and good counsel to the
contrary.

Atten.  Alas! he deluded her with his tongue, and feigned
reformation.

Wise.  Well, well; she should have gone more warily to work:  {78d}
what if she had acquainted some of her best, most knowing, and
godly friends therewith? what if she had engaged a Godly Minister
or two to have talked with Mr. Badman?  Also, what if she had laid
wait round about him, to espie if he was not otherwise behind her
back than he was before her face?  And besides, I verily think
(since in the multitude of Counsellors there is safety) that if she
had acquainted the Congregation with it, and desired them to spend
some time in prayer to God about it, and if she must have had him,
to have received him as to his godliness, upon the Judgment of
others, rather than her own, (she knowing them to be Godly and
Judicious, and unbiassed men) she had had more peace all her life
after; than to trust to her own poor, raw, womanish Judgment, as
she did.  Love is blind, and will see nothing amiss, where others
may see an hundred faults.  Therefore I say, she should not have
trusted to her own thoughts in the matter of his Goodness.

As to his Person, there she was fittest to judge, because she was
to be the person pleased, but as to his Godliness, there the Word
was the fittest Judge, and they that could best understand it,
because God was therein to be pleased.  I wish {79a} that all young
Maidens will take heed of being beguiled with flattering words,
with feigning and lying speeches, and take the best way to preserve
themselves from being bought and sold by wicked men, as she was;
lest they repent with her, when (as to this) repentance will do
them no good, but for their unadvisedness goe sorrowing to their
graves.

Atten.  Well, things are past with this poor woman, and cannot be
called back, let others {79b} beware, by her misfortunes, lest they
also fall into her distress.

Wise.  That is the thing that I say, let them take heed, lest for
their unadvisedness the smart, as this poor woman has done.  And
ah! methinks, that they that yet are single persons, and that are
tempted to marry to such as Mr. Badman; would, to inform, and warn
themselves in this matter, before they intangle themselves, but goe
to some that already are in the snare, and ask them how it is with
them, as to the suitable, or unsuitableness of their marriage, and
desire their advice.  Surely they would ring such a peal in their
ears about the unequality, unsuitableness, disadvantages, and
disquietments, and sins that attend such marriages, that would make
them beware as long as they live.  But the bird in the air, knows
not the notes of the bird in the snare, untill she comes thither
herself:  Besides, to make up such marriages, Satan, and carnal
Reason, and Lust, or at least Inconsiderateness, has the chiefest
hand; and where these things bear sway, designs, though never so
destructive, will goe headlong on:  and therefore I fear, that but
little warning will be taken by young Girls, at Mr. Badmans wives
affliction.

Atten.  But are there no disswasive arguments to lay before such,
to prevent their future misery.

Wise.  Yes:  There is the Law of God, that forbiddeth marriage with
unbelievers.  These kind of marriages also are condemned even by
irrational creatures.  1. It is forbidden by the Law of God both in
the Old Testament and in the New.  1. In the Old.  Thou shalt not
make Marriages with them; Thy daughter thou shalt not give unto his
son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son, Deut. 7. 4, 5.
{80a}  2.  In the New Testament it is forbidden.  Be ye not
unequally yoaked together with unbelievers; Let them marry to whom
they will, only in the Lord. {80b}

Here now is a prohibition, {80c} plainly forbidding the Believer to
marry with the Unbeliever, therefore they should not do it.  Again,
these unwarrantable Marriages, are, as I may so say, condemned by
irrational creatures, who will not couple but with their own sort:
Will the Sheep couple with a Dog, the Partridge with a Crow, or the
Feasant with an Owl?  No, they will strictly tye up themselves to
those of their own sort only:  Yea, it sets all the world a
wondring, when they see or hear the contrary.  Man only is most
subject to wink at, and allow of these unlawful mixtures of men and
women; Because man only is a sinful Beast, a sinful Bird, therefore
he, above all, will take upon him by rebellious actions to answer,
or rather to oppose and violate the Law of his God and Creator; nor
shall these, or other Interogatories, [What fellowship? what
concord? what agreement? what communion can there be in such
Marriages?] be counted of weight, or thought worth the answering by
him.

But further.  The dangers {80d} that such do commonly run
themselves into, should be to others a disswasive argument to stop
them from doing the like:  for besides the distresses of Mr.
Badmans wife, many that have had very hopefull beginnings for
heaven, have by vertue of the mischiefs that have attended these
unlawfull marriages, miserably and fearfully miscarried.  Soon
after such marriages, Conviction (the first step toward heaven)
hath ceased; Prayer (the next step toward Heaven) hath ceased;
Hungrings and thirstings after salvation (another step towards the
Kingdom of Heaven) have ceased.  In a word, such marriages have
estranged them from the Word, from their godly and faithful
Friends, and have brought them again into carnal company, among
carnal Friends, and also into carnal Delights, where, and with whom
they have in conclusion both sinfully abode, and miserably
perished.

And this is one reason why God hath forbidden this kind of unequal
marriages.  For they, saith he, meaning the ungodly, will turn away
thy son from following me, that they may serve other Gods, so will
the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and destroy you
suddenly. {81a}  Now mark, there were some in Israel, that would,
notwithstanding this prohibition, venture to marry to the Heathens
and Unbelievers:  But what followed?  They served their Idols, they
sacrificed their Sons and their Daughters unto Devils.  Thus were
they defiled with their own works, and went a whoring with their
own Inventions.  Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled
against his people, insomuch that he abhorred his own Inheritance.
{81b}

Atten.  But let's return again to Mr. Badman; had he any Children
by his wife?

Wise.  Yes, seven.

Atten.  I doubt they were but badly brought up.

Wise.  One of them loved its Mother dearly, and would constantly
harken to her voice.  Now that Child {81c} she had the opportunity
to instruct in the Principles of Christian Religion, and it became
a very gracious child.  But that child Mr. Badman could not abide,
he would seldom afford it a pleasant word, but would scowl and
frown upon it, speak churlishly and doggedly to it, and though as
to Nature it was the most feeble of the seven, yet it oftenest felt
the weight of its Fathers fingers.  Three of his Children did
directly follow his steps, and began to be as vile as (in his
youth) he was himself.  The other that remained became a kind of
mungrel Professors, not so bad as their Father, nor so good as
their Mother, but were betwixt them both.  They had their Mothers
Notions, and their Fathers Actions, and were much like those that
you read of in the Book of Nehemiah; These children spake half in
the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews Language, but
according to the language of each people. {81d}

Atten.  What you say in this matter, is observable, and if I take
not my mark amiss, it often happeneth after this manner where such
unlawful Marriages are contracted.

Wise.  It sometimes doth so, and the reason, with respect to their
Parents, is this:  Where the one of the Parents is godly, and the
other ungodly and vile, (though they can agree in begetting of
Children, yet) they strive for their Children when they are born.
{82a}  The godly Parent strives for the child, and by Prayers,
Counsel and good Examples, labours to make it holy in body and
soul, and so fit for the Kingdom of Heaven; but the ungodly would
have it like himself, wicked and base and sinful; and so they both
give instructions accordingly:  instructions did I say? yea, and
Examples too, according to their minds.  Thus the godly, as Hannah,
is presenting her Samuel unto the Lord:  but the ungodly, like them
that went before them, are for offering their Children to Moloch,
to an Idol, to sin, to the Devil, and to Hell.  Thus one harkeneth
to the Law of their Mother, and is preserved from destruction, but
as for the other, as their Fathers did, so do they.  Thus did Mr.
Badman and his wife part some of their Children betwixt them; but
as for the other three that were as 'twere Mungrels, betwixt both,
they were like unto those that you read of in Kings, They feared
the Lord, but served their own Idols. {82b}  They had, as I sail,
their Mothers Notions, and I will adde, Profession too, but their
Fathers Lusts, and something of his Life.  Now their Father did not
like them, because they had their Mothers tongue; and the Mother
did not like them because they had still their Fathers heart and
life; nor were they indeed fit company for good or bad.  The Good
would not trust them because they were bad, the Bad would not trust
them because they were good, viz.  The good would not trust them
because they were bad in their Lives, and the bad would not trust
them because they were good in their Words:  So they were forced
with Esau to joyn in affinity with Ishmael; to wit, to look out a
people that were Hypocrites like themselves, and with them they
matcht, and lived and died.

Atten.  Poor woman, she could not but have much perplexity.

Wise.  Yea, and poor Children, that ever they were sent into the
world as the fruit of the loyns, and under the government of such a
father as Mr. Badman.

Atten.  You say right, for such children, lye, almost under all
manner of disadvantages:  but we must say nothing, because this
also is the sovereign Will of God.

Wise.  We may not by any means object against God:  yet we may talk
of the advantages, and disadvantages that Children have by having
for their Parents such as are either Godly, or the contrary.

Atten.  You say right, we may so, and pray now, since we are about
it, speak something in brief unto it, that is, unto this; What
advantage those Children have above others, that have for their
Parents such as indeed are Godly.

Wise.  So I will, only I must first premise these two or three
things. {83a}

1.  They have not the advantage of Election for their fathers
sakes.

2.  They are born, as others, the children of wrath, though they
come of Godly Parents.

3.  Grace comes not unto them as an Inheritance, because they have
Godly Parents.  These things premised I shall now proceed.

1.  The children of Godly Parents are the children of many Prayers:
they are prayed for before, and Prayed for after they are born, and
the Prayer of a godly Father and godly Mother doth much.

2.  They have the advantage of what restraint is possible, from
what evils their Parents see them inclinable to, and that is a
second mercy.

3.  They have the advantage of Godly instruction, and of being told
which be, and which be not the right ways of the Lord.

4.  They have also those ways commended unto them, and spoken well
of in their hearing, that are good.

5.  Such are also, what may be, kept out of evil company, from evil
Books, and from being taught the way of Swearing, Lying, and the
like, as Sabbath-breaking, and mocking at good men, and good
things, and this is a very great mercy.

6.  They have also the benefit of a godly life set before them
doctrinally by their Parents, and that doctrine backt with a godly
and holy example:  and all these are very great advantages.

Now all these advantages, the children of ungodly Parents want;
{84a} and so are more in danger of being carried away with the
error of the wicked.  For ungodly Parents neither Pray for their
Children, nor do, nor can they heartily instruct them; they do not
after a godly manner restrain them from evil, nor do they keep them
from evil company.  They are not grieved at, nor yet do they
forewarn their children to beware of such evil actions that are
abomination to God, and to all good men.  They let their children
break the Sabbath, swear, lye, be wicked and vain.  They commend
not to their children an holy life, nor set a good example before
their eyes.  No, they do in all things contrary:  Estranging of
their children what they can, from the love of God and all good
men, so soon as they are born.  Therefore it is a very great
Judgment of God upon children to be the Offspring of base and
ungodly men. {84b}

Atten.  Well, but before we leave Mr. Badmans wife and children, I
have a mind, if you please, to enquire a little more after one
thing, the which I am sure you can satisfie me in.

Wise.  What is that?

Atten.  You said a while ago, that this Mr. Badman would not suffer
his wife to go out to hear such godly Ministers as she liked, but
said if she did, she had as good never come home any more.  Did he
often carry it thus to her?

Wise.  He did say so, he did often say so.  This I told you then,
and had also then told you more, but that other things put me out.

Atten.  Well said, pray therefore now go on.

Wise.  So I will.  Upon a time, she was on a Lords day for going to
hear a Sermon, and Mr. Badman was unwilling {84c} she should:  but
she at that time, as it seems, did put on more courage than she was
wont; and therefore, after she had spent upon him, a great many
fair words and entreaties, if perhaps she might have prevailed by
them, but all to no purpose at all:  At last she said she would go,
and rendred this reason for it; I have an Husband, but also a God;
my God has commanded me, and that upon pain of damnation, to be a
continual Worshipper of him, and that in the way of his own
Appointments:  I have an Husband, but also a Soul, and my Soul
ought to be more unto me, than all the world besides.  This soul of
mine I will look after, care for, and (if I can) provide it an
Heaven for its habitation.  You are commanded to love me, as you
love your own body, and so do I love you; {85a} but I tell you
true, I preferr my Soul before all the world, and its Salvation I
will seek.

At this, first, {85b} he gave her an ugly wish, and then fell into
a fearfull rage, and sware moreover that if she did go, he would
make both her, and all her damnable Brotherhood (for so he was
pleased to call them) to repent their coming thither.

Atten.  But what should he mean by that?

Wise.  You may easily guess what he meant:  he meant, he would turn
Informer, and so either weary out those that she loved, from
meeting together to Worship God; or make them pay dearly for their
so doing; the which if he did, he knew it would vex every vein of
her tender heart.

Atten.  But do you think Mr. Badman would have been so base?

Wise.  Truly he had malice, and enmity enough in his heart to do
it, onely he was a Tradesman; also he knew that he must live by his
neighbours, and so he had that little wit in his anger, that he
refrained himself, and did it not.  But, as I said, he had malice
and envy enough in his heart {85c} to have made him to do it, only
he thought it would worst him in his trade:  yet these three things
he would be doing.

1.  He would be putting of others on to molest and abuse her
friends.

2.  He would be glad when he heard that any mischief befell them.

3.  And would laugh at her, when he saw her troubled for them.  And
now I have told you Mr. Badmans way as to this.

Atten.  But was he not afraid of the Judgments of God, that did fly
about at that time?

Wise.  He regarded not the Judgment nor Mercy of God, for had he at
all done that, he could not have done as he did.  But what
Judgments do you mean?

Atten.  Such Judgments, that if Mr Badman himself had taken but
sober notice of, they might have made him a hung down his ears.

Wise.  Why, have you heard of any such persons that the Judgments
of God have overtaken.

Atten.  Yes, and so, I believe, have you too, though you make so
strange about it.

Wise.  I have so indeed, to my astonishment and wonder.

Atten.  Pray, therefore, if you please, tell me what it is, as to
this, that you know; and then, perhaps, I may also say something to
you of the same.

Wise.  In {86a} our Town {86b} there was one W. S. a man of a very
wicked life; and he, when there seemed to be countenance given to
it, would needs turn Informer.  Well, so he did, and was as
diligent in his business as most of them could be; he would watch a
nights, climb Trees, and range the Woods a days, if possible, to
find out the Meeters, for then they were forced to meet in the
Fields:  yea, he would curse them bitterly, and swear most
fearfully what he would do to them when he found them.  Well, after
he had gone on like a Bedlam in his course a while, and had done
some mischiefs to the people, he was stricken by the hand of God,
and that in this manner.

1.  Although he had his tongue naturally at will, now he was taken
with a faultering in his speech, and could not for weeks together
speak otherwise, than just like a man that was drunk.

2.  Then he was taken with a drauling, or slabbering at his mouth,
which slabber sometimes would hang at his mouth well nigh half way
down to the ground.

3.  Then he had such a weakness in the back sinews of his Neck,
that oft times he could not look up before him, unless he clapped
his hand hard upon his forehead, and held up his head that way, by
strength of hand.

4.  After this his speech went quite away, and he could speak no
more than a Swine or a Bear.  Therefore, like one of them, he would
gruntle and make an ugly noyse, according as he was offended, or
pleased, or would have any thing done, &c.

In this posture he continued for the space of half a year, or
thereabouts, all the while otherwise well, and could go about his
business, save once that he had a fall from the Bell as it hangs in
our Steeple, which 'twas a wonder it did not kill him:  But after
that he also walked about, till God had made him a sufficient
spectacle of his Judgment for his sin, and then on a sudden he was
stricken and dyed miserably:  and so there was an end of him and
his doings.

I will tell you {87a} of another.  About four miles from St. Neots,
there was a Gentleman had a man, and he would needs be an Informer,
and a lusty young man he was.  Well, an Informer he was, and did
much distress some people, and had perfected his Informations so
effectually against some, that there was nothing further to do, but
for the Constables to make distress on the people, that he might
have the Money or Goods; and as I heard, he hastened them much to
do it.  Now while he was in the heat of his work, as he stood one
day by the Fire-side, he had (it should seem) a mind to a Sop in
the Pan, (for the Spit was then at the fire,) so he went to make
him one; but behold, a Dog (so say his own Dog) took distaste at
something, and bit his Master by the Leg; the which bite,
notwithstanding all the means that was used to cure him, turned (as
was said) to a Gangrene; however, that wound was his death, and
that a dreadful one too:  for my Relator said, that he lay in such
a condition by this bite, (as the beginning) till his flesh rotted
from off him before he went out of the world.  But what need I
instance in particular persons, when the Judgement of God against
this kind of people was made manifest, I think I may say, if not in
all, yet in most of the Counties in England where such poor
Creatures were.  But I would, if it had been the will of God, that
neither I nor any body else, could tell you more of these Stories:
True stories, that are neither Lye, nor Romance.

Atten.  Well, I also heard of both these my self, and of more too,
as remarkable in their kind as these, if I had any list to tell
them:  but let us leave those that are behind to others, or to the
coming of Christ, who then will justifie or condemn them as the
merit of their work shall require; or if they repented, and found
mercy, I shall be glad when I know it, for I wish not a curse to
the Soul of mine Enemy.

Wise.  There can be no pleasure in the telling of such stories,
though to hear of them may do us a pleasure:  They may put us in
mind that there is a God that judgeth in the earth, and that doth
not alwayes forget nor deferre to hear the Crye of the destitute;
They also carry along with them both Caution and Counsel to those
that are the survivors of such.  Let us tremble at the Judgements
of God, and be afraid of sinning against him, and it shall be our
protection.  It shall go well with them that fear God, that fear
before him.

Atten.  Well Sir, as you have intimated, so I think we have in this
place spoken enough about these kind of men; if you please, let us
return again to Mr. Badman himself, if you have any more to say of
him.

Wise.  More! we have yet scarce throughly begun with Any thing that
we have said.  All the particulars are in themselves so full of
badness, that we have rather only looked in them, than indeed said
any thing to them:  but we will pass them, and proceed.  You have
heard of the sins of his Youth, of his Apprentiship, and how he set
up, and married, and what a life he hath led his wife; and now I
will tell you some more {88a} of his pranks.  He had the very knack
of Knavery; had he, as I said before, been bound to serve an
Apprentiship to all these things, he could not have been more
cunning, he could not have been more artificial at it.

Atten.  Nor perhaps so artificially neither.  For as none can teach
Goodness like to God himself, so concerning Sin and Knavery, none
can teach a man it like the Devil, to whom, as I perceive, Mr.
Badman went to School from his Childhood to the end of his life.
But pray Sir, make a beginning.

Wise.  Well so I will.  You may remember that I told you what a
condition he was in for Money before he did marry, and how he got a
rich Wife, with whose Money he paid his debts:  Now when he had
paid his debts, he having some Moneys left, he sets up again {88b}
as briskly as ever, keeps a great Shop, drives a great Trade, and
runs again a great way into debt; but now not into the debt of one
or two, but into the debt of many, so that at last he came to owe
some thousands; and thus he went on a good while.  And to pursue
his ends the better, he began now to study to please all men, and
to suit himself to any company; he could now be as they, say as
they, that is, if he listed; and then he would list, when he
perceived that by so doing, he might either make them his Customers
or Creditors for his Commodities.  If he dealt with honest men, (as
with some honest men he did) then he would be as they; talk as
they, seem to be sober as they, talk of Justice and Religion as
they, and against Debauchery as they; yea, and would too seem to
shew a dislike of them that said, did, or were otherwise than
honest.

Again, when he did light among those that were bad, then he would
be as they, but yet more close and cautiously, except he were sure
of his company:  Then he would carry it openly, be as they; say,
Damn'em and Sink'em, as they.  If they railed on Good men, so could
he; {89a} if they railed on Religion, so could he:  if they talked
beastly, vainly, idlely, so would he; if they were for drinking,
swearing, whoring, or any the like Villanies, so was he.  This was
now the path he trod in, and could do all artificially, as any man
alive.  And now he thought himself a perfect man, he thought he was
always a Boy till now.  What think you now of Mr. Badman?

Atten.  Think! why, I think he was an Atheist:  For no man but an
Atheist can do this.  I say, it cannot be, but that the man that is
such as this Mr. Badman, must be a rank and stinking Atheist; for
he that believes that there is either God or Devil, Heaven or Hell,
or Death, and Judgment after, cannot doe as Mr. Badman did; I mean,
if he could do these things without reluctancy and check of
Conscience; yea, if he had not sorrow and remorse for such
abominable sins as these.

Wise.  Nay, he was so far off from reluctancies and remorse of
Conscience for these things, that he counted them the excellency of
his Attainments, the quintessence of his Wit, his rare and singular
vertues, such as but few besides himself could be the Masters of.
Therefore, as for those that made boggle and stop at things, and
that could not in Conscience, and for fear of Death and Judgement,
do such things as he; he would call them Fools and Noddies, and
charge them for being frighted with the talk of unseen Bugbears;
and would encourage them, if they would be men indeed, to labour
after the attainment of this his excellent art.  He would often-
times please himself {90a} with the thoughts of what he could do in
this matter, saying within himself; I can be religious, and
irreligious, I can be any thing, or nothing; I can swear, and speak
against swearing; I can lye, and speak against lying; I can drink,
wench, be unclean, and defraud, and not be troubled for it:  Now I
enjoy my self, and am Master of mine own wayes, and not they of me.
This I have attained with much study, great care, and more pains.
But this his talk should be only with himself, to his wife, who he
knew durst not divulge it; or among his Intimates, to whom he knew
he might say any thing.

Atten.  Did I call him before an Atheist?  I may call him now a
Devil, or a man possessed with one, if not with many.  I think that
there cannot be found in every corner such an one as this.  True,
it is said of King Ahaz, that be sinned more and more; and of Ahab,
that he sold himself to work wickedness; and of the men of Sodom,
that they were sinners exceedingly before the Lord. {90b}

Wise.  An Atheist he was no doubt, if there be such a thing as an
Atheist in the world, but for all his brags of perfection and
security in his wickedness, I believe that at times God did let
down fire from Heaven into his Conscience.  True, I believe he
would quickly put it out again, and grow more desperate and wicked
afterward, but this also turned to his destruction, as afterward
you may hear. {90c}

But I am not of your mind, to think that there are but few such in
the world; except you mean as to the Degree of wickedness unto
which he had attained.  For otherwise, no doubt, {90d} there is
abundance of such as he:  men of the same mind, of the same
principles, and of the same conscience too, to put them into
practice.  Yea, I believe that there are many that are endeavouring
to attain to the same pitch of wickedness; and all them are such as
he, in the Judgment of the Law; nor will their want of hellish wit
to attain thereto, excuse them at the day of Judgment.  You know
that in all Science, some are more arch than some; and so it is in
the art, as well as in the practice of wickedness:  some are two-
fold, and some seven-fold more the children of Hell than others,
(and yet all the children of Hell,) else they would all be Masters,
and none scholars in the school of wickedness.  But there must be
Masters, and there must be Learners; Mr. Badman was a master in
this art, and therefore it follows that he must be an arch and
chief one in that mystery.

Atten.  You are in the right, for I perceive that some men, though
they desire it, cannot be so arch in the practice thereof as
others, but are (as I suppose they call them) fools and dunces to
the rest, their heads and capacities will not serve them to act and
do so wickedly.  But Mr. Badman wanted not a wicked head to
contrive, as well as a wicked heart to do his wickedness.

Wise.  True, but yet I say, such men shall at the day of Judgment,
be judged, not only for what they are, but also for what they would
be.  For if the thought of foolishness is sin, {91a} doubtless the
desire of foolishness is more sin:  and if the desire be more, the
endeavour after it must needs be more and more. {91b}  He then that
is not an artificial Atheist and Transgressor, yet if he desires to
be so, if he endeavoureth to be so, he shall be Judged and
condemned to Hell for such an one.  For the Law Judgeth men, as I
said, according to what they would be.  He that looketh upon a
woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery with her already
in his heart. {91c}  By the same rule, he that would steal, doth
steal; he that would cheat, doth cheat; he that would swear, doth
swear; and he that would commit adultery, doth do so.  For God
Judgeth men according to the working of their minds, and saith; As
he thinketh, so is he.  That is, so is he in his heart, in his
intentions, in his desires, in his endeavours; and Gods Law, I say,
lays hold of the desires, intentions and endeavours, even as it
lays hold of the act of wickedness it self. {91d}  A man then that
desires to be as bad as Mr. Badman, (and desires to be so wicked
have many in their hearts) though he never attains to that
proficiency in wickedness as he, shall yet be Judged for as bad a
man as he, because 'twas in his desires to be such a wicked one.

Atten.  But this height of wickedness in Mr. Badman, will not yet
out of my mind.  This hard, desperate, or what shall I call it,
diabolicall frame of heart, was in him a foundation, a ground-work,
to all acts and deeds that were evil.

Wise.  The heart, and the desperate wickedness of it, is the
foundation and groundwork of all.  Atheism, professed and
practicall, spring both out of the heart, yea and all manner of
evils besides. {92a}  For they be not bad deeds that make a bad
man, but he is already a bad man that doth bad deeds.  A man must
be wicked before he can do wickedness. {92b}  Wickedness proceedeth
from the wicked.  'Tis an evil tree that bears evil fruit, men
gather no grapes of thorns; the heart therefore must be evil,
before the man can do evil, and good before the man doth good.

Atten.  Now I see the reason why Mr. Badman was so base, as to get
a Wife by dissimulation, and to abuse her so like a Villain when he
had got her, it was because he was before by a wicked heart
prepared to act wickedness.

Wise.  You may be sure of it; for from within, out of the heart of
man proccedeth evil thoughts, Adulteries, Fornications, Murders,
Thefts, Coveteousness, Wickedness, Deceit, Lasciviousness, an evil
Eye, Blasphemy, Pride, Foolishness.  All these things come from
within, and defile a man. {92c}  And a man, as his naughty mind
inclines him, makes use of these, or any of these, to gratifie his
lust, to promote his designs, to revenge his malice, to enrich, or
to wallow himself in the foolish pleasures and pastimes of this
life:  And all these did Mr. Badman do, even to the utmost, if
either opportunity, or purse, or perfidiousness, would help him to
the obtaining of his purpose.

Atten.  Purse!  Why he could not but have Purse to do almost what
he would, having married a wife with so much money.

Wise.  Hold you there; some of Mr. Badmans sins were costly, as his
drinking, and whoring, and keeping other bad company; though he was
a man that had ways too many to get money, as well as ways too many
to spend it.

Atten.  Had he then such a good Trade, for all he was such a bad
man? or was his Calling so gainfull to him, as alwayes to keep his
Purses belly full, though he was himself a great spender?

Wise.  No:  It was not his Trade that did it, though he had a
pretty trade too.  He had another way to get Money, and that by
hatfulls and pocketfulls at a time.

Atten.  Why I trow he was no Highway man, was he?

Wise.  I will be sparing in my speech as to that, though some have
muttered as if he could ride out now and then, about no body but
himself knew what, over night, and come home all dirty and weary
next morning.  But that is not the thing I aim at.

Atten.  Pray let me know it, if you think it convenient that I
should.

Wise.  I will tell you:  It was this, he had an art to Break, {93a}
and get hatfulls of money by breaking.

Atten.  But what do you mean by Mr. Badmans Breaking? you speak
mystically, do you not?

Wise.  No, no, I speak plainly.  Or, if you will have it in plainer
language, 'tis this:  When Mr. Badman had swaggered and whored away
most of his wifes portion, he began to feel that he could not much
longer stand upon his legs in this course of life, and keep up his
Trade and Repute (such as he had) in the world; but by the new
Engine of Breaking.  Wherefore, upon a time, he gives a great, and
sudden {93b} rush into several mens debts, to the value of about
four or five thousand pound, driving at the same time a very great
trade, by selling many things for less than they cost him, to get
him custom, therewith to blind his Creditors eyes.  His Creditors
therefore feeling that he had a great employ, and dreaming that it
must needs at length turn to a very good account to them, trusted
him freely without mistrust, and so did others too, to the value of
what was mentioned before.  Well, when Mr. Badman had well
feathered his Nest with other mens goods and money, after a little
time {93c} he breaks.  And by and by it is noysed abroad that Mr.
Badman had shut up Shop, was gone, and could trade no longer.  Now,
by that time his breaking was come to his Creditors ears, he had by
Craft and Knavery made so sure of what he had, that his Creditors
could not touch a penny.  Well, when he had done, he sends his
mournfull sugered letters to his Creditors, to let them understand
what had happened unto him, and desired them not to be severe with
him; {94a} for he bore towards all men an honest mind, and would
pay so far as he was able.  Now he sends his letters by a man {94b}
confederate with him, who could make both the worst, and best of
Mr. Badmans case:  The best for Mr. Badman, and the worst for his
Creditors.  So when he comes to them, he both bemoans them, and
condoles Mr. Badmans condition:  Telling of them, that without a
speedy bringing of things to a conclusion, Mr. Badman would be able
to make them no satisfaction, but at present he both could, and
would, and that to the utmost of his power:  and to that end, he
desired that they would come over to him.  Well, his Creditors
appoint him a time, and come over; and he, mean while, authorizes
another to treat with them, but will not be seen himself, unless it
was on a Sunday, lest they should snap him with a Writ.  So his
deputed friend treats with them about their concern with Mr.
Badman, first telling them of the great care that Mr. Badman took
to satisfie them and all men for whatsoever he ought, as far as in
him lay, and, how little he thought a while since to be in this low
condition.  He pleaded also the greatness of his Charge, the
greatness of Taxes, the Badness of the times, and the great Losses
that he had by many of his customers, some of which died in his
debt, others were run away, and for many that were alive, he never
expected a farthi[n]g from them.  Yet nevertheless he would shew
himself an honest man, and would pay as far as he was able; and if
they were willing to come to terms, he would make a composition
with them, (for he was not able to pay them all.)  The Creditors
asked what he would give? {94c}  'Twas replyed, Half a crown in the
pound.  At this they began to huff, and he to renew his complaint
and entreaty; but the Creditors would not hear, and so for that
time their meeting without success broke up.  But after his
Creditors were in cool blood, and admitting of second thoughts, and
fearing lest delays should make them lose all, they admit of a
second debate, come together again, and by many words, and great
ado, they obtained five shillings i'th' pound. {94d}  So the money
was produced, Releases and Discharges drawn, signed, and sealed,
Books crossed, and all things confirmed; and then Mr. Badman can
put his head out of dores again, and be a better man than when he
shut up Shop, by several thousands of pounds.

Atten.  And did he do thus indeed?

Wise, Yes, once, and again.  I think he brake twice or thrice.

Atten.  And did he do it before he had need to do it?

Wise.  Need!  What do you mean by need? there is no need at any
time for a man to play the knave. {95a}  He did it of a wicked
mind, to defraud and beguile his Creditors:  he had wherewithall of
his Father, and also by his Wife, to have lived upon, with lawfull
labour, like an honest man.  He had also when he made this wicked
Break (though he had been a profuse and prodigal spender) to have
paid his creditors their own to a farthing.  But had he done so, he
had not done like himself, like Mr. Badman; had he, I say, dealt
like an honest man, he had then gone out of Mr. Badmans road.  He
did it therefore of a dishonest mind, and to a wicked end; to wit,
that he might have wherewithall, howsoever unlawfully gotten, to
follow his Cups and Queans, and to live in the full swinge of his
lusts, even as he did before.

Atten.  Why this was a meer Cheat.

Wise.  It was a cheat indeed.  This way of breaking, it is else but
a more neat way of Thieving, of picking of pockets, of breaking
open of shops, and of taking from men what one has nothing to do
with.  But though it seem easie, it is hard to learn, no man that
has conscience to God or man, can ever be his Crafts Master in this
Hellish art.

Atten.  Oh! Sirs! what a wicked man was this?

Wise.  A wicked man indeed.  By this art he could tell how to make
men send their goods to his shop, and then be glad to take a penny
for that for which he had promised before it came thither, to give
them a Groat:  I say, he could make them glad to take a Crown for a
pounds worth, and a thousand for that for which he had promised
before to give them four thousand pounds.

Atten.  This argueth that Mr. Badman had but little conscience.

Wise.  This argued that Mr. Badman had No Conscience at all; for
Conscience, the least spark of a good Conscience cannot endure
this.

Atten.  Before we go any further in Mr. Badmans matters, let me
desire you, if you please, to give me an answer to these two
questions. {96a}

1.  What do you find in the Word of God against such a practice, as
this of Mr. Badmans is? {96b}

2.  What would you have a man do that is in his Creditors debt, and
can neither pay him what be owes him, nor go on in a trade any
longer?

Wise.  I will answer you as well as I can.  And first to the first
of your questions.  To wit, What I find in the Word of God against
such a practice, as this of Mr. Badmans is.

Answ.  The Word of God doth forbid this wickedness; and to make it
the more odious in our eyes, it joyns it with Theft and Robbery:
Thou shalt not, says God, defraud thy neighbour, nor rob him. {96c}
Thou shalt not defraud, that is, deceive or beguile.  Now thus to
break, is to defraud, deceive and beguile; which is, as you see,
forbidden by the God of Heaven:  Thou shalt not defraud thy
neighbour, nor rob him.  It is a kind of theft and robbery, thus to
defraud, and beguile. {96d}  It is a wilely robbing of his shop,
and picking of his pocket:  a thing odious to Reason and
Conscience, and contrary to the Law of nature.  It is a designed
piece of wickedness, and therefore a double sin.  A man cannot do
this great wickedness on a sudden, and through a violent assault of
Satan.  He that will commit this sin, must have time to deliberate,
that by invention, he may make it formidable, and that with lies
and high dissimulations.  He that commits this wickedness, must
first hatch it upon his bed, beat his head about it, and lay his
plot strong:  So that to the completing of such a wickedness, there
must be adjoyned many sins, and they too, must go hand in hand
untill it be compleated.  But what saith the Scripture? {96e}{96f}
Let no man go beyond, and defraud his Brother in any matter,
because the Lord is the avenger of all such.  But this kind of
Breaking is a going beyond my Brother; This is a compassing of him
about that I may catch him in my net; and as I said, an art to rob
my Brother, and to pick his pocket, and that with his consent.
Which doth not therefore mitigate, but so much the more greaten and
make odious the offence.  For men that are thus wilily abused
cannot help themselves, they are taken in a deceitfull net.  But
God will here concern himself, he will be the avenger, he will be
the avenger of all such either here or in another world.

And this, the Apostle testifies again, where he saith; {97a} But he
that doth wrong, shall receive for the wrong that he hath done, and
there is no respect of persons. {97b}  That is, there is no man, be
he what he will, if he will be guilty of this sin, of going beyond,
of beguiling of, and doing wrong to his Brother, but God will call
him to an account for it, and will pay him with vengeance for it
too; for there is no respect of persons.

I might add, that this sin of wronging, of going beyond, and
defrauding of my Neighbour, it is like that first prank that the
Devil plaid with our first Parents, {97c} (as the Altar that Uriah
built for Ahaz, was taken from the fashion of that that stood at
Damascus, to be the very pattern of it.)  The Serpent beguiled me,
says Eve; Mr. Badman beguiles his Creditors.  The Serpent beguiled
Eve with lying promises of gain; and so did Mr. Badman beguile his
Creditors.  The Serpent said one thing and meant another, when he
beguiled Eve; and so did Mr. Badman when he beguiled his Creditors.

That man therefore that doth thus deceive and beguile his
neighbour, imitateth the Devil; he taketh his examples from him,
and not from God, the Word, or good men:  and this did Mr. Badman.

And now to your second question:  To wit, What I would have a man
do, that is in his Creditors debt, and that can neither pay him,
nor go on in a trade any longer? {97d}

Answ.  First of all.  If this be his case, and he knows it, let him
not run one penny further in his Creditors debt.  For that cannot
be done with good conscience.  He that knowes he cannot pay, and
yet will run into debt; does knowingly wrong and defraud his
neighbour, and falls under that sentence of the Word of God, The
wicked borroweth and payeth not again.  Yea worse, he borrows
though at the very same time he knows that he cannot pay again.  He
doth also craftily take away what is his Neighbours.  That is
therefore the first thing that I would propound to such:  Let him
not run any further into his Creditors debt. {98a}

Secondly, After this, let him consider, {98b} how, and by what
means he was brought into such a condition, that he could not pay
his just debts.  To wit, whether it was by his own remisness in his
Calling, by living too high in Dyet or Apparel, by lending too
ravishingly that which was none of his own, to his loss; or whether
by the immediate hand and Judgment of God.

If by searching, he findes, that this is come upon him through
remisness in his Calling, Extravagancies in his Family, or the
like; let him labour for a sence of his sin and wickedness, {98c}
for he has sinned against the Lord:  First, in his being slothfull
in business, and in not providing, to wit, of is own, by the sweat
of his brows, or other honest ways, for those of his own house.
{98d}  And secondly in being lavishing in Dyet and Apparel in the
Family, or in lending to others that which was none of his own.
This cannot be done with good conscience:  it is both against
reason and nature, and therefore must be a sin against God.  I say
therefore, if thus this debtor hath done, if ever he would live
quietly in conscience, and comfortably in his condition for the
future, let him humble himself before God, and repent of this his
wickedness.  For he that is slothfull in his work, is brother to
him that is a great waster. {98e}  To be slothfull and a waster
too, is to be as it were a double sinner.

But again, as this man should enquire into these things, so he
should also into this.  How came I into this way of dealing in
which I have now miscarried? is it a way that my Parents brought me
up in, put me Apprentice to, or that by providence I was first
thrust into? or is it a way into which I have twisted my self, as
not being contented with my first lot, that by God and my Parents I
was cast into?  This ought duly to be considered. {98f}  And if
upon search, a man shall find that he is out of the place and
Calling into which he was put by his Parents, or the Providence of
God, and has miscarried in a new way, that through pride and
dislike of his first state he as chose rather to embrace; his
miscarriage is his sin, the fruit of his Pride, and a token of the
Judgment of God upon him for his leaving of his first state.  And
for this he ought, as for the former, to be humble and penitent
before the Lord.

But if by search, he finds, that his poverty came by none of these;
if by honest search, he finds it so, and can say with good
conscience, I went not out of my place and state in which God by
his providence had put me; but have abode with God in the calling
wherein I was called, and have wrought hard, and fared meanly, been
civilly apparelled, and have not directly, nor indirectly made away
with my Creditors goods:  Then has his fall come upon him by the
immediate hand of God, whether by visible or invisible wayes.  For
sometimes it comes by visible wayes, to wit, by Fire, by Thieves,
by loss of Cattel, or the wickedness of sinful dealers, &c.  And
sometimes by means invisible, and then no man knows how; we only
see things are going, but cannot see by what way they go.  Well,
Now suppose that a man, by an immediate hand of God is brought to a
morsel of Bread, what must he do now?

I answer:  His surest way is still to think, that this is the fruit
of some sin, though possibly not sin in the management of his
calling, yet of some other sin.  God casteth away the substance of
the wicked.  Therefore let him still humble himself before his God,
because his hand is upon him, and say, What sin is this, for which
this hand of God is upon me? and let him be diligent to find it
out, for some sin is the cause of this Judgment; for God doth not
willingly afflict nor grieve the children of men.  Either the heart
is too much set upon the world, or Religion is too much neglected
in thy Family, or some thing.  There is a Snake in the grass, a
Worm in the gourd; some sin in thy bosom, for the sake of which God
doth thus deal with thee.

Thirdly, This thus done, let that man again consider thus with
himself:  Perhaps God is now changing of my Condition and state in
the world; he has let me live in fashion, in fulness, and abundance
of worldly glory, and I did not to his glory improve, as I should,
that his good dispensation to me. {100a}  But when I lived in full
and fat pasture, I did there lift up the heel:  Therefore he will
now turn me into hard Commons, that with leanness, and hunger, and
meanness, and want, I may spend the rest of my days.  But let him
do this without murmering, and repining; let him do it in a godly
manner, submitting himself to the Judgment of God.  Let the rich
rejoyce in that he is made low. {100b}

This is duty, and it may be priviledg to those that are under this
hand of God.  And for thy encouragement to this hard work, (for
this is a hard work) consider of these four things. {100c}

1.  This is right lying down under Gods hand, and the way to be
exalted in Gods time:  when God would have Job embrace the
Dunghill, he embraces it, and says, The Lord giveth, and the Lord
hath taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. {100d}

2.  Consider, That there are blessings also that attend a low
condition, more than all the world are aware of.  A poor condition
has preventing mercy attending of it.  The poor, because they are
poor, are not capable of sinning against God as the rich man does.

3.  The Poor can more clearly see himself preserved by the
providence of God than the rich, for he trusteth in the abundance
of his riches. {100e}

4.  It may be God has made thee poor, because he would make thee
rich.  Hearken my beloved brethren, hath not God chosen the poor of
this world, rich in Faith, and heirs of a Kingdom which God hath
promised to them that love him? {100f}

I am perswaded, if men upon whom this hand of God is, would thus
quietly lye down, and humble themselves under it, they would find
more peace, yea, more blessing of God attending them in it, than
the most of men are aware of.  But this is an hard Chapter, and
therefore I do not expect that many should either read it with
pleasure, or desire to take my counsel.

Having thus spoken to the Broken man, with reference to his own
self; I will now speak to him as he stands related to his
Creditors.

In the next place therefore, let him fall upon the most {101a}
honest way of dealing with his Creditors, and that I think must be
this.

First, Let him timely make them acquainted with his condition, and
also do to them these three things.

1.  Let him heartily, and unfeignedly ask them forgiveness for the
wrong that he has done them.

2.  Let him proffer them all, and the whole all that ever he has in
the world; let him hide nothing, let him strip himself to his
raiment for them; let him not keep a Ring, a Spoon, or any thing
from them.

3.  If none of these two will satisfie them, let him proffer them
his Body, to be at their dispose, to wit, either to abide
imprisonment their pleasure, or to be at their service, till by
labour and travel he hath made them such amends as they in reason
think fit, (only reserving something for the succour of his poor
and distressed Family out of his labour, which in Reason, and
Conscience, and Nature, he is bound also to take care of:)  Thus
shall he make them what amends he is able, for the Wrong that he
hath done them in wasting and spending of their Estates.

By thus doing, he submits himself to Gods rod, commits himself to
the dispose of his Providence; yea, by thus doing, he casteth the
lot of his present and future condition into the lap of his
Creditors, and leaves the whole dispose thereof to the Lord, {101b}
even as he shall order and incline their hearts to do with him.
And let that be either to forgive him; or to take that which he
hath for satisfaction; or to lay his body under affliction, this
way or that, according to Law; can he, I say, thus leave the whole
dispose to God, let the issue be what it will, that man shall have
peace in his mind afterward.  And the comforts of that state,
(which will be comforts that attend Equity, Justice, and Duty,)
will be more unto him, because more according to Godliness, than
can be the comforts that are the fruits of Injustice, Fraudulency,
and Deceit.  Besides, this is the way to engage God to favour him
by the sentence of his Creditors; (for He can entreat them to use
him kindly,) and he will do it when his ways are pleasing in his
sight:  When a mans ways please the Lord, his enemies shall be at
peace with him; {102a} And surely, for a man to seek to make
restitution for wrongs done, to the utmost of his power, by what he
is, has, and enjoys in this world, is the best way, in that
capacity, and with reference to that thing, that a man can at this
time be found active in.

But he that doth otherwise, abides in his sin, refuses to be
disposed of by the Providence of God, chuseth an high Estate,
though not attained in Gods way; when Gods Will is, that he should
descend into a low one:  yea, he desperately saith in his heart and
actions, I will be mine own chooser, and that in mine own way,
whatever happens or follows thereupon.

Atten.  You have said well, in my mind.  But suppose now, that Mr.
Badman was here, could he not object as to what you have said,
saying, Go and teach your Brethren, that are Professors, this
lesson, for they, as I am, are guilty of Breaking; yea I am apt to
think, of that which you call my Knavish way of breaking; to wit,
of breaking before they have need to break.  But if not so, yet
they are guilty of neglect in their Calling, {102b} of living
higher, both in Fare and Apparrel, than their Trade or Income will
maintain.  Besides, that they do break, all the world very well
knowes, and that they have the art to plead for a composition, is
very well known to men; and that it is usual with them, to hide
their Linnen, their Plate, their Jewels, and ('tis to be thought,
sometimes Money and Goods besides,) is as common as four eggs a
penny.  And thus they beguile men, debauch their consciences, sin
against their Profession, and make, 'tis to be feared, their lusts
in all this, and the fulfilling of them, their end.  I say, if Mr.
Badman was here to object thus unto you, what would be your reply?

Wise.  What!  Why I would say, I hope no Good man, no man of good
conscience, no man that either feareth God, regardeth the credit of
Religion, the peace of Gods people, or the salvation of his own
soul, will do thus.

Professors, such perhaps there may be, and who, upon earth can help
it?  Jades there be of all colours. {103a}  If men will profess,
and make their profession a stalking-Horse to beguile their
neighbours of their estates, as Mr. Badman himself did, when he
beguiled her that now is with sorrow his wife, who can help it?
The Churches of old were pestered with such, and therefore no
marvel if these perilous difficult times be so.  But mark how the
Apostle words it:  Nay do wrong and defraud, and that your
Brethren:  Know you not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God?  Be not deceived, neither Fornicator, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards,
nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God.
{103b}

None of these shall be saved in this state, nor shall profession
deliver them from the censure of the Godly, when they shall be
manifest such to be.  But their profession we cannot help:  How can
we help it, if men should ascribe to themselves the title of Holy
ones, Godly ones, Zealous ones, Self-denying ones, or any other
such glorious title? and while they thus call themselves, they
should be the veryest Rogues for all evil, sin, and villany
imaginable, who could help it?  True, they are a scandal to
Religion, a grief to the honest hearted, an offence to the world,
and a stumbling stone to the weak, and these offences have come, do
come, and will come, do what all the world can; but wo be to them
through whom they come; {103c} let such professors therefore
disowned by all true Christians, and let them be reckoned among
those base men of the world which by such actions they most
resemble:  They are Mr. Badmans Kindred.

For {103d} they are a shame to Religion, I say these slithy, rob-
Shop, pick-pocket men, they are a shame to Religion, and religious
men should be ashamed of them.  God puts such an one among the
Fools of the world, therefore let not Christians put them among
those that are wise for heaven.  As the Partridge sitteth on eggs,
and hatcheth them not, so he that getteth riches and not by right,
shall leave them in the midst of his dayes, and at his end shall be
a fool. {103e}  And the man under consideration is one of these,
and therefore must look to fall by this Judgment.

A professor! and practice such villianies as these! such an one is
not worthy to bear that name any longer.  We may say to such as the
Prophet spake to their like, to wit, to the rebellious that were in
the house of Israel.  Goe ye, serve every man his Idols:- If ye
will not hearken to the Law and Testament of God, to lead your
lives thereafter:  but pollute Gods holy name no more with your
Gifts, and with your Idols. {104a}

Goe professors, Goe; leave off profession, unless you will lead
your lives according to your profession.  Better never profess,
than to make profession a stalking-horse to sin, Deceit, to the
Devil, and Hell.

The ground and rules of Religion allow not any such thing:  Receive
us, says the Apostle, we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no
man, we have defrauded no man. {104b}  Intimating, that those that
are guilty of wronging, corrupting or defrauding of any, should not
be admitted to the fellowship of Saints, no nor into the common
catalogue of Brethren with them.

Nor can men with all their Rhetorick, and Eloquent speaking prove
themselves fit for the Kingdom of Heaven, or men of good conscience
on earth. {104c}  O that godly plea of Samuel:  Behold here I am,
says he, witness against me, before the Lord, and  before his
Anointed, whose Oxe have I taken, or whose Ass have I taken, or
whom have I defrauded, whom have I oppressed, {104d} &c?  This was
to do like a man of good conscience indeed.  And in this his
Appeal, he was so justified in the consciencies of the whole
Congregation, that they could not but with one voice, as with one
mouth, break out joyntly and say, Thou hast not defrauded us, nor
oppressed us. {104e}

A Professor, and defraud, away with him! a Professor should not owe
any man any thing, but love.  A professor should provide things,
not of other mens, but of his own, of his own honest getting, and
that not onely in the sight of God, but of all men; that he may
adorn the Doctrine if God our Saviour in all things.

Atten.  But {105a} suppose God should blow upon a Professor in his
Estate, and Calling, and he should be run out before he is aware,
must he be accounted to be like Mr. Badman, and lie under the same
reproach as he?

Wise.  No:  {105b} If he hath dutifully done what he could to avoid
it.  It is possible for a Ship to sink at sea, notwithstanding the
most faithfull endeavour of the most skilful Pilot under Heaven.
And thus, as I suppose, it was with the Prophet that left his wife
in debt to the hazarding the slavery of her children by the
Creditors. {105c}  He was no profuse man, nor one that was given to
defraud, for the Text says he feared God; yet, as I said, he was
run out more than she could pay.

If God would blow upon a man, who can help it? and he will do so
sometimes, {105d} because he will change dispensations with men,
and because he will trye their Graces. {105e}  Yea, also because he
will overthrow the wicked with his Judgments; and all these things
are seen in Job.  But then the consideration of this, should bid
men have a care that they be honest, lest this comes upon them for
their sin:  It should also bid them beware of launching further
into the world, than in an honest way by ordinary means they can
Godlily make their retreat; for the further in, the greater fall.
It should also teach them, to begg of God his blessing upon their
endeavours, their honest and lawfull endeavours.  And it should put
them upon a diligent looking to their steps, that if in their going
they should hear the Ice crack, they may timely goe back again.

These things considered, and duely put in practice, if God will
blow upon a man, then let him be content, and with Job embrace the
dunghill; let him give unto all their dues, and not fight against
the Providence of God, (but humble himself rather under his mighty
hand,) which comes to strip him naked and bare:  for he that doth
otherwise, fights against God; and declares that he is a stranger
to that of Paul; I know both how to be abased, and I know how to
abound; every where, in all things, I am instructed both to be
full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and to suffer need. {105f}

Atten.  But Mr. Badman would not, I believe, have put this
difference 'twixt things feigned, and those that fall of necessity.

Wise.  If he will not, God will, Conscience will; and that not
thine own only, but the Consciences of all those that have seen the
way, and that have known the truth of the condition of such an one.

Atten.  Well:  Let us at this time leave this matter, and return
again to Mr. Badman.

Wise.  With all my heart will I proceed to give you a relation of
what is yet behind of his Life, in order to our discourse of his
Death.

Atten.  But pray do it with as much brevity as you can.

Wise.  Why? are you a weary of my relating of things?

Atten.  No.  But it pleases me to hear a great deal in few words.

Wise.  I profess not my self an artist that way, but yet as briefly
as I can, I will pass through what of his Life is behind; and again
I shall begin with his fraudulent dealing (as before I have shewed
with his Creditors, so now) with his Customers, and those that he
had otherwise to deal withall.

He dealt by deceitfull Weights and Measures. {106a}  He kept
weights to buy by, and weights to sell by; measures to buy by, and
measures to sell by:  those he bought by were too big, those he
sold by were too little.

Besides, he could use a thing called slight of hand, if he had to
do with other mens weights and measures, and by that means make
them whether he did buy or sell, yea though his Customer or Chapman
looked on, turn to his own advantage.

Moreover, he had the art to misreckon men in their Accounts whether
by weight, or measure, or money, and would often do it to his
worldly advantage, and their loss:  What say you to Mr. Badman now?

And if a question was made of his faithfull dealing, he had his
servants ready, that to his purpose he had brought up, that would
avouch and swear to his Book, or word:  this was Mr. Badmans
practice; What think you of Mr. Badman now?

Atten.  Think!  Why I can think no other but that he was a man left
to himself, a naughty man; for these, as his other, were naughty
things; if the tree, as indeed it may, ought to be judged, what it
is by its fruits; then Mr. Badman must needs be a bad Tree.  But
pray, for my further satisfaction, shew me now by the Word of God,
evil of this his practice:  and first of his using false Weights
and Measures.

Wise.  The evil of that! why the evil of that appears to every eye:
the Heathens, that live like Beasts and Bruits in many things, do
abominate and abhorr such wickedness as this.  Let a man but look
upon these things as he goes by, and he shall see enough in them
from the light of nature to make him loath so base a practice;
although Mr. Badman loved it.

Atten.  But shew me something out of the Word against it, will you?

Wise.  I will willingly do it.  And first we will look into the Old
Testament:  {107a} You shall, saith God there, do no
unrighteousness in Judgment, in mete-yard, in weights or in
measures, a just Ballance, a just Weight, a just Ephah, and a just
Hin shall you have. {107b}  This is the Law of God, and that which
all men according to the Law of the land ought to obey.  So again:
Ye shall have just Ballances, and a just Ephah, &c. {107c}

Now having shewed you the Law, I will also shew you how God takes
swerving therefrom.  A false Ballance is not good; a false Ballance
is an abomination to the Lord. {107d}  Some have just Weights but
false Ballances, and by vertue of those false Ballances, by their
just Weights, they deceive the Countrey:  {107e} Wherefore, God
first of all commands that the Ballance be made Just:  A just
Ballance shalt thou have.  Else they may be, yea are, decievers,
notwithstanding their just weights.

Now, having commanded that men have a just Ballance, and testifying
that a false one is an abomination to the Lord, he proceedeth also
unto weight and measure.

Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a small;
{107f} that is one to buy by, and another to sell by, as Mr. Badman
had.  Thou shalt not have in thy house divers measures, a great and
a small, (and these had Mr. Badman also) but thou shalt have a
perfect and a just weight; a perfect and a just measure shalt thou
have, that thy days may be lengthened in the land which the Lord
thy God giveth thee.  For all that do such things, (that is, that
use false Weights and Measures) and all that do unrighteously are
abomination to the Lord.  See now both how plentiful, and how
punctual the Scripture is in this matter.  But perhaps it may be
objected, that all this is old Law, and therefore hath nothing to
do with us under the New Testament.  (Not that I think you,
neighbour, will object thus:) Well, to this foolish objection, let
us make an Answer.  First, he that makes this objection, if he doth
it to overthrow the authority of those Texts, {108a} discovereth
that himself is first cousen to Mr. Badman:  For a Just man is
willing to speak reverently of those commands.  That man therefore
hath, I doubt, but little conscience, if any at all that is good,
that thus objecteth against the Text:  but let us look into the New
Testament, and there we shall see how Christ confirmeth the same:
Where he commandeth that men make to others good measure, including
also that they make good weight; telling such that doe thus, or
those that do it not, that they may be encouraged to do it; Good
measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over, shall men
give into your bosom; for with the same measure that ye mete
withall, it shall be measured to you again:  {108b} To wit, both
from God and man.  For as God will shew his indignation against the
false man, by taking away even that he hath, so he will deliver up
the false man to the Oppressor, and the Extortioner shall catch
from him, as well as he hath catched from his neighbour; therefore
another Scripture saith, When thou shalt cease to deal
treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.  That the
New Testament also, hath an inspection into mens Trading, yea even
with their weights and measures, is evident from these general
exhortations. {108c}  Defraud not; lye not one to another; let no
man goe beyond his brother in any matter, for God is the avenger of
all such:  whatsoever you do, do it heartily, as unto the Lord,
doing all in his name, to his glory; and the like.  All these
injunctions and commandments do respect our life and conversation
among men, with reference to our dealing, trading, and so
consequently they forbid false, deceitful, yea all doings that are
corrupt.

Having thus in a word or two shewed you, that these things are bad;
I will next, for the conviction of those that use them, shew you,
where God saith they are to be found. {109a}

1.  They are not to be found in the house of the good and godly
man, for he, as his God, abhorrs them; but they are to be found in
the house of evil doers, {109b} such as Mr. Badmans is.  Are there,
saith the Prophet, yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of
the wicked, and the scant measure that is abomination? {109c}  Are
they there yet, notwithstanding Gods forbidding, notwithstanding
Gods tokens of anger against those that do such things?  O how loth
is a wicked man to let goe a sweet, a gainful sin, when he hath
hold of it!  They hold fast deceit, they refuse to let it goe.

2.  These deceitful Weights and Measures are not to be found in the
house of the Mercifull, but in the house of the Cruel; in the house
of them that love to oppress. {109d}  The Ballances of deceit are
in his hand, he loveth to oppress. {109e}  He is given to
oppression and cruelty, therefore he useth such wicked things in
his calling.  Yea he is a very cheat, and as was hinted before,
concerning Mr. Badmans breaking, so I say now, concerning his using
these deceitful weights and measures, it is as bad, as base, as to
take a purse, or pick a pocket; for it is a plain robbery, it takes
away from a man that which is his own, even the price of his money.

3.  The deceitful Weights and Measures are not to be found in the
house of such as relieve the belly, and that cover the loyns of the
poor, but of such as indeed would swallow them up. {109f}  Hear ye
this, ye that swallow up the needy, and that make the poor of the
land to fail, saying, When will the new Moon be gone that we may
sell corn, and the Sabbath that we may set forth Wheat, making the
Ephah small and the Sheckle great, (making the Measure small, and
the Price great) and falsifying the Ballances by deceit, that ye
may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shooes,
and sell the refuse of the Wheat.  The Lord hath sworn by the
excellencie of Jacob, surely I will not forget any of their works.
{109g}  So detestable and vile a thing is this in the sight of God.

4.  God abominates the thoughts of calling of those that use false
weights and measures, by any other term than, that they be Impure
ones {110a} or the like:  Shall I count them pure (saith he) with
the bag of deceitful weights? {110b} no by no means, they are
impure ones, their hands are defiled, deceitful gain is in their
houses, they have gotten what they have by coveting an evil
Covetousness, and therefore must and shall be counted among the
impure, among the wicked of the world.

Thus you see how full and plain the Word of God is, against this
sin, and them that use it.  And therefore Mr. Badman, for that he
used by these things thus to rook and cheat his neighbours, is
rightly rejected from having his Name in, and among the catalogue
of the godly.

Atten.  But I am perswaded, that the using of these things, and the
doing by them thus deceitfully, is not counted so great an evil by
some.

Wise.  Whether it be counted an evil or a vertue, by men, it
mattereth not; you see by the Scriptures, the Judgment of God upon
it.  It was not counted an evil by Mr. Badman, nor is it by any
that still are treading in his steps.  But, I say, 'tis no matter
how men esteem of things, let us adhere to the Judgment of God.
And the rather, because when we our selves have done weighing and
measuring to others, then God will weigh and measure both us and
our actions.  And when he doth so, as he will do shortly, then wo
be to him to whom, and of whose actions it shall be thus said by
him:  Tekel, Thou art weighed in the Ballances, and art found
wanting. {110c}  God will then recompense their evil of deceiving
upon their own head, when he shall shut them out of his presence,
favour, and kingdom, for ever and ever.

Atten.  But 'tis a wonder, that since Mr. Badmans common practice
was to do thus, that some one or more did not find him out, and
blame him for this his wickedness.

Wise.  For the generality of people, he went away clever with his
Knavery.  For what with his Ballance, his false Ballance, and good
weight, and what with his slight of hand to boot, he beguiled,
sometimes a little, and sometimes more, most that he had to deal
with:  Besides, those that use this naughty trade, are either such
as blind men with a shew of Religion, or by hectoring the buyer out
by words.  I must confess Mr. Badman was not so arch at the first;
{111a} that is, to do it by shew of Religion; for now he began to
grow threadbare, (though some of his brethren are arch enough this
way, yea and of his sisters too, for I told you at first that there
was a great many of them, and of them good:) but for hectoring, for
swearing, for lying, if these things would make weight and measure,
they should not be wanting to Mr. Badmans Customers.

Atten.  Then it seem he kept good Weights, and a bad Ballance; well
that was better than that both should be bad.

Wise.  Not at all.  There lay the depth of his deceit:  {111b} For
if any at any time found fault, that he used them hardly, and that
they wanted their weight of things; he would reply:  Why did you
not see them weighed? will you not believe your own eyes:  If you
question my weights, pray carry them whether you will, I will
maintain them to be good and just.  The same he would say of his
scales.  So he blinded all, by his Ballance.

Atten.  This is cunning indeed:  but as you say, there must be also
something done or said, to blind therewith, and this I perceive Mr.
Badman had.

Wise.  Yes.  He had many ways to blind, but he was never clever at
it, by making a shew of Religion, (though he cheated his wife
therewith:) for he was, especially by those that dwelt near him,
too well known to do that, though he would bungle at it as well as
he could.  But there are some that are arch villains this way; they
shall to view live a whole life Religiously, and yet shall be
guilty of these most horrible sins:  And yet Religion in it self is
never the worse, nor yet the true professors of it.  But as Luther
says, In the name of God begins all mischief.  For Hypocrites have
no other way to bring their evils to maturity, but by using and
mixing the Name of God and Religion therewith. {112b}  Thus they
become whited Walls; {112a} for by this white, the white of
Religion, the dirt of their actions is hid.  Thus also they become
graves that appear not, and they that goe over them, (that have to
do with them) are not aware of them, but suffer themselves to be
deluded by them.  Yea, if there shall, as there will sometimes,
rise a doubt in the heart of the buyer about the weight and measure
he should have, why, he suffereth his very sences to be also
deluded, by recalling of his Chapmans Religion to mind, and thinks
verily that not his good chapman but himself is out; for he dreams
not that his chapman can deceive.  But if the buyer shall find it
out, and shall make it apparent, that he is beguiled; then shall he
be healed by having amends made, and perhaps fault shall be laid
upon servants, &c. and so Master Cheat shall stand for a right
honest man in the eye of his Customer, though the next time he
shall pick his pocket again.

Some {112c} plead Custom for their Cheat, as if that could acquit
them before the Tribunal of God:  And others say, it came to them
for so much, and therefore another must take it for so much, though
there is wanting both as to weight and measure:  but in all these
things there are Juggles; or if not, such must know, {112d} That
that which is altogether just, they must doe.  Suppose that I be
cheated my self with a brass half-Crown, must I therefore cheat
another therewith? if this be bad in the whole, it is also bad in
the parts.  Therefore however thou are dealt withall in thy buying,
yet thou must deal justly in selling, or thou sinnest against thy
soul, and art become as Mr. Badman.  And know, that a pretence to
custom is nothing worth.  'Tis not custom, but good conscience that
will help at Gods Tribunal.

Atten.  But I am perswaded, that that which is gotten by men this
way, doth them but little good.

Wise.  I am of your mind for that, but this is not considered by
those thus minded.  For if they can get it, though they get, as we
say, the Devil and all, by their getting, yet they are content, and
count that their getting is much.

Little good!  Why do you think they consider that?  No:  no more
than they consider what they shall doe in the Judgment, at the day
of God Almighty, for their wrong getting of what they get, and that
is just nothing at all. {113a}

But to give you a more direct answer.  This kind of getting, is so
far off from doing them little good, that it doth them no good at
all; because thereby they lose their own souls; What shall it
profit a man if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? {113b}  He loseth then, he loseth greatly that getteth after
this fashion.  This is the man that is penny-wise, and pound-
foolish; this is he that loseth his good Sheep for a halfpennyworth
of tarr; that loseth a soul for a little of the world.  And then
what doth he get thereby, but loss and dammage? {113c}  Thus he
getteth, or rather loseth about the world to come:  But what doth
he get in this world, more than travel and sorrow vexation of
spirit, and disappointment?  Men aim at blessedness in getting, I
mean, at temporal blessedness; but the man that thus getteth, shall
not have that.  For though an Inheritance after this manner may be
hastily gotten at the beginning, yet the end thereof shall not be
blessed.  They gather it indeed, and think to keep it too, but what
says Solomon?  God casteth it away.  The Lord will not suffer the
soul of the righteous to famish, but he casteth away the substance
of the wicked.

The time, as I said, that they do enjoy it, it shall doe them no
good at all; but long to be sure they must not have it.  For God
will either take it away in their life time, or else in the
generation following, according to that of Job:  He, the wicked,
may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent
shall divide the silver. {113d}

Consider that also that is written in the Proverbs:  A good man
leaveth an Inheritance to his childrens children, and the wealth of
the sinner is laid up for the just. {113e}  What then doth he get
thereby, that getteth by dishonest means? why he getteth Sin and
Wrath, Hell and Damnation:  and now tell me how much he doth get.

This, I say, is his getting; so that as David says, we may be bold
to say too:  I beheld the wicked in great prosperity, and presently
I cursed his habitation:  for it cannot prosper with him.  Fluster
and huff, and make a doe for a while he may, but God hath
determined that both he and it shall melt like grease, and any
observing man may see it so.  Behold, the unrighteous man in a way
of Injustice getteth much, and loadeth himself with thick Clay, but
anon it withereth, it decayeth, and even he, or the Generation
following decline, and return to beggery.

And this Mr. Badman, notwithstanding his cunning and crafty tricks
to get money, did dye, no body can tell whether worth a farthing or
no.

Atten.  He had all the bad tricks, I think, that it was possible
for a man to have, to get money; one would think that he should a
been rich.

Wise.  You reckon too fast, if you count these all his bad tricks
to get money:  For he had more besides. {114a}

If his customers were in his Books (as it should goe hard but he
would have them there; at least, if he thought he could make any
advantage of them,) then, then would he be sure to impose upon them
his worst, even very bad Comodity, yet set down for it the price
that the best was sold at:  like those that sold the Refuse Wheat,
or the worst of the wheat; making the Sheckle great, {114b} yet
hoisting up the price:  This was Mr. Badmans way.  He {114c} would
sell goods that cost him not the best price by far, for as much as
he sold the best of all for.  He had also a trick to mingle his
comodity, that that which was bad might goe off with the less
mistrust.

Besides, if his customers at any time paid him money, let them look
to themselves, and to their Acquitances, for he would usually
attempt to call for that payment again, specially if he thought
that there was hopes of making a prize thereby, and then to be sure
if they could not produce good and sufficient ground of the
payment, a hundred to one but they payed it again.  Sometimes the
honest Chapman would appeal to his servants for proof of the
payment of money, but they were trained up by him to say after his
mind, right or wrong:  so that, relief that way, he could get none.

Atten.  It is a bad, yea an abominable thing for a man to have such
servants.  For by such means a poor customer may be undone and not
know how to help himself.  Alas! if the master be so
unconscionable, as I perceive Mr. Badman was, to call for his money
twice, and if his servant will swear that it is a due debt, where
is any help for such a man? he must sink, there is no remedy.

Wise.  This is very bad, but this has been a practice, and that
hundreds of years agoe.  But what saith the Word of God?  I will
punish all those that leap upon the threshold, which fill their
masters houses with violence and deceit. {115a} {115b}

Mr. Badman also had this art; could he get a man at advantage, that
is, if his chapman durst not go from him, or if the comodity he
wanted could not for the present be conveniently had elsewhere;
Then let him look to himself, he would surely make his purse-
strings crack; he would exact upon him without any pity or
conscience.

Atten.  That was Extortion, was it not?  I pray let me hear your
Judgment of Extortion, what it is, and when committed?

Wise.  Extortion {115c} is a screwing from men more than by the Law
of God or men is right; and it is committed sometimes by them in
Office, about Fees, Rewards, and the like:  but 'tis most commonly
committed by men of Trade, who without all conscience, when they
have the advantage, will make a prey of their neighbour.  And thus
was Mr. Badman an Extortioner; for although he did not exact, and
force away, as Bailifs and Clarks have used to doe; yet he had his
opportunities, and such cruelty to make use of them, that he would
often, in his way, be Extorting, and forcing of money out of his
Neighbours pocket.  For every man that makes a prey of his
advantage upon his neighbours necessities, to force from him more
than in reason and conscience, according to the present prizes of
things such comodity is worth; may very well be called an
Extortioner, and Judged for one that hath No inheritance in the
Kingdom of God. {115d}

Atten.  Well, this Badman was a sad wretch.

Wise.  Thus you have often said before.  But now we are in
discourse of this, give me leave a little to goe on.  We have a
great many people in the Countrey too that live all their dayes in
the practice, and so under the guilt of Extortion:  people, alas!
that think scorn to be so accounted.

As for Example:  {116a} There is a poor body that dwells, we will
suppose, so many miles from the Market; and this man wants a Bushel
of Grist, a pound of Butter, or a Cheese for himself, his wife and
poor children:  But dwelling so far from the Market, if he goes
thither, he shall lose his dayes work, which will be eight pence or
ten pence dammage to him, and that is something to a poor man.  So
he goeth to one of his Masters or Dames for what he wanteth, and
asks them to help him with such a thing:  Yes, say they, you may
have it; but withall they will give him a gripe, perhaps make him
pay as much (or more) for it at home, as they can get when they
have carryed it five miles to a Market, yea and that too for the
Refuse of their Commodity.  But in this the Women are especially
faulty, in the sale of their Butter and Cheese, &c.  Now this is a
kind of Extortion, it is a making a prey of the necessity of the
poor, it is a grinding of their faces, a buying and selling of
them.

But above all, your {116b} Hucksters, that buy up the poor mans
Victuals by whole-sale, and sell it to him again for unreasonable
gains, by retale, and as we call it, by piece meal; they are got
into a way, after a stingeing rate, to play their game upon such by
Extortion:  I mean such who buy up Butter, Cheese, Eggs, Bacon, &c.
by whole sale, and sell it again (as they call it) by penny worths,
two penny worths, a half penny worth, or the like, to the poor, all
the week after the market is past.

These, though I will not condemn them all, do, many of them, bite
and pinch the poor by this kind of evil dealing.  These destroy the
poor because he is poor, and that is a grievous sin.  He that
oppresseth the poor to increase his riches, and that giveth to the
rich, shall surely come to want. {116c}  Therefore he saith again,
Rob not the poor because he is poor, neither oppress the afflicted
in the gate; for the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the
soul of them that spoile them.

Oh that he that gripeth and grindeth the face of the poor, would
take notice of these two Scriptures!  Here is threatned the
destruction of the Estate, yea and of the Soul too, of them that
oppress the poor.  Their Soul we shall better see where, and in
what condition that is in, when the day of Doom is come; but for
the Estates of such, they usually quickly moulter; and that
sometimes all men, and sometimes no man knows how.

Besides, these are Usurers, yea they take usury for victuals, which
thing the Lord has forbidden. {117a}  And because they cannot so
well do it on the Market-day, therefore they do it, as I said, when
the market is over; for then the poor falls into their mouths, and
are necessitated to have, as they can, for their need, and they are
resolved they shall pay soundly for it.  Perhaps some will find
fault for my medling thus with other folks matters, and for my thus
prying into the secrets of their iniquity.  But to such I would
say, since such actions are evil, 'tis time they were hissed out of
the world.  For all that doe such things, offend against God, wrong
their neighbour, and like Mr. Badman doe provoke God to Judgment.
God knows, there is abundance of deceit in the world!

Wise.  Deceit!  Aie, but I have not told you the thousandth part of
it; nor is it my business now to rake to the bottom of that
dunghill:  what would you say, if I should anatomize some of those
vile wretches called Pawn-Brokers, that lend Money and Goods to
poor people, who are by necessity forced to such an inconvenience;
and will make, by one trick or other, the Interest of what they so
lend, amount to thirty, forty, yea sometimes fifty pound by the
year; nothwithstanding the Principal is secured by a sufficient
pawn; which they will keep too at last, if they can find any shift
to cheat the wretched borrower.

Atten.  Say!  Why such Miscreants are the pest and Vermin of the
Common-Wealth, not fit for the society of men; but methinks by some
of those things you Discoursed before, you seem to import that it
is not lawful for a man to make the best of his own.

Wise.  If by making the best, you mean, to sell for as much as by
hook or crook he can get for his comodity; then I say, it is not
lawful.  And if I should say the contrary, I should justifie Mr.
Badman and all the rest of that Gang:  but that I never shall doe,
for the Word of God condemns them.  But that it is not lawful for a
man at all times, to sell his commodity for as much as he can, I
prove by these reasons. {118a}

First, If it be lawful for me alway to sell my commodity as dear,
or for as much as I can, then 'tis lawful for me to lay aside in my
dealing with others, good conscience, to them, and to God:  but it
is not lawful for me, in my dealing with others, to lay aside good
conscience, &c.  Therefore it is not lawful for me always to sell
my commodity as dear, or for as much as I can.

That {118b} it is not lawful to lay aside good conscience in our
dealings, has already been proved in the former part of our
discourse:  but that a man must lay it aside that will sell his
commodity always as dear or for as much as he can, is plainly
manifest thus.

1.  He that will (as is mentioned afore) sell his commodity as dear
as he can, must sometimes make a prey of the ignorance of his
chapman:  {118c} but that he cannot doe with a good conscience (for
that is to overreach, and to goe beyond my chapman, and is
forbidden, 1 Thess. 4. 6.)  Therefore he that will sell his
commodity, as afore, as dear, or for as much as he can, must of
necessity lay aside good conscience.

2.  He that will sell his commodity always as dear as he can, must
needs, sometimes make a prey of his neighbours necessity; {118d}
but that he cannot doe with a good conscience, (for that is to goe
beyond and defraud his neighbour, contrary to 1 Thess. 4. 6.)
Therefore he that will sell his commodity, as afore, as dear, or
for as much as he can, must needs cast off and lay aside a good
conscience.

3.  He that will (as afore) sell his commodity as dear, or for as
much as he can, must, if need be, make a prey of his neighbours
fondness; but that a man cannot doe with a good conscience, {119a}
(for that is still a going beyond him, contrary to 1 Thess. 4. 6.)
Therefore, he that will sell his commodity as dear, or for as much
as he can, must needs cast off, and lay aside good conscience.

The same also may be said for buying; no man may always buy as
cheap as he can, but must also use good conscience in buying;
{119b} The which he can by no means use and keep, if he buyes
always as cheap as he can, and that for the reasons urged before.
For such will make a prey of the ignorance, necessity, and fondness
of their chapman, the which they cannot doe with a good consceince.

When Abraham would buy a Burying-place of the Sons of Heth, thus he
said unto them.  Intreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar, that he
may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he hath, in the end his
field.  For as much as it is worth shall he give it me.  Gen. 23.
8, 9. {110c}  He would not have it under foot, he scorned it, he
abhored it:  It stood not with his Religion, Credit, nor
Conscience.  So also when David, would buy a field of Ornon the
Jebusite:  Thus he said unto him:  Grant me the place the
threshing-floor, that I may build an Altar there unto the Lord.
Thou shalt give it me for the full price. {119d}  He also, as
Abraham, made conscience of this kind of dealing:  he would not lie
at catch to go beyond, no not the Jebusite, but will give him his
full price for his field.  For he knew that there was wickedness,
as in selling too dear so in buying too cheap, therefore he would
not do it.

There ought therefore to be good conscience used, as in selling, so
in buying; for 'tis also unlawful for a man to goe beyond or to
defraud his neighbour in buying; yea 'tis unlawful to doe it in any
matter, and God will plentifully avenge that wrong:  as I also
before have forewarned and testified.  See also the {119e} text in
the margent.  But,

Secondly, if it be lawful for me always to sell my commodity as
dear, or for as much as I can, then it is lawful for me to deal
with my neighbour without the use of {120a} charity:  but it is not
lawful for me to lay aside, or to deal with my neighbour without
the use of charity, therefore it is not lawful for me always to
sell my commodity to my neighbour for as much as I can.  A man in
dealing should as really design his Neighbours good, profit, and
advantage, as his own:  For this is to exercise Charity in his
dealing.

That I should thus use, or exercise charity towards my Neighbour in
my buying and selling, &c. with him, is evident from the general
command:  [Let all your things be done in charity:] {120b}  But
that a man cannot live in the exercise of charity, that selleth, as
afore, as dear, or that buyeth as cheap as he can, is evident by
these reasons.

1.  He that sells his commodity as dear, or for as much money
(always) as he can, seeks himself, and himself only; (but charity
seeketh not her own, nor her own only {120c}:)  So then, he that
seeks himself, and himself onely, as he that sells (as afore) as
dear as he can, does; maketh not use of, nor doth he exercise
charity, in his so dealing.

2.  He that selleth his commodity (always) for as much as he can
get, hardeneth his heart against all reasonable entreaties of the
buyer.  But he that doth so, cannot exercise charity in his
dealing; therefore it is not lawful for a man to sell his
commodity, as afore, as dear as he can.

Thirdly, If it be lawful for me to sell my commodity, as afore, as
dear as I can, then there can be no sin in my Trading, how
unreasonably soever I manage my calling, whether by Lying,
Swearing, Cursing, Cheating; for all this is but to sell my
commodity as dear as I can:  but that there is sin in these, is
evident, therefore I may not sell my commodity always as dear as I
can. {120d} {120e}

Fourthly, He that sells, as afore, as dear as he can, offereth
violence to the law of Nature:  {121b} for that saith, Doe unto all
men, even as ye would that they should doe unto you. {121a}  Now,
was the Seller a Buyer, he would not that he of whom he buyes,
should sell him always as dear as he can; therefore he should not
sell so himself, when it is his lot to sell, and others to buy of
him.

Fifthly, He that selleth, as afore, as dear as he can, makes use of
that instruction, that God hath not given to others, but sealed up
in his hand, {121c} to abuse his Law, and to wrong his neighbour
withall:  which indeed is contrary to God. {121d}  God hath given
thee more skill, more knowledge and understanding in thy commodity
than he hath given to him that would buy of thee.  But what! canst
thou think, that God has given thee this, that thou mightest
thereby make a prey of thy neighbour? that thou mightest thereby
goe beyond and beguile thy neighbour?  No, verily; but he hath
given thee it, for his help; that thou mightest in this, be eyes to
the blind, and save thy neighbour from that dammage, that his
ignorance, or necessity, or fondness would betray him into the
hands of.

Sixthly, In all that a man does, he should have an eye to the glory
of God, {121f} but that he cannot have that sells his commodity
always for as much as he can, for the reasons urged before.

Seventhly, All that a man does, he should doe in the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ; {121g} that is, as being commanded, and
authorized to doe it by him:  but he that selleth always as dear as
he can, cannot so much as pretend to this, without horrid
blaspheming of that Name, because commanded by him to doe
otherwise.

Eightly, and lastly, In all that a man does, he should have an eye
to the day of Judgment, and to the consideration of how his actions
will be esteemed of in that day. {121h}  Therefore there is not any
man can or ought to sell always as dear as he can:  unless he will,
yea he must say, in so doing, I will run the hazard of the tryal of
that day,

If thou sell ought unto thy neighbour, or buyest ought of thy
neighbour, ye shall not oppress one another. {122a}

Atten.  But why doe you put in those cautionary words?  They must
not sell [always] as dear, nor buy [always] as cheap as they can:
doe you not thereby intimate that a man may sometimes do so?

Wise.  I doe indeed intimate that somtimes the seller may sell as
dear, and the buyer buy as cheap as he can; but this is allowable
only in these cases:  When he that sells is a Knave, and lays aside
all good conscience in selling; or when the buyer is a Knave, and
layes aside all good conscience in buying.  If the buyer therefore
lights of a Knave, or if the seller lights of a Knave, then let
them look to themselves:  but yet so, as not to lay aside
conscience, because he that thou dearest with doth so:  but how
vile or base soever the chapman is, do thou keep thy commodity at a
reasonable price:  or if thou buyest, offer reasonable gain for the
thing thou wouldest have:  and if this will not do with the buyer
or seller, then seek thee a more honest chapman:  If thou
objectest, But I have not skil to know when a pennyworth is before
me:  Get some that have more skill than thy self in that affair,
and let them in that matter dispose of thy money.  But if there
were no Knaves in the world, these objections need not be made.

And thus, my very good neighbour, have I given you a few of my
reasons, why a man that hath it, should not always sell too dear,
nor buy as cheap as he can:  but should use good Conscience to God,
and Charity to his Neighbour in both.

Atten.  But were some men here, to hear you, I believe they would
laugh you to scorn.

Wise.  I question not that at all, for so, {122b} Mr. Badman used
to doe, when any man told him of his faults:  he used to think
himself wiser than any, and would count, as I have hinted before,
that he was not arrived to a manly spirit that did stick or boggle
at any wickedness.  But let Mr. Badman and his fellowes laugh, I
will bear it, and still give them good counsel.  But I will
remember also, for my further relief and comfort, that thus they
that were covetous of old, served the Son of God himself.  It is
their time to laugh now, that they may mourn in time to come.
{122c}  And, I say again, when they have laughed out their laugh;
He that useth not good conscience to God, and charity to his
neighbour, in buying and selling, dwells next dore to an Infidel,
and is near of kin to Mr. Badman.

Atten.  Well, but what will you say to this question? {123a} (you
know that there is no settled price set by God upon any Commodity
that is bought or sold under the Sun; but all things that we buy
and sell, do ebbe and flow, as to price, like the Tide:)  How
(then) shall a man of a tender conscience doe, neither to wrong the
seller, buyer, nor himself, in buying and selling of commodities?

Wise.  This Question is thought to be frivolous by all that are of
Mr. Badmans way; 'tis also difficult in it self:  yet I will
endeavour to shape you an Answer, {123b} and that first to the
matter of the question; to wit, How a Tradesman should, in Trading,
keep a good conscience; (A buyer or seller either.)  Secondly, How
he should prepare himself to this work, and live in the practice of
it.

For the first:  He {123c} must observe what hath been said before,
to wit, he must have conscience to God, charity to his neighbour;
and I will add, much moderation in dealing.  Let him therefore keep
within the bounds of the affirmative of those eight reasons that
before were urged to prove, that men ought not in their Dealing,
but to do Justly and mercifully 'twixt man and man; and then there
will be no great fear of wronging the seller, buyer, or himself.

But particularly to prepare, or instruct a man to this work:

1.  Let the Tradesman or others consider, that there is not that in
great Gettings, and in abundance, which the most of men do suppose:
For all that a man has over and above what serves for his present
necessity and supply, serves only to feed the lusts of the eye.
For what good is there to the owners thereof, save the beholding of
them with their eyes? {123d}  Men also, many times, in getting of
riches, get therewith a snare to their soul:  {123e} But few get
good by getting of them.  But this consideration, Mr. Badman could
not abide.

2.  Consider, that the getting of wealth dishonestly (as he does,
that getteth it without good conscience and charity to his
neighbour,) is a great offender against God.  Hence he says, I have
smitten mine hands at thy dishonest gain, which thou hast made.
{124a}  It is a manner of speech that shews anger in the very
making of mention of the Crime.  Therefore,

3.  Consider, that a little honestly gotten, though it may yield
thee but a dinner of herbs at a time, will yield more peace
therewith, than will a stalled Ox, ill gotten.  Better is a little
with righteousness, than great revenues without right. {124b}

4.  Be thou confident, that Gods eyes are upon all thy wayes, and
that he pondereth all thy goings, and also that he marks them,
writes them down, and seals them up in a bag, against the time to
come. {124c}

5.  Be thou sure that thou remembrest, that thou knowest not the
day of thy death.  Remember also, that when death comes, God will
give thy substance, for the which thou hast laboured, and for the
which perhaps thou hast hazarded thy soul, to one, thou knowest not
who, nor whether he shall be a wise man or a fool.  And then, what
profit hath he that laboureth for the wind? {124d}

Besides, thou shalt have nothing that thou mayest so much as carry
away in thine hand.  Guilt shall goe with thee, if thou hast got it
dishonestly, and they also to whom thou shalt leave it, shall
receive it to their hurt.

These things duly considered, and made use of by thee to the
preparing of thy heart to thy calling of buying or selling; I come
in the next place to shew thee how thou shouldest live in the
practick part of this art.  Art thou to buy or sell?

1.  If thou sellest, do not commend; if thou buyest, do not
dispraise, any otherwise, but to give the thing that thou hast to
do with, its just value and worth; for thou canst not do otherwise
knowingly, but of a covetous and wicked mind.  Wherefore else are
comodities over-valued by the Seller, and also under-valued by the
Buyer.  It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer, but when he
hath got his bargain he boasteth thereof. {124e}  What hath this
man done now but lyed in the dispraising of his bargain? and why
did he dispraise it, but of a covetous mind, to wrong and beguile
the seller?

2.  Art thou a seller, and do things grow dear? set not thy hand to
help, or hold them up higher; this cannot be done without
wickedness neither; for this is a making of the sheckle great:
{125a} Art thou a buyer, and do things grow dear? use no cunning or
deceitful language to pull them down:  for that cannot be done but
wickedly too.  What then shall we do? will you say.  Why I answer:
Leave things to the providence of God, and do thou with moderation
submit to his hand.  But since, when they are growing dear, the
hand that upholds the price, is, for the time, more strong than
that which would pull it down; That being the hand of the seller,
who loveth to have it dear, specially if it shall rise in his hand:
therefore I say, do thou take heed, and have not a hand in it.  The
which thou mayest have to thine own and thy neighbours hurt, these
three ways:

1.  By crying out scarcity, scarcity, beyond the truth and state of
things:  especially take heed of doing of this by way of a
prognostick for time to come.  'Twas for {125b} this for which he
was trodden to death in the gate of Samaria, that you read of in
the book of Kings.  This sin has a double evil in it.  1.  It
belieth the present blessing of God amongst us:  and, 2.  It
undervalueth the riches of his goodness, which can make all good
things to abound towards us.

2.  This wicked thing may be done by hoarding up, when the hunger
and Necessity of the poor calls for it.  Now that God may shew his
dislike against this, he doth, as it were, license the people to
curse such an hoarder up.  He that withholdeth corn, the people
shall curse him, but blessing shall be upon the head of him that
selleth it. {125c}

3.  But if things will rise, do thou be grieved; Be also moderate
in all thy sellings, and be sure let the poor have a pennyworth,
and sell thy Corn to those in necessity:  {125d} Which then thou
wilt do, when thou shewest mercy to the poor in thy selling to him,
and when thou for his sake, because he is poor, undersellest the
market.  This is to buy and sell with good conscience:  thy buyer
thou wrongest not, thy Conscience thou wrongest not, thy self thou
wrongest not, for God will surely recompense thee.

I have spoken concerning Corn, but thy duty is, to let thy
moderation in all things be known unto all men, the Lord is at
hand. {125e}

Atten.  Well, Sir, now I have heard enough of Mr. Badmans
naughtiness, pray now proceed to his Death.

Wise.  Why Sir, the Sun is not so low, we have yet three hours to
night.

Atten.  Nay; I am not in any great hast, but I thought you had even
now done with his Life.

Wise.  Done! no, I have yet much more to say.

Atten.  Then he has much more wickedness than I thought he had.

Wise.  That may be.  But let us proceed:  This Mr. Badman, added to
all his wickedness this, He was a very proud man, a Very proud man.
{126a}  He was exceeding proud and haughty in mind; He looked, that
what he said, ought not, must not be contradicted or opposed.  He
counted himself as wise as the wisest in the Countrey, as good as
the best, and as beautiful as he that had most of it.  He took
great delight in praising of himself, and as much in the praises
that others gave him.  He could not abide that any should think
themselves above him, or that their wit or personage should by
others be set before his. {126b}  He had scarce a fellowly carriage
for his equals.  But for those that were of an inferior ranck, he
would look over them in great contempt.  And if at any time he had
any remote occasion of having to do with them, he would shew great
height, and a very domineering spirit.  So that in this it may be
said that Solomon gave a characteristical note of him, when he
said:  Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who dealeth in proud
wrath. {126c}  He never thought his Dyet well enough dressed, his
Cloathes fine enough made, or his Praise enough refined.

Atten.  This Pride, is a sin that sticks as close to nature I
think, as most sins.  There is Uncleanness and Pride, I know not of
any two gross sins that stick closer to men then they.  They have,
as I may call it, an interest in Nature; it likes them because they
most suit its lusts and fancies:  and therefore no marvel though
Mr. Badman was tainted with pride, since he had so wickedly given
up himself to work all iniquity with greediness.

Wise.  You say right; Pride, is a sin that sticks close to Nature,
{126d} and is one of the first follies wherein it shews it self to
be polluted.  For even in Childhood, even in little children, Pride
will first of all shew it self; it is a hasty, an early appearance
of the sin of the soul.  It, as I may say, is that corruption that
strives for predominancy in the heart, and therefore usually comes
out first.  But though children are so incident to it, yet methinks
those of more years, should be ashamed thereof.  I might at the
first have begun with Mr. Badmans Pride, only I think it is not the
Pride in Infancy, that begins to make a difference betwixt one and
another, as did, and do those wherewith I began my relation of his
life:  therefore I passed it over, but now, since he had no more
consideration of himself, and of his vile and sinful state, but to
be proud when come to years; I have taken the occasion in this
place to make mention of his pride.

Atten.  But pray, if you can remember them, tell me of some places
of Scripture that speak against pride.  I the rather desire this,
because that pride is now a reigning sin, and I happen sometimes to
fall into the company of them that in my conscience are proud, very
much, and I have a mind also to tell them of their sin; now when I
tell them of it, unless I bring Gods word too, I doubt they will
laugh me to scorn.

Wise.  Laugh you to scorn! the Proud man will laugh you to scorn,
bring to him what Text you can, except God shall smite him in his
conscience by the Word:  Mr. Badman did use to serve them so that
did use to tell him of his:  and besides, when you have said what
you can, they will tell you they are not proud, and that you are
rather the proud man, else you would not judge, nor so malapertly
meddle with other mens matters as you do.  Nevertheless, since you
desire it, I will mention two or three texts:  They are these.
Pride and arrogancy do I hate.  A mans pride shall bring him low.
And he shall bring down their pride.  And all the proud, and all
that do wickedly shall be as stubble, and the day that comes shall
burn them up. {127a}  This last, is a dreadful Text; it is enough
to make a proud man shake:  God, saith he, will make the proud ones
as stubble; that is, as fuel for the fire, and the day that cometh
shall be like a burning oven, and that day shall burn them up,
saith the Lord.  But Mr. Badman could never abide to hear pride
spoken against, nor that any should say of him, He is a proud man.

Atten.  What should be the reason of that?

Wise.  He did not tell me the reason; but I suppose it to be that
which is common to all vile persons.  They love this Vice, but care
not to bear its name. {128a}  The Drunkard loves the sin, but loves
not to be called a drunkard.  The Thief loveth to steal, but cannot
abide to be called a thief, the whore loveth to commit uncleanness,
but loveth not to be called a Whore; And so Mr. Badman loved to be
proud, but could not abide to be called a proud man.  The sweet of
sin, is desirable to polluted and corrupted man, but the name
thereof, is a blot in his Scutcheon.

Atten.  'Tis true that you have said:  but pray how many sorts of
pride are there?

Wise.  There are two sorts of Pride; {128b} Pride of Spirit, and
Pride of Body.  The first of these is thus made mention of in the
Scriptures.  Every one that is proud in heart is abomination to the
Lord. {128c}  A high look, and a proud heart, and the plowing of
the wicked is sin.  The patient in spirit is better than the proud
in spirit.  Bodily pride these Scriptures mention.  In that day the
Lord shall take away the bravery of their tinckling ornaments about
their feet, and their cauls, and their round tires like the Moon,
the chains, and the bracelets, and the mufflers, the bonnets, and
the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands, and the tablets, and
the ear-rings, the rings, and the Nose-jewels:  {128d} The
changable suits of Apparell, and the mantles, and the wimples, and
the crisping pins, the glasses, and the fine linnen, and the hoods
and the vails.  By these expressions it is evident that there is
Pride of Body, as well as Pride of Spirit, and that both are sin,
and so abominable to the Lord.  But these Texts Mr. Badman could
never abide to read, they were to him as Micaiah was to Ahab, they
never spake good of him, but evil.

Atten.  I suppose that it was not Mr. Badmans case alone even to
maligne those Texts that speak against their vices:  For I believe,
that most ungodly men, (where the Scriptures are) have a secret
antipathy against those words of God that do most plainly and fully
rebuke them for their sins. {128e}

Wise.  That is out of doubt, and by that antipathy, they shew, that
sin and Satan are more welcome to them than are the wholesome
instructions of life and godliness.

Atten.  Well, but not to goe off from our discourse of Mr. Badman.
You say he was proud:  but will you shew me now some symptoms of
one that is proud?

Wise.  Yes, that I will:  And first I will shew you some symptoms
of Pride of Heart. {129a}  Pride of heart, is seen by outward
things, as Pride of Body in general, is a sign of pride of heart;
for all proud gestures of the body flow from Pride of heart:
therefore Solomon saith; There is a generation, O how lofty are
their eyes, and their eye-lids are lifted up:  {129b} And again;
There is that exalteth their gate, their going. {129c}  Now these
lofty eyes, and this exalting of the gate, is a sign of a Proud
heart:  for both these actions come from the heart:  for out of the
heart comes Pride, in all the visible appearances of it. {129d}
But more particularly:

1.  Heart Pride is discovered {129e} by a stretched out Neck, and
by mincing as they go.  For the wicked, the Proud, have a proud
Neck, a proud Foot, a proud Tongue, by which this their going is
exalted.  This is that which makes them look scornfully, speak
ruggedly, and carry it huffingly among their Neighbours.

2.  A proud heart, is a persecuting one:  The wicked through his
pride doth persecute the poor. {129f}

3.  A prayerless man is a proud man. {129g}

4.  A contentious man is a proud man. {129h}

5.  The disdainful man is a proud man. {129i}

6.  The man that oppresses his neighbour is a proud man. {129j}

7.  He that hearkeneth not to Gods Word with reverence and fear, is
a proud man. {129k}

8.  And he that calls the proud happy, is, be sure, a proud man.
All these are proud in heart, and this their pride of heart doth
thus discover it self. {129l} {129m}

As to bodily {129n} pride, it is discovered, that is, something of
it, by all the particulars mentioned before; for though they are
said to be symptoms of pride of heart, yet they are symptoms of
that pride, by their shewing of themselves in the Body.  You know
diseases that are within, are seen oft-times by outward and visible
Signs, yet by them very signs even the outside is defiled also.  So
all those visible signs of heart-pride, are signs of bodily pride
also.  But to come to more outward signs:  The putting on of Gold,
and Pearls, and costly array; the pleating of the hair, the
following of fashions, the seeking by gestures to imitate the
proud, either by speech, looks, dresses, goings, or other fools
baubles, (of which at this time the world is full) all these, and
many more, are signs, as of a proud heart, so of bodily pride also.
{130b}

But Mr. Badman would not allow, by any means, that this should be
called Pride, {130c} but rather neatness, handsomness, comeliness,
cleanliness, &c. neither would he allow that following of fashions
was any thing else, but because he would not be proud, singular,
and esteemed fantastical by his neighbours.

Atten.  But I have been told, that when some have been rebuked for
their pride, they have turned it again upon the brotherhood of
those by whom they have been rebuked:  saying, Physician heal thy
Friends, look at home, among your Brotherhood, even among the
wisest of you, and see if you your selves be clear, even you
professors:  for who is prouder than you professors? scarcesly the
Devil himself.

Wise.  My heart akes at this answer, because there is too much
cause for it. {130d}  This very Answer would Mr. Badman give his
wife, when she (as she would sometimes) reproved him for his pride:
We shall have, says he, great amendments in living now, for the
Devil is turned a corrector of vice:  For no sin reigneth more in
the world, quoth he, than pride among professors.  And who can
contradict him? let us give the Devil his due, the thing is too
apparent for any man to deny.

And I doubt not but the same answer is ready in the mouths of Mr.
Badmans friends; for they may and do see pride display it self in
the Apparel and carriages of professors; one may say, almost as
much, as among any people in the Land, the more is the pity.  Ay,
and I fear that even their Extravagancies in this, hath hardened
the heart of many a one, as I perceive it did somewhat the heart of
Mr. Badman himself.

For mine own part, I have seen many my self, and those Church-
members too, so deckt and bedaubed with their Fangles and Toyes,
and that when they have been at the solemn Appointments of God, in
the way of his Worship, that I have wondred with what face such
painted persons could sit in the place where they were without
swounding.  But certainly the holiness of God, and also the
pollution of themselves by sin, must needs be very far out of the
minds of such people, what profession soever they make.

I have read of an Whores forehead, {131a} and I have read of
christian-shamefacedness; I have read of costly array, and of that
which becometh women professing Godliness, with good works; {131b}
{131c} but if I might speak, I know what I know, and could say, and
yet do no wrong, that which would make some professors stink in
their places; {131d} but now I forbear.

Atten.  Sir, you seem to be greatly concerned at this, but what I
shall say more? it is whispered, that some good Ministers have
countenanced their people in their light and wanton Apparrel, yea
have pleaded for their Gold, and Pearls, and costly array, &c.

Wise.  I know not what they have pleaded for, but 'tis easily seen
that they tolerate, or at least wise, wink and connive at such
things, both in their Wives and Children.  And so from the Prophets
of Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth into all the land. {131e}
And when the hand of the Rulers are chief in a trespass, who can
keep their people from being drowned in that trespass?

Atten.  This is a lamentation, and must stand for a lamentation.

Wise.  So it is, and so it must.  And I will add, it is a shame, it
is a reproach, it is a stumbling-block to the blind; {131f} for
though men be as blind as Mr. Badman himself, yet they can see the
foolish lightness that must needs be the bottom of all these apish
and wanton extravagancies.  But many have their excuses ready; to
wit, their Parents, their Husbands, and their breeding calls for
it, and the like:  yea, the examples of good people prompt them to
it:  but all these will be but the Spiders webb, when the thunder
of the Word of the great God shall rattle from Heaven against them,
as it will at Death or Judgment; but I wish it might do it before.
But alas! these excuses are but bare pretences, these proud ones
love to have it so.  I once talked with a Maid, by way of reproof,
for her fond and gaudy garment.  But she told me, {132a} The Tailor
would make it so:  when alas, poor proud Girle, she gave order to
the Taylor so to make it.  Many make Parents, and Husbands, and
Taylors, &c. the Blind to others, but their naughty hearts, and
their giving of way thereto, that is the original cause of all
these evils.

Atten.  Now you are speaking of the cause of pride, pray shew me
yet further why pride is now so much in request? {132b}

Wise.  I will shew you what I think are the reasons of it.

1.  The first is, {132c} Because such persons are led by their own
hearts, rather than by the Word of God.  I told you before, that
the original fountain of pride is the heart.  For out of the heart
comes pride; it is therefore because they are led by their hearts,
which naturally tends to lift them up in pride.  This pride of
heart, tempts them, and by its deceits overcometh them; {132d} yea
it doth put a bewitching vertue into their Peacocks feathers, and
then they are swallowed up with the vanity of them.

2.  Another reason why professors are so proud, (for those we are
talking of now) is because they are more apt to take example of
those that are of the World, than they are to take example of those
that are Saints indeed.  Pride is of the world.  For all that is of
the world, the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, are not of the Father but of the world. {132e}  Of
the world therefore Professors learn to be proud.  But they should
not take them for example.  It will be objected, No, nor your
saints neither, for you are as proud as others:  Well, let them
take shame that are guilty.  But when I say, professors should take
example for their life by those that are saints indeed, I mean as
Peter says:  They should take example of those that were in old
time, the saints; for saints of old time were the best, therefore
to these he directeth us for our pattern.  Let the wives
conversation be chast, and also coupled with fear.  Whose adorning,
saith Peter, let it not be that outward adorning, of pleating the
hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of Apparel:  but let
it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is
in the sight of God of great price.  For after this manner, in the
old time, the holy women also who trusted in God, adorned
themselves, being in subjection to their own husbands. {132f}

3.  Another reason is, {133a} Because they have forgotten the
pollution of their Nature.  For the remembrance of that, must needs
keep us humble, and being kept humble, we shall be at a distance
from pride.  The proud and the humble are set in opposition; (God
resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble.)  And can it
be imagined, that a sensible Christian should be a proud one; sence
of baseness tends to lay us low, not to lift us up with pride; not
with pride of Heart, nor pride of Life:  But when a man begins to
forget what he is, then he, if ever, begins to be proud.

Methinks it is one of the most senceless and ridiculous things in
the world, that a man should be proud of that which is given him on
purpose to cover the shame of his nakedness with.

4.  Persons that are proud, have gotten God and his Holiness out of
their sight. {133b}  If God was before them, as he is behind their
back; And if they saw him in his holiness, as he sees them in their
sins and shame, they would take but little pleasure in their apish
Knacks.  The Holiness of God makes the Angels cover their faces,
crumbles Christians, when they behold it, into dust and ashes:
{133c} and as his Majesty is, such is his Word; Therefore they
abuse it, that bring it to countenance pride.

Lastly, {133d} But what can be the end of those that are proud, in
the decking of themselves after their antick manner? why are they
for going with their Bulls-foretops, with their naked shoulders,
and Paps hanging out like a Cows bag? why are they for painting
their faces, for stretching out their necks, and for putting of
themselves into all the Formalities which proud Fancy leads them
to?  Is it because they would honour God? because they would adorn
the Gospel? because they would beautifie Religion, and make sinners
to fall in love with their own salvation?  No, no.  It is rather to
please their lusts, to satisfie their wild and extravagant fancies;
and I wish none doth it to stir up lust in others, to the end they
may commit uncleanness with them.  I believe, whatever is their
end, this is one of the great designes of the Devil:  and I believe
also, that Satan has drawn more into the sin of uncleanness, by the
spangling shew of fine cloaths, than he could possibly have drawn
unto it, without them.  I wonder what it was, that of old was
called the Attire of an Harlot:  certainly it could not be more
bewitching and tempting than are the garments of many professors
this day.

Atten.  I like what you say very well, and I wish that all the
proud Dames in England that profess, were within the reach and
sound of your words.

Wise.  What I have said, I believe is true, but as for the proud
Dames in England that profess, they have Moses and the Prophets,
and if they will not hear them, how then can we hope that they
should recieve good by such a dull sounding Ramshorn as I am?
However, I have said my mind, and now if you will, we will proceed
to some other of Mr. Badmans doings.

Atten.  No:  pray before you shew me any thing else of Mr. Badman,
shew me yet more particularly the evil effects of this sin of
Pride.

Wise.  With all my heart, I will answer your request. {134a}

1. {134b}  Then:  'Tis pride that makes poor Man so like the Devil
in Hell, that he cannot in it be known to be the Image and
similitude of God.  The Angels when they became Devils, 'twas
through their being lifted or puffed up with pride.  'Tis pride
also that lifteth or puffeth up the heart of the sinner, and so
makes him to bear the very image of the Devil.

2. {134c}  Pride makes a man so odious in the sight of God, that he
shall not, must not come nigh his Majesty.  Though the Lord be
high, yet hath he respect to the lowly, but the proud he knows afar
off.  Pride sets God and the Soul at a distrance; pride will not
let a man come nigh God, nor God will not let a proud man come nigh
unto him:  Now this is a dreadful thing.

3. {134d}  As pride sets, so it keeps God and the Soul at a
distance.  God resisteth the proud; resists, that is, he opposes
him, he thrusts him from him, he contemneth his person and all his
performances.  Come in to Gods Ordinances, the proud man may; but
come into his presence, have communion with him, or blessing from
him, he shall not.  For the high God doth resist him. {135a}

4. {135b}  The Word saith, that The Lord will destroy the House of
the proud.  He will destroy his House; it may be understood, he
will destroy him and his.  So he destroyed proud Pharaoh, so he
destroyed proud Corah, and many others.

5. {135c}  Pride, where it comes, and is entertained, is a certain
forerunner of some Judgment that is not far behind.  When pride
goes before, shame and destruction will follow after.  When pride
cometh, then cometh shame.  Pride goeth before destruction, and a
haughty spirit before a fall.

6. {135d}  Persisting in pride makes the condition of a poor man as
remediless as is that of the Devils themselves.

And this I fear was Mr. Badmans condition, and that was the reason
that he died so as he did; as I shall shew you anon.

But what need I thus talk of the particular actions, or rather
prodigious sins of Mr. Badman, when his whole Life and all his
actions, went as it were to the making up one massie body of sin?
{135e}  Instead of believing that there was a God, his Mouth, his
Life and Actions declared, that he believed no such thing.  His
transgression said within my heart, that there was no fear of God
before his eyes. {135f} {135g}  Instead of honouring of God, and of
giving glory to him for any of his Mercies, or under any of his
good Providences towards him (for God is good to all, and lets his
Sun shine, and his Rain fall upon the unthankful and unholy,) he
would ascribe the glory to other causes.  If they were Mercies, he
would ascribe them (if the open face of the providence did not give
him the lye) to his own wit, labour, care, industry, cunning, or
the like:  if they were Crosses, he would ascribe them, or count
them the offspring of Fortune, ill Luck, Chance, the ill
mannagement of matters, the ill will of neighbours, or to his wifes
being Religious, and spending, as he called it, too much time in
Reading, Praying, or the like.  It was not in his way to
acknowledge God, (that is, graciously) or his hand in things.  But,
as the Prophet saith; Let favour be skewed to the wicked, yet will
he not learn righteousness. {136a}  And again, They returned not to
him that smote them, nor did they seek the Lord of hosts. {136b}
This was Mr. Badmans temper, neither Mercies nor Judgment would
make him seek the Lord.  Nay, as another Scripture sayes, he would
not see the works of God, nor regard the operations of his hands
either in mercies or in Judgments. {136c}  But further, when by
Providence he has been cast under the best Means for his soul,
(for, as was shewed before, he having had a good master, and before
him a good father, and after all a good wife, and being sometimes
upon a Journey, and cast under the hearing of a good Sermon, as he
would sometimes for novelties sake go to hear a good Preacher;) he
was always without heart to make use thereof:  In this land of
righteousness he would deal unjustly, and would not behold the
majesty of the Lord.

Instead of reverencing the Word, {136g} when he heard it preached,
read, or discoursed of, he would sleep, talk of other Business, or
else object against the authority, harmony, and wisdom of the
Scriptures.  Saying, How do you know them to be the Word of God?
how do you know that these sayings are true?  The Scriptures, he
would say, were as a Nose of Wax, and a man may turn them
whithersoever he lists:  one Scripture says one thing, and another
sayes the quite contrary; Besides, they make mention of a thousand
imposibilities; they are the cause of all dissensions and discords
that are in the Land:  Therefore you may (would he say) still think
what you will, but in my mind they are best at ease that have least
to do with them.

Instead of loving and honouring of them that did bear in their
Foreheads the Name, and in their Lives the Image of Christ, they
should be his Song, {136h} the matter of his Jests, and the objects
of his slanders.  He would either make a mock at their sober
deportment, their gracious language, quiet behaviour, or else
desperately swear that they did all in deceit and hypocrisie.  He
would endeavour to render godly men as odious and contemptable as
he could; any lyes that were made by any, to their disgrace, those
he would avouch for truth, and would not endure to be controlled.
He was much like those that the prophet speaks of, that would sit
and slander his mothers son; {137a} yea, he would speak
reproachfully of his wife, though his conscience told him, and many
would testifie, that she was a very vertuous woman.  He would also
raise slanders of his wives friends himself, affirming that their
doctrine tended to lasciviousness, and that in their assemblies
they acted and did unbeseeming men and women, that they committed
uncleanness, &c.  He was much like those that affirmed the Apostle
should say, Let us do evil that good may come:  {137b} Or like
those of whom it is thus written:  Report, say they, and we will
report it. {137c}  And if he could get any thing by the end that
had scandal in it, if it did but touch professors, how falsely
soever reported; Oh! then he would glory, laugh, and be glad, and
lay it upon the whole party:  Saying, Hang them Rogues, there is
not a barrel better Herring of all the holy Brotherhood of them:
Like to like, quoth the Devil to the Collier, this is your precise
Crew.  And then he would send all home with a curse.

Atten.  If those that make profession of Religion be wise, Mr.
Badmans watchings and words will make them the more wary and
careful in all things.

Wise.  You say true.  For when we see men do watch for our halting,
and rejoyce to see us stumble and fall, it should make us so much
abundance the more careful. {137d}

I do think it was as delightful to Mr. Badman to hear, raise, and
tell lies, and lying stories of them that fear the Lord, as it was
for him to go to bed when a weary.  But we will at this time let
these things pass.  For as he was in these things bad enough, so he
added to these, many more the like.

He was an {137e} angry, wrathfull, envious man, a man that knew not
what meekness or gentleness meant, nor did he desire to learn.  His
natural temper was to be surly, huffie, and rugged, and worse; and
he so gave way to his temper, as to this, that it brought him to be
furious and outrageous in all things, specially against goodness it
self, and against other things too, when he was displeased. {138a}

Atten.  Solomon saith, He is a fool that rageth.

Wise.  He doth so; and sayes moreover, That anger rests in the
bosom of fools. {138b}  And truly, if it be a sign of a Fool to
have anger rest in his bosom, then was Mr. Badman, notwithstanding
the conceit that he had of his own abilities, a Fool of no small
size.

Atten.  Fools are mostly most wise in their own eyes.

Wise.  True.  But I was a saying, that if it be a sign that a man
is a Fool, when Anger rests in his bosom; Then what is it a sign
of, think you, when Malice and Envy rests there?  For to my
knowledge Mr. Badman was as malicious and as envious a man as
commonly you can hear of.

Atten.  Certainly, malice and envy flow {138c} from pride and
arrogancy, and they again from ignorance, and ignorance from the
Devil; And I thought, that since you spake of the pride of Mr.
Badman before, we should have something of these before we had
done.

Wise.  Envy flows from Ignorance indeed.  And this Mr. Badman was
so envious an one, where he set against, that he would swell with
it, as a Toad, as we say, swells with poyson.  He whom he maligned,
might at any time even read envy in his face wherever he met with
him, or in whatever he had to do with him.

His envy was so rank and strong, that if it at any time turned its
head against a man, it would hardly ever be pulled in again:  He
would watch over that man to do him mischief, as the Cat watches
over the Mouse to destroy it; yea, he would wait seven years, but
he would have an opportunity to hurt him, and when he had it, he
would make him feel the weight of his Envy.

Envy is a devilish thing, the Scripture intimates that none can
stand before it.  A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty, but a
fools wrath is heavier than them both.  Wrath is cruel, and anger
is outrageous, but who can stand before envy? {138d} {138e}

This Envy, for the foulness of it, is reckoned {138f} among the
foulest Villanies that are, as adultery, murder, drunkenness,
revellings, witchcrafts, heresies, seditions, &c.  Yea, it is so
malignant a corruption, that it rots the very bones of him in whom
it dwells.  A sound heart is life to the flesh, but envy the
rottenness of the bones. {139a}

Atten.  This Envy is the very Father and Mother of a great many
hideous and prodigious wickednesses:  I say, it is the very {139b}
Father and Mother of them; it both besets them, and also nourishes
them up, till they come to their cursed maturity in the bosom of
him that entertains them.

Wise.  You have given it a very right description, in calling of it
the Father and Mother of a great many other prodigious
wickednesses:  for it is so venomous and vile a thing, that it puts
the whole course of Nature out of order, and makes it fit for
nothing but confusion, and a hold for every evil thing. For where
envy and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work. {139c}
Wherefore, I say, you have rightly called it, The very Father and
Mother of a great many other sins.  And now for our further
edification, I will reckon up some of the births of Envy.

1.  Envy, as I told you before, it rotteth the very bones of him
that entertains it.  And,

2.  As you have also hinted, it is heavier than a Stone, than Sand;
yea, and I will add, It falls like a Mill-stone upon the head.
Therefore,

3.  It kills him that throws it, and him at whom it is thrown.
Envy slayeth the silly one. {139e}  That is, him in whom it
resides, and him who is its object.

4.  'Twas that also that slew Jesus Christ himself; for his
adversaries persecuted him through their envy. {139f} {139g}

5.  Envy was that by vertue of which Joseph was sold by his
Brethren into Egypt:  {139h}

6.  'Tis envy that hath the hand in making of variance among Gods
Saints. {139i}

7.  'Tis envy in the hearts of Sinners, that stirres them up to
thrust Gods Ministers out of their coasts.

8.  What shall I say?  'Tis envy that is the very Nursery of
whisperings, debates, backbitings, slanders, reproaches, murders,
&c.

'Tis not possible to repeat all the particular fruits of this
sinfull root.  Therefore, it is no marvel that Mr. Badman was such
an ill natured man, for the great roots of all manner of wickedness
were in him, unmortified, unmaimed, untouched.

Atten.  But it is {140a} a rare case, even this of Mr. Badman, that
he should never in all his life be touched with remorse for his
ill-spent life.

Wise.  Remorse, I cannot say he ever had, if by remorse you mean
repentance for his evils.  Yet twice I remember he was under some
trouble of mind about his condition:  {140b} Once when he broke his
legg as he came home drunk from the Ale-house; and another time
when he fell sick, and thought he should die:  Besides these two
times, I do not remember any more.

Atten.  Did he break his legg then?

Wise.  Yes:  Once, as he came home drunk from the Ale-house.

Atten.  Pray how did he break it?

Wise.  Why upon a time he was at an Ale-house, that wicked house,
about two or three miles from home, and having there drank hard the
greatest part of the day, when night was come, he would stay no
longer, but calls for his horse, gets up, and like a Madman (as
drunken persons usually ride) away he goes, as hard as horse could
lay legs to the ground.  Thus he rid, till coming to a dirty place,
where his horse flouncing in, fell, threw his master, and with his
fall broke his legg:  so there he lay. {140c}  But you would not
think how he {140d} swore at first.  But after a while, he comeing
to himself, and feeling by his pain, and the uselesness of his
legg, what case he was in, and also fearing that this bout might be
his death; he began to crie out after the manner of such; {140e}
Lord help me, Lord have mercy upon me, good God deliver me, and the
like.  So there he lay, till some came by, who took him up, carried
him home, where he lay for some time, before he could go abroad
again.

Atten.  And then, you say, he called upon God.

Wise.  He cryed out in his pain, and would say, O God, and O Lord,
help me:  but whether it was that his sin might be pardoned, and
his soul saved, or whether to be rid of his pain, I will not
positively determine; though I fear it was but for the last; {141a}
because, when his pain was gone, and he had got hopes of mending,
even before he could go abroad, he cast off prayer, and began his
old game; to wit, to be as bad as he was before.  He then would
send for his old companions; his Sluts also would come to his house
to see him, and with them he would be, as well as he could for his
lame leg, as vicious as they could be for their hearts.

Atten.  'Twas a wonder he did not break his neck.

Wise.  His neck had gone instead of his leg, but that God was long-
suffering towards him; he had deserved it ten thousand times over.
There have been many, as I have heard, and as I have hinted to you
before, that have taken their Horses when drunk, as he; but they
have gone from the pot to the grave; for they have broken their
necks 'twixt the Ale-house and home.  One hard by us {141b} also
drunk himself dead; he drank, and dyed in his drink.

Atten.  'Tis a sad thing to dye drunk.

Wise.  So it is:  But yet I wonder that no more do so.  For
considering the heinousness of that sin, and with how many other
sins it is accompanied, {141c} as with oaths, blasphemies, lyes,
revellings, whoreings, brawlings, &c. it is a wonder to me, that
any that live in that sin should escape such a blow from heaven
that should tumble them into their graves.  Besides, when I
consider also how, when they are as drunk as beasts, they, without
all fear of danger, will ride like Bedlams and mad men, even as if
they did dare God to meddle with them if he durst, for their being
drunk:  I say, I wonder that he doth not withdraw his protecting
providences from them, and leave them to those Dangers and
Destructions that by their sin they have deserved, and that by
their Bedlam madness they would rush themselves into:  only I
consider again, that he has appointed a day wherein he will reckon
with them, {141d} and doth also commonly make Examples of some, to
shew that he takes notice of their sin, abhorrs their way, and will
count with them for it at the set time.

Atten.  It is worthy of our remark, to take notice how God, to shew
his dislike of the sins of men, strikes some of them down with a
blow; as the breaking of Mr. Badmans legg, for doubtless that was a
stroak from heaven.

Wise.  It is worth our remark indeed.  It was an open stroak, it
fell upon him while he was in the height of his sin:  And it looks
much like to that in Job; Therefore he knoweth their works, and
overturneth them in the night, so that they are destroyed.  He
striketh them as wicked men in the open sight of others:  {142a} Or
as the Margent reads it, in the place of beholders.  He layes them
with his stroak in the place of beholders.  There was {142b} Mr.
Badman laid, his stroak was taken notice of by every one:  his
broken legg was at this time the Town-talk.  Mr. Badman has broken
his legg, sayes one:  How did he break it? sayes another:  As he
came home drunk from such an Ale-house, said a third; A Judgment of
God upon him, said a fourth.  This his sin, his shame, and
punishment, are all made conspicuous to all that are about him.  I
will here tell you another story or two.

I have read in Mr. Clark's Looking-glass for Sinners; {142c} That
upon a time, a certain drunken fellow boasted in his Cups, that
there was neither Heaven nor Hell; also he said, He believed, that
man had no Soul, and that for his own part, he would sell his soul
to any that would buy it.  Then did one of his companions buy it of
him for a cup of Wine; and presently the Devil in mans shape bought
it of that man again at the same price; and so in the presence of
them all laid hold on this Soul-seller, and carried him away
through the Air, so that he was never more heard of.

In pag. 148, he tells us also:  That there was one at Salisbury, in
the midst of his health drinking and carousing in a Tavern; and he
drank a health to the Devil, saying, That if the Devil would not
come and pledge him, he would not believe that there was either God
or Devil.  Whereupon his companions stricken with fear, hastened
out of the room:  and presently after, hearing a hideous noise, and
smelling a stinking savour, the Vintner ran up into the chamber;
and coming in, he missed his Guest, and found the window broken,
the Iron barr in it bowed, and all bloody:  But the man was never
heard of afterwards.

Again, in pag. 149. he tells us of a Bailiff of Hedly:  Who upon a
Lords Day being drunk at Melford, got upon his horse, to ride
through the streets, saying, That his horse would carry him to the
Devil:  and presently his horse threw him, and broke his neck.
These things are worse than the breaking of Mr. Badmans Leg, and
should be a caution to all of his friends that are living, lest
they also fall by their sin into these sad Judgements of God.

But, as I said, Mr. Badman quickly forgot all, his conscience was
choaked, before his legg was healed.  And therefore, before he was
well of the fruit of one sin, he tempts God to send another
Judgment to seize upon him:  And so he did quickly after.  For not
many months after his legg was well, he had a very dangerous fit of
sickness, insomuch that now he began to think he must dye in very
deed. {143a}

Atten.  Well, and what did he think and do then?

Wise.  He thought he must go to Hell; this I know, for he could not
forbear but say so. {143b}  To my best remembrance, he lay crying
out all one night for fear, and at times he would so tremble, that
he would make the very bed shake under him. {143c}  But, Oh! how
the thoughts of Death, of Hell-fire, and of eternal Judgment, did
then wrack his conscience.  Fear might be seen in his face, and in
his tossings to and fro:  It might also be heard in his words, and
be understood by his heavy groans.  He would often cry, I am
undone, I am undone; my vile life has undone me.

Atten.  Then his former atheistical thoughts and principles, were
too weak now to support him from the fears of eternal damnation.

Wise.  Aie! they were too weak indeed.  They may serve to stifle
conscience, when a man is in the midst of his prosperity, and to
harden the heart against all good counsel when a man is left of
God, and given up to his reprobate mind:  {143d} But alas,
atheistical thoughts, Notions and Opinions, must shrink and melt
away, when God sends, yea comes with sickness to visit the soul of
such a sinner for his sin.  There was a man dwelt about 12 miles
off from us, that had so trained up himself in his atheistical
Notions, that at last he attempted to write a book against Jesus
Christ, and against the divine Authority of the Scriptures.  (But I
think it was not printed:)  Well, after many days God struck him
with sickness, whereof he dyed.  So, being sick, and musing upon
his former doings, the Book that he had written came into his mind,
and with it such a sence of his evil in writing of it, that it tore
his Conscience as a Lyon would tare a Kid.  He lay therefore upon
his death-bed in sad case, {144a} and much affliction of
conscience:  some of my friends also went to see him; and as they
were in his chamber one day, he hastily called for Pen Ink and
Paper, which when it was given him, he took it and writ to this
purpose.  I, {144b} such an one, in such a Town, must goe to Hell-
fire, for writing a Book against Jesus Christ, and against the Holy
Scriptures:  And would also have leaped out of the window of his
house to have killed himself, but was by them prevented of that:
so he dyed in his bed, such a death as it was.  'Twill be well if
others take warning by him.

Atten.  This is a remarkable story.

Wise.  'Tis as true as remarkable; I had it from them that I dare
believe, who also themselves were eye and ear witnesses; and also
that catcht him in their arms, and saved him when he would have
leaped out of his chamber-window, to have destroyed himself.

Atten.  Well, you have told me what were Mr. Badmans thoughts (now,
being sick) of his condition; pray tell me also what he then did
when he was sick?

Wise.  Did! he did many things, which I am sure he never thought to
have done, and which, to be sure, was not looked for of his wife
and children.

In this fit of sickness, his Thoughts were quite altered about his
wife; I say his Thoughts, so far as could be judged by his words
and carriages to her. {144c}  For now she was his good wife, his
godly wife, his honest wife, his duck, and dear, and all.  Now he
told her, that she had the best of it, she having a good Life to
stand by her, while his debaucheries and ungodly Life did always
stare him in the face.  Now he told her, the counsel that she often
gave him, was good; though he was so bad as not to take it.

Now he would hear her talk to him, and he would lie sighing by her
while she so did.  Now he would bid her pray for him, that he might
be delivered from Hell. {145a}

He would also now consent, that some of her good Ministers might
come to him to comfort him; and he would seem to shew them kindness
when they came, for he would treat them kindly with words, and
hearken diligently to what they said, only he did not care that
they should talk much of his ill spent life, because his conscience
was clogged with that already; he cared not now to see his old
companions, the thoughts of them was a torment to him:  and now he
would speak kindly to that child of his that took after its mothers
steps, though he could not at all abide it before.

He also desired the prayers of good people, that God of his mercy
would spare him a little longer, promising that if God would but
let him recover this once, what a new, what a penitent man he would
be toward God, and what a loving husband he would be to his wife:
what liberty he would give her, yea how he would goe with her
himself to hear her Ministers, and how they should go hand in hand
in the way to heaven together.

Atten.  Here was a fine shew of things; I'le warrant you, his wife
was glad for this.

Wise.  His wife!  Aie, and a many good people besides:  it was
noysed all over the Town, {145b} what a great change there was
wrought upon Mr. Badman; how sorry he was for his sins, how he
began to love his wife, how he desired good men should pray to God
to spare him; and what promises he now made to God in his sickness,
that if ever he should raise him from his sick bed to health again,
what a new penitent man he would be towards God, and what a loving
husband to his good wife.

Well, ministers prayed, and good people rejoyced, thinking verily
that they now had gotten a man from the Devil; nay, some of the
weaker sort did not stick to say that God had began a work of Grace
in his heart; and his wife, poor woman, {145c} you cannot think how
apt she was to believe it so; she rejoyced, and she hoped as she
would have it.  But, alas! alas! in little time things all proved
otherwise.

After he had kept his Bed a while, his distemper began to abate,
and he to feel himself better, so he in little time was so finely
mended, that he could walk about the house, and also obtained a
very fine stomach to his food:  {146a} and now did his wife and her
good friends stand gaping, to see Mr. Badman fulfill his promise of
becoming new towards God, and loving to his wife:  but the contrary
only shewed it self.  For so soon as ever he had hopes of mending,
and found that his strength began to renew, his trouble began to
goe off his heart, and he grew as great a stranger to his frights
and fears, as if he had never had them.

But verily, I am apt to think, that one reason of his no more
regarding, or remembring of his sick-bed fears, and of being no
better for them, was, some words that the Doctor that supplied him
with Physick said to him when he was mending.  For as soon as Mr.
Badman began to mend, the Doctor comes and sits him down by him in
his house, and there fell into discourse with him about the nature
of his disease; and among other things they talked of Badmans
trouble, and how he would cry out, tremble, and express his fears
of going to Hell when his sickness lay pretty hard upon him.  To
which the Doctor replyed:  {146b} That those fears and Out-cries
did arise from the height of his distemper, for that disease was
often attended with lightness of the head, by reason the sick party
could not sleep, and for that the vapours disturbed the brain:  But
you see Sir, quoth he, that so soon as you got sleep and betook
your self to rest, you quickly mended, and your head settled, and
so those frenzies left you.

And was it so indeed, thought Mr. Badman; was my troubles, only the
effects of my distemper, and because ill vapours got up into my
brain?  Then surely, since my Physician was my Saviour, my Lust
again shall be my God.  So he never minded Religion more, but
betook him again to the world, his lusts and wicked companions:
And there was an end of Mr. Badmans Conversion.

Atten.  I thought, (as you told me of him) that this would be the
result of the whole; for I discerned by your relating of things,
that the true symptoms of conversion were wanting in him, and that
those that appeared to be any thing like them, were only such as
the reprobates may have.

Wise.  You say right, for there wanted in him, when he was most
sensible, a sence of the pollution of his Nature; he only had guilt
for his sinful actions, the which Cain, and Pharaoh, and Saul, and
Judas, those reprobates, have had before him. {147a}

Besides, the great things that he desired, were, to be delivered
from going to Hell, (and who would willingly?) and that his life
might be lengthened in this world.  We find not by all that he said
or did, that Jesus Christ the Saviour was desired by him, from a
sence of his need of his Righteousness to cloath him, and of his
Spirit to sanctifie him. {147b}

His own strength was whole in him, he saw nothing of the treachery
of his own heart; for had he, he would never have been so free to
make promises to God of amendment.  He would rather have been
afraid, that if he had mended, he should have turned with the dog
to his vomit, and have begged prayers of Saints, and assistance
from heaven upon that account, that he might have been kept from
doing so.

'Tis true he did beg prayers of good people, and so did Pharaoh of
Moses and Aaron, and Simon Magus of Simon Peter. {147c}

His mind also seemed to be turned to his wife and child; but alas!
'twas rather from conviction that God had given him concerning
their happy estate over his, than for that he had any true love to
the work of God that was in them.  True, some shews of kindness he
seemed to have for them, and so had rich Dives, when in Hell, to
his five brethren that were yet in the world; yea he had such love,
as to wish them in Heaven, that they might not come thither to be
tormented. {147d}

Atten.  Sick-bed Repentance is seldom good for any thing.

Wise.  You {147e} say true, it is very rarely good for any thing
indeed.  Death is unwelcom to Nature, and usually when sickness and
death visit the sinner; the first taking of him by the shoulder,
and the second standing at the Bed-chamber door to receive him;
then the sinner begins to look about him, and to bethink with
himself, These will have me away before God; and I know that my
Life has not been as it should, how shall I do to appear before
God!  Or if it be more the sence of the punishment, and the place
of the punishment of sinners, that also is starting to a defiled
conscience, now rouzed by deaths lumbring at the door.

And hence usually is sick-bed Repentance, and the matter of it:  To
wit, to be saved from Hell, and from Death, and that God will
restore again to health till they mend; concluding that it is in
their power to mend, as is evident by their large and lavishing
promises to do it.

I have known many, that, when they have been sick, have had large
measures of this kind of Repentance, and while it has lasted, the
noyse and sound thereof, has made the Town to ring again:  but
alas! how long has it lasted? oft-times scarce so long as untill
the party now sick has been well.  It has passed away like a mist
or a vapour, it has been a thing of no continuance.  But this kind
of Repentance is by God compared to the howling of a dog.  And they
have not cried unto me with their heart, when they howled upon
their bed. {148a}

Atten.  Yet one may see, by this, the desperateness of mans heart:
{148b} for what is it but desperate wickedness, to make promise to
God of amendment, if he will but spare them; and yet so soon as
they are recovered (or quickly after,) fall to sin as they did
before, and never to regard their promise more.

Wise.  It is a sign of desperateness indeed; yea, of desperate
madness.  For surely, they must needs think, that God took notice
of their promise, that he heard the words that they spake, {148c}
and that he hath laid them up against the time to come; and will
then bring out, and testifie to their faces, that they flattered
him with their mouth, and lyed unto him with their tongue, {148d}
when they lay sick, to their thinking, upon their death-bed, and
promised him that if he would recover them they would repent and
amend their ways.  But thus, as I have told you, Mr. Badman did.
He made great promises that he would be a New man, that he would
leave his sins, and become a Convert, that he would love, &c. his
godly wife, &c.  Yea many fine words had Mr. Badman in his
sickness, but no good actions when he was well.

Atten.  And how did his good wife take it, when she saw that he had
no Amendment, but that he returned with the Dog to his vomit, to
his old courses again?

Wise.  Why it {149a} broke her heart, it was a worse disappointment
to her than the cheat that he gave her in marriage:  At least she
laid it more to heart, and could not so well grapple with it.  You
must think that she had put up many a prayer to God for him before,
even all the time that he had carried it so badly to her, and now
when he was so affrighted in his sickness, and so desired that he
might live and mend, poor woman, she thought that the time was come
for God to answer her prayers; nay, she did not let with gladness,
to whisper it out amongst her Friends, that 'twas so:  but when she
saw her self disappointed by her husbands turning Rebel again, she
could not stand up under it, but falls into a languishing
distemper, and in a few weeks gave up the Ghost.

Atten.  Pray how did she dye?

Wise.  Die! she dyed bravely; full of comfort of the faith of her
Interest in Christ, and by him, of the world to come:  she had many
brave Expressions in her sickness, and gave to those that came to
visit her many signs of her salvation; the thoughts of the Grave,
but specially of her Rising again, were sweet thoughts to her.  She
would long for Death, because she knew it would be her Friend.  She
behaved her self like to some that were making of them ready to go
meet their Bridegroom. {149b}  Now, said she, I am going to rest
from my sorrows, my sighs, my tears, my mournings and complaints:
I have heretofore longed to be among the Saints, but might by no
means be suffered to goe, but now I am going, (and no man can stop
me) to the great Meeting, to the general Assembly, and Church of
the first-born which are written in Heaven. {149c}  There I shall
have my hearts desire; there I shall worship without Temptation or
other impediment; there I shall see the face of my Jesus, whom I
have loved, whom I have served, and who now, I know, will save my
soul. {149d}  I have prayed often for my husband, that he might be
converted, but there has been no answer of God in that matter; Are
my prayers lost? are they forgotten? are they thrown over the barr?
No; they are hanged upon the horns of the golden Altar, and I must
have the benefit of them my self, that moment that I shall enter
into the gates, in at which the righteous Nation that keepeth truth
shall enter:  I say, I shall have the benefit of them.  I can say
as holy David; I say, I can say of my husband, as he could of his
enemies.  As for me, when they were sick my cloathing was of sack-
cloth, I humbled my soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into
my bosom. {150a}  My prayers are not lost, my tears are yet in
God's bottle; I would have had a Crown, and Glory for my husband,
and for those of my children that follow his steps; but so far as I
can see yet, I must rest in the hope of having all my self.

Atten.  Did she talk thus openly?

Wise.  No; this she spake but to one or two of her most intimate
acquaintance, who were permitted to come and see her, when she lay
languishing upon her death-bed.

Atten.  Well, but pray go on in your relation, this is good:  I am
glad to hear it, this is as a cordial to my heart while we sit thus
talking under this tree.

Wise.  When she drew near her end, she called for her husband, and
when he was come to her, she told him, {150b} That now he and she
must part, and said she, God knows, and thou shalt know, that I
have been a loving, faithful Wife unto thee; my prayers have been
many for thee; and as for all the abuses that I have received at
thy hand, those I freely and heartily forgive, and still shall pray
for thy conversion, even as long as I breathe in this world.  But
husband, I am going thither, where no bad man shall come, and if
thou dost not convert, thou wilt never see me more with comfort;
let not my plain words offend thee:  I am thy dying wife, and of my
faithfulness to thee, would leave this Exhortation with thee:
Break off thy sins, fly to God for mercy while mercies gate stands
open; remember, that the day is coming, when thou, though now lusty
and well, must lye at the gates of death, as I do:  And what wilt
thou then do, if thou shalt be found with a naked soul, to meet
with the Cherubims with their flaming swords? yea, what wilt thou
then do, if Death and Hell shall come to visit thee, and thou in
thy sins, and under the Curse of the Law?

Atten.  This was honest and plain:  but what said Mr. Badman to
her?

Wise.  He did what he could to divert her talk, {151a} by throwing
in other things; he also shewed some kind of pity to her now, and
would ask her, What she would have? and with various kind of words
put her out of her talk; for when she see that she was not
regarded, she fetcht a deep sigh, and lay still.  So he went down,
and then she called for her Children, and began to talk to them.
And first she spake to those that were rude, {151b} and told them
the danger of dying before they had grace in their hearts.  She
told them also, that Death might be nearer them than they were
aware of; and bid them look, when they went through the Church-yard
again, if there was not little graves there.  And, ah children,
said she, will it not be dreadful to you, if we only shall meet at
the day of Judgment, and then part again, and never see each other
more?  And with that she wept, the Children (also) wept; so she
held on her discourse:  Children, said she, I am going from you, I
am going to Jesus Christ, and with him there is neither sorrow, nor
sighing, nor pain, nor tears, nor death. {151c}  Thither would I
have you go also, but I can neither carry you, nor fetch you
thither; but if you shall turn from your sins to God, and shall beg
mercy at his hands by Jesus Christ, you shall follow me, and shall,
when you dye, come to the place where I am going, that blessed
place of Rest:  and then we shall be for ever together, beholding
the face of our Redeemer, to our mutual and eternal joy.  So she
bid them remember the words of a dying mother when she was cold in
her grave, and themselves were hot in their sins, if perhaps her
words might put check to their vice, and that they might remember
and turn to God.

Then they all went down; but her {151d} Darling, to wit, the child
that she had most love for, because it followed her ways.  So she
addressed her self to that.  Come to me, said she, my sweet child,
thou art the child of my joy:  I have lived to see thee a Servant
of God; thou shalt have eternal life.  I, my sweet heart, shall goe
before, and thou shalt follow after; if thou shalt hold the
beginning of thy confidence stedfast to the end. {152a}  When I am
gone, do thou still remember my words, love thy Bible, follow my
Ministers, deny ungodliness still, and if troublous times shall
come, set an higher price upon Christ, his Word and Wayes, and the
testimony of a good conscience, than upon all the world besides.
Carry it kindly and dutifully to thy Father, but choose none of his
ways.  If thou mayest, goe to service, choose that, rather than to
stay at home; but then be sure to choose a service where thou
mayest be helped forwards in the way to heaven; and that thou
mayest have such a service, speak to my Minister, he will help
thee, if possible, to such an one.

I would have thee also, my dear child, to love thy Brothers and
Sisters, but learn none of their naughty tricks.  Have no
fellowship with the unfruitfull works of darkness, but rather
reprove them. {152b}  Thou hast Grace, they have none:  do thou
therefore beautifie the way of salvation before their eyes, by a
godly life, and conformable conversation to the revealed will of
God, that thy Brothers and Sisters may see and be the more pleased
with the good wayes of the Lord.

If thou shalt live to marry, take heed of being served as I was;
that is, of being beguiled with fair words, and the flatteries of a
lying tongue.  But first be sure of godliness.  Yea, as sure as it
is possible for one to be in this world:  trust not thine own eyes,
nor thine own Judgment; I mean as to that persons godliness that
thou art invited to marry.  Ask counsel of good men, and do nothing
therein, if he lives, without my Ministers advice.  I have also my
self desired him to look after thee.  Thus she talked to her
children, and gave them counsel, and after she had talked to this a
little longer, she kiss'd it, and bid it go down.

Well, in short, her time drew on, and the day that she must die.
So she {152c} died with a soul full of Grace, an heart full of
comfort, and by her death ended a life full of trouble.  Her
husband made a Funerall for her, perhaps because he was glad he was
rid of her, but we will leave that to be manifest at Judgment.

Atten.  This Woman died well:  And now we are talking of the dying
of Christians, I will tell you a story of one that died some time
since in our Town.  The man was a godly old Puritan, for so the
godly were called in time past.  This man after a long, and godly
life, fell sick, of the sickness, whereof he died.  And as he lay
drawing on, the woman that looked to him thought she heard Musick,
and that the sweetest that ever she heard in her life, which also
continued untill he gave up the Ghost:  {153a} now when his soul
departed from him, the Musick seemed to withdraw and to go further
and further off from the house, and so it went untill the sound was
quite gone out of hearing.

Wise.  What do you think that might be?

Atten.  For ought I know, the melodious Notes of Angels, that were
sent of God to fetch him to Heaven.

Wise.  I cannot say but that God goes out of his Ordinary Road with
us poor mortals sometimes.  I cannot say this of this woman, but
yet she had better musick in her heart than sounded in this womans
ears.

Atten.  I believe so; but pray tell me, did any of her other
children hearken to her words, so as to be bettered in their souls
thereby?

Wise.  One of them did, {153b} and became a very hopefull young
man:  but for the rest I can say nothing.

Atten.  And what did Badman do after his wife was dead?

Wise.  Why even as he did before, he scarce mourned a fortnight for
her, and his mourning then was, I doubt, more in fashion than in
heart.

Atten.  Would he not sometimes talk of his Wife, when she was dead?

Wise.  Yes, when the fit took him, and could commend her too
extremely; saying, she was a good, godly, vertuous woman.  But this
is not a thing to be wondred at:  It is common with wicked men, to
hate Gods Servants while alive, and to commend them when they are
dead.  So served the Pharisees the Prophets:  Those of the Prophets
that were dead, they commended; and those of them that were alive
they condemned. {153c}

Atten.  But did not Mr. Badman marry again quickly?

Wise.  No, not a good while after:  and when he was asked the
reason, he would make this slighty answer, Who would keep a Cow of
their own, that can have a quart of milk for a penny? {154a}
Meaning, Who would be at the charge to have a Wife, that can have a
Whore when he listeth?  So villanous, so abominable did he continue
after the death of his wife.  Yet at last there was one was too
hard for him.  For, getting of him to her upon a time, and making
of him sufficiently drunk, she was so cunning as to get a promise
of marriage of him, and so held him to it, and forced him to marry
her. {154b}  And she, as the saying is, was as good as he, {154c}
at all his vile and ranting tricks:  she had her companions as well
as he had his, and she would meet them too at the Tavern and Ale-
house, more commonly than he was aware of.  To be plain, she was a
very Whore, and had as great resort came to her, where time and
place was appointed, as any of them all.  Aie, and he smelt it too,
but could not tell how to help it.  For if he began to talk, she
could lay in his dish the whores that she knew he haunted, and she
could fit him also with cursing and swearing, for she would give
him Oath for Oath, and Curse for Curse.

Atten.  What kind of oaths would she have?

Wise.  Why damn her, and sink her, and the like.

Atten.  These are provoking things.

Wise.  So they are:  but God doth not altogether let such things
goe unpunished in this life.  Something of this I have shewed you
already, and will here give you one or two Instances more.

There lived, saith one, {154d} in the year 1551. in a city of
Savoy, a man who was a monstrous Curser and Swearer, and though he
was often admonished and blamed for it, yet would he by no means
mend his manners.  At length a great plague happening in the City,
he withdrew himself into a Garden, where being again admonished to
give over his wickedness, he hardned his heart more, Swearing,
Blaspheming God, and giving himself to the Devil:  And immediately
the Devil snatched him up suddenly, his wife and kinswoman looking
on, and carried him quite away.  The Magistrates advertised hereof,
went to the place and examined the Woman, who justified the truth
of it.

Also at Oster in the Dutchy of Magalapole, (saith Mr. Clark) a
wicked Woman, used in her cursing to give herself body and soul to
the Devil, and being reproved for it, still continued the same;
till (being at a Wedding-Feast) the Devil came in person, and
carried her up into the Air, with most horrible outcries and
roarings:  And in that sort carried her round about the Town, that
the Inhabitants were ready to dye for fear:  And by and by he tore
her in four pieces, leaving her four quarters in four several high-
wayes; and then brought her Bowels to the Marriage-feast, and threw
them upon the Table before the Maior of the Town, saying, Behold,
these dishes of meat belong to thee, whom the like destruction
waiteth for, if thou dost not amend thy wicked life.

Atten.  Though God forbears to deal thus with all men that thus
rend and tare his Name, and that immediate Judgments do not
overtake them; yet he makes their lives by other Judgments bitter
to them, does he not?

Wise.  Yes, yes.  And for proof, I need goe no further than to this
Badman and his wife; for their railing, and cursing, and swearing
ended not in words:  They would fight and fly at each other, and
that like Cats and Dogs.  But it must be looked upon as the hand
and Judgment of God upon him for his villany; he had an honest
woman before, but she would not serve his turn, and therefore God
took her away, and gave him one as bad as himself.  Thus that
measure that he meted to his first wife, this last did mete to him
again.  And this is a punishment, wherewith sometimes God will
punish wicked men.  So said Amos to Amaziah:  Thy wife shall be an
Harlot in the City. {155a}  With this last wife Mr. Badman lived a
pretty while; but, as I told you before, in a most sad and hellish
manner.  And now he would bewail his first wifes death:  not of
love that he had to her Godliness, for that he could never abide,
but for that she used alwayes to keep home, whereas this would goe
abroad; his first wife was also honest, and true to that Relation,
but this last was a Whore of her Body:  The first woman loved to
keep things together, but this last would whirl them about as well
as he:  The first would be silent when he chid, and would take it
patiently when he abused her, but this would give him word for
word, blow for blow, curse for curse; so that now Mr. Badman had
met with his match:  {156a} God had a mind to make him see the
baseness of his own life, in the wickedness of his wives. {156b}
But all would not do with Mr. Badman, he would be Mr. Badman still:
This Judgment did not work any reformation upon him, no, not to God
nor man.

Atten.  I warrant you that Mr. Badman thought when his wife was
dead, that next time he would match far better.

Wise.  What he thought I cannot tell, but he could not hope for it
in this match.  For here he knew himself to be catcht, he knew that
he was by this woman intangled, and would therefore have gone back
again, but could not.  He knew her, I say, to be a Whore before,
and therefore could not promise himself a happy life with her.  For
he or she that will not be true to their own soul, will neither be
true to husband nor wife.  And he knew that she was not true to her
own soul, and therefore could not expect she should be true to him
but Solomon says, An whore is a deep pit, and Mr. Badman found it
true.  For when she had caught him in her pit, she would never
leave him till she had got him to promise her Marriage; and when
she had taken him so far, she forced him to marry indeed.  And
after that, they lived that life that I have told you.

Atten.  But did not the neighbours take notice of this alteration
that Mr. Badman had made?

Wise.  Yes; and many of his Neighbours, yea, many of those that
were carnal said, {156c} 'Tis a righteous Judgment of God upon him,
for his abusive carriage and language to his other wife:  for they
were all convinced that she was a vertuous woman, and he, vile
wretch, had killed her, I will not say, with, but with the want of
kindness.

Atten.  And how long I pray did they live thus together?

Wise.  Some fourteen or sixteen years, even untill (though she also
brought somthing with her) they had sinned all away, and parted as
poor as Howlets. {156d}  And, in reason, how could it be otherwise?
he would have his way, and she would have hers; he among his
companions, and she among hers; he with his Whores, and she with
her Rogues; and so they brought their Noble to Nine-pence.

Atten.  Pray of what disease did Mr. Badman die, for now I perceive
we are come up to his death?

Wise.  I cannot so properly say that he died of one disease, {157a}
for there were many that had consented, and laid their heads
together to bring him to his end.  He was dropsical, he was
consumptive, he was surfeited, was gouty, and, as some say, he had
a tang of the Pox in his bowels.  Yet the Captain of all these men
of death that came against him to take him away, was the
Consumption, for 'twas that that brought him down to the grave.

Atten.  Although I will not say, but the best men may die of a
consumption, a dropsie, or a surfeit; yea, that these may meet upon
a man to end him:  yet I will say again, that many times these
diseases come through mans inordinate use of things.  Much drinking
brings dropsies, consumptions, surfeits, and many other diseases;
and I doubt, that Mr. Badman's death did come by his abuse of
himself in the use of lawfull and unlawfull things.  I ground this
my sentence upon that report of his life that you at large have
given me.

Wise.  I think verily that you need not call back your sentence;
for 'tis thought by many, that by his Cups and his Queans he
brought himself to this his destruction:  he was not an old man
when he dyed, nor was he naturally very feeble, but strong, and of
a healthy complexion:  Yet, as I said, he moultered away, and went,
when he set a going, rotten to his Grave.  And that which made him
stink when he was dead, I mean, that made him stink in his Name and
Fame, was, that he died with a spice of the foul disease upon him:
A man whose life was full of sin, and whose death was without
repentance.

Atten.  These were blemishes sufficient to make him stink indeed.

Wise.  They were so, and they did do it.  No man could speak well
of him when he was gone. {157b}  His Name rotted above ground, as
his Carkass rotted under.  And this is according to the saying of
the wise man:  The memory of the just is blessed, but the name of
the wicked shall rot. {157c}

This Text, in both the parts of it, was fulfilled upon him and the
woman that he married first.  For her Name still did flourish,
though she had been dead almost seventeen years; but his began to
stink and rot, before he had been buried seventeen dayes.

Atten.  That man that dieth with a life full of sin, and with an
heart void of repentance, although he should die of the most Golden
disease (if there were any that might be so called) I will warrant
him his Name shall stink, and that in Heaven and Earth.

Wise.  You say true; and therefore doth the name of Cain, Pharaoh,
Saul, Judas, and the Pharisees, though dead thousands of years
agoe, stink as fresh in the nostrils of the world as if they were
but newly dead.

Atten.  I do fully acquiesce with you in this.  But, Sir, since you
have charged him with dying impenitent, pray let me see how you
will prove it:  not that I altogether doubt it, because you have
affirmed it, but yet I love to have proof for what men say in such
weighty matters.

Wise.  When I said, he died without repentance, I meant, so far as
those that knew him, could judge, when they compared his Life, the
Word, and his Death together.

Atten.  Well said, they went the right way to find out whether he
had, that is, did manifest that he had repentance or no.  Now then
shew me how they did prove he had none?

Wise.  So I will:  And first, {158b} this was urged to prove it.
He had not in all the time of his sickness, a sight and sence of
his sins, but was as secure, and as much at quiet, as if he had
never sinned in all his life.

Atten.  I must needs confess that this is a sign he had none.  For
how can a man repent of that of which he hath neither sight nor
sence?  But 'tis strange that he had neither sight nor sence of sin
now, when he had such a sight and sence of his evil before:  I mean
when he was sick before.

Wise.  He was, as I said, as secure now, as if he had been as
sinless as an Angel; though all men knew what a sinner he was, for
he carried his Sins in his Forehead.  His debauched Life was read
and known of all men; but his Reputation was read and known of no
man; for, as I said, he had none.  And for ought I know, the reason
he had no sence of his sins now, was because he profited not by
that sence that he had of them before.  He liked not to retain that
knowledge of God then, that caused his sins to come to remembrance:
Therefore God gave him up now to a reprobate mind, to hardness and
stupidity of Spirit; and so was that Scripture fulfilled upon him,
He hath blinded their eyes.  And that, Let their eyes be darkned
that they may not see. {159a}  Oh! for a man to live in sin, and to
go out of the world without Repentance for it, is the saddest
Judgement that can overtake a man.

Atten.  But, Sir, although both you and I have consented that
{159b} without a sight and sence of sin there can be no Repentance,
yet that is but our bare Say-so; let us therefore now see if by the
Scripture we can make it good.

Wise.  That is easily done.  The three thousand that were
converted, (Acts the second,) repented not, till they had sight and
sence of their sins:  {159c} Paul repented not till he had sight
and sence of his sins:  the Jailor repented not till he had sight
and sence of his sins:  nor could they.  For of what should a man
repent?  The Answer is, of Sin.  What is it to Repent of sin?  The
answer is, To be sorry for it, to turn from it. {159d}  But how can
a man be sorry for it, that has neither sight nor sence of it.
David did, not only commit sins, but abode impenitent for them,
untill Nathan the Prophet was sent from God to give him a sight and
sence of them; {159e} and then, but not till then, he indeed
repented of them.  Job, in order to his Repentance, cries unto God,
Shew me wherefore thou contendest with me.  And again, That which I
see not teach thou me, I have born chastisement, I will not offend
any more:  {159f} That is, not in what I know, for I will repent of
it; nor yet in what I know not, when thou shalt shew me it.

Also Ephraims Repentance was after he was turned to the sight and
sence of his sins, and after he was instructed about the evil of
them. {159g}

Atten.  These are good testimonies of this truth, and doe (if
matter of fact, with which Mr. Badman is charged, be true), prove
indeed that he did not repent, but as he lived, so he dyed in his
sin:  For without Repentance a man is sure to dye in his sin; for
they will lie down in the dust with him, {160a} rise at the
Judgement with him, hang about his Neck like Cords and Chains when
he standeth at the Barre of Gods Tribunal, and goe with him too
when he goes away from the Judgment-seat, with a Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels; and there shall fret and gnaw his Conscience, because they
will be to him a never-dying worm. {160b}

Wise.  You say well, and I will add a word or two more to what I
have said:  Repentance, as it is not produced without a sight and
sence of sin, so every sight and sence of sin cannot produce it:  I
mean, every sight and sence of sin cannot {160c} produce that
Repentance, that is Repentance unto salvation; repentance never to
be repented of.  For it is yet fresh before us, that Mr. Badman had
a sight and sence of sin, in that fit of sickness that he had
before, but it dyed without procuring any such godly fruit; as was
manifest by his so soon returning with the Dog to his Vomit.  Many
people think also that Repentance stands in Confession of sin only,
but they are very much mistaken:  For Repentance, as was said
before, is a being sorry for, and a turning from transgression to
God by Jesus Christ.  Now, if this be true, that every sight and
sence of sin will not produce Repentance, then Repentance cannot be
produced there where there is no sight and sence of sin.  That
every sight and sence of sin will not produce repentance, to wit,
the godly repentance that we are speaking of, is manifest in Cain,
Pharaoh, Saul and Judas, who all of them had sence, great sence of
sin, but none of them repentance unto life.

Now I conclude, that Mr. Badman did die impenitent, and so a death
most miserable.

Atten.  But pray now, before we conclude our discourse of Mr.
Badman, give me another proof of his dying in his sins.

Wise.  Another proof is this. {160d}  He did not desire a sight and
sence of sins, that he might have repentance for them.  Did I say
he did not desire it, I will add, he greatly desired to remain in
his security:  and that I shall prove by that which follows.
First, he could not endure that any man, now, should talk to him of
his sinfull life, and yet that was the way to beget a sight and
sence of sin, and so of repentance from it in his soul.  But, I
say, he could not endure such discourse.  Those men that did offer
to talk unto him of his ill-spent Life, they were as little welcome
to him in the time of his last sickness, as was Elijah when he went
to meet with Ahab, as he went down to take possession of Naboths
Vineyard.  Hast thou found me, said Ahab, O mine enemy? {161a}  So
would Mr. Badman say in his heart to and of those that thus did
come to him, though indeed they came even of love, to convince him
of his evil life, that he might have repented thereof, and have
obtained mercy.

Atten.  Did good men then goe to see him in his last sickness?

Wise.  Yes:  Those that were his first wifes acquaintance, they
went to see him, and to talk with, and to him, if perhaps he might
now, at last, bethink himself, and cry to God for mercy.

Atten.  They did well to try now at last if they could save his
soul from Hell:  But pray how can you tell that he did not care for
the company of such?

Wise.  Because of the differing Carriage that he had for them, from
what he had when his old carnal companions came to see him:  When
his old Campanions came to see him, he would stir up himself as
much as he could both by words and looks, to signifie they were
welcome to him; he would also talk with them freely, and look
pleasantly upon them, though the talk of such could be none other
but such as David said, carnal men would offer to him, when they
came to visit him in his sickness:  If he comes to see me, says he,
he speaketh vanity, his heart gathereth iniquity to itself. {161b}
But these kind of talks, I say, Mr. Badman better brooked, than he
did the company of better men.

But I will more particularly give you a Character {161c} of his
carriage to good men (and good talk) when they came to see him.

1.  When they were come, he would seem to fail in his spirits at
the sight of them.

2.  He would not care to answer them to any of those questions that
they would at times put to him, to feel what sence he had of sin,
death, Hell, and Judgment:  But would either say nothing, or answer
them by way of evasion, or else by telling of them he was so weak
and spent that he could not speak much.

3.  He would never shew forwardness to speak to, or talk with them,
but was glad when they held their tongues.  He would ask them no
question about his state and another world, or how he should escape
that damnation that he had deserved.

4.  He had got a haunt at last to bid his wife and keeper, when
these good people attempted to come to see him, to tell them that
he was asleep or inclining to sleep, or so weak for want thereof,
that he could not abyde any noyse.  And so they would serve them
time after time, till at last they were discouraged from coming to
see him any more.

5.  He was so hardned, now, in this time of his sickness, that he
would talk, when his companions came unto him, to the disparagement
of those good men (and of their good doctrine too) that of love did
come to see him, and that did labour to convert him.

6.  When these good men went away from him, he would never say,
Pray when will you be pleased to come again, for I have a desire to
more of your company, and to hear more of your good instruction?
No not a word of that, but when they were going would scarce bid
them drink, or say, Thank you for your good company, and good
instruction.

7.  His talk in his sickness with his companions, would be of the
World, as Trades, Houses, Lands, great Men, great Titles, great
places, outward Prosperity, or outward Adversity, or some such
carnal thing.

By all which I conclude, that he did not desire a sence and sight
of his sin, that he might repent and be saved.

Atten.  It must needs be so as you say, if these things be true
that you have asserted of him.  And I do the rather believe them,
because I think you dare not tell a lie of the dead.

Wise.  I was one of them that went to him, and that beheld his
carriage and manner of way, and this is a true relation of it that
I have given you.

Atten.  I am satisfied.  But pray if you can, shew me now by the
Word, what sentence of God doth pass upon such men?

Wise.  Why, the man that is thus averse to repentance, that desires
not to hear of his sins, that he might repent and be saved; is said
to be a man that saith unto God, Depart from me, for I desire not
the knowledge of thy wayes. {163a}  He is a man that sayes in his
heart and with his actions, I have loved strangers, (sins) and
after them I will goe.  He is a man that shuts his eyes, stops his
ears, and that turneth his spirit against God.  Yea he is the man
that is at enmity with God, and that abhorres him with his soul.
{163b}

Atten.  What other signe can you give me that Mr. Badman died
without repentance?

Wise.  Why, he did never heartily cry to God for mercy all the time
of his affliction. {163c}  True, when sinking fits, stitches, or
pains took hold upon him, then he would say as other carnal men use
to do, Lord help me, Lord strengthen me, Lord deliver me, and the
like:  But to cry to God for mercy, that he did not, but lay, as I
hinted before, as if he never had sinned.

Atten.  That is another bad sign indeed; for crying to God for
mercy, is one of the first signs of repentance.  When Paul lay
repenting of his sin, upon his bed, the Holy Ghost said of him,
Behold he prayes. {163d}  But he that hath not the first signs of
repentance, 'tis a sign he hath none of the other, and so indeed
none at all.  I do not say, but there may be crying, where there
may be no sign of repentance.  They cryed, says David, to the Lord,
but he answered them not; {163e} but that he would have done, if
their cry had been the fruit of repentance.  But, I say, if men may
cry, and yet have no repentance, be sure, they have none, that cry
not at all.  It is said in Job, They cry not when he bindeth them;
{163f} that is, because they have no repentance; no repentance, no
cryes; false repentance, false cryes; true repentance, true cryes.

Wise.  I know that it is as possible for a man to forbear crying
that hath repentance, as it is for a man to forbear groaning that
feeleth deadly pain.  He that looketh into the Book of Psalms,
(where repentance is most lively set forth even in its true and
proper effects,) shall there find, that crying, strong crying,
hearty crying, great crying, and uncessant crying, hath been the
fruits of repentance:  (But none of this had this Mr. Badman,
therefore he dyed in his sins.)

That Crying is an inseparable effect of repentance, is seen in
these Scriptures.  Have mercy upon me, O God, according to the
multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions.  O
Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure.  Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak.  O Lord,
heal me for my bones are vexed.  My soul is also vexed, but thou, O
Lord, how long:  Return, O Lord, deliver my soul:  O save me for
thy mercies sake:  O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath, neither
chasten me in thy hot displeasure; for thine arrows stick fast in
me, and thy hand presseth me sore.  There is  no soundness in my
flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my
bones, because of my sin.  For mine iniquities are gone over mine
head, as an heavy burthen, they are too heavy for me.  My wounds
stink and are corrupt; because of my foolishness.  I am troubled, I
am bowed down greatly, I goe mourning all the day long.  My loyns
are filled with a loathsom disease, and there is no soundness in my
flesh.  I am feeble, and sore broken, I have roared by reason of
the disquietness of my heart. {164a}

I might give you a great number more of the holy sayings of good
men, whereby they express how they were, what they felt, and
whether they cryed or no, when repentance was wrought in them.
Alas, alas, it is as possible for a man, when the pangs of Guilt
are upon him to forbear praying, as it is for a woman when pangs of
travel are upon her to forbear crying.  If all the world should
tell me that such a man hath repentance, yet if he is not a praying
man, I should not be perswaded to believe it.

Atten.  I know no reason why you should:  for there is nothing can
demonstrate that such a man hath it.  But pray Sir, what other sign
have you, by which you can prove that Mr. Badman died in his sins,
and so in a state of damnation?

Wise.  I have this to prove it. {164b}  Those who were his old
sinfull companions in the time of his health, were those whose
company and carnal talk he most delighted in, in the time of his
sickness.  I did occasionally hint this before, but now I make it
an argument of his want of grace:  for where there is indeed a work
of Grace in the heart, that work doth not only change the heart,
thoughts and desires, but the conversation also; yea conversation
and company too.  When Paul had a work of grace in his soul, he
assayed to Joyn himself to the Disciples.  He was for his old
companions in their abominations no longer:  he was now a Disciple,
and was for the company of Disciples.  And he was with them coming
in and going out in Jerusalem. {165a}

Atten.  I thought something when I heard you make mention of it
before.  Thought I, this is a shrewd sign that he had not grace in
his heart.  Birds of a feather, thought I, will flock together:  If
this man was one of Gods children, he would heard with Gods
children, his delight would be with, and in the company of Gods
children.  As David said, I am a companion of all them that fear
thee, and of them that keep thy precepts. {165b}

Wise.  You say well, for what fellowship hath he that believeth
with an Infidel?  And although it be true, that all that joyn to
the godly are not godly, yet they that shall inwardly choose the
company of the ungodly and open profane, rather than the company of
the godly, as Mr. Badman did; surely are not godly men, but
profane.  He was, as I told you, out of his element, when good men
did come to visit him, but then he was where he would be, when he
had his vain companions about him.  Alas! grace, as I said,
altereth all, heart, life, company, and all; for by it the heart
and man is made new:  and a new heart, a new man, must have objects
of delight that are new, and like himself:  Old things are passed
away; Why?  For all things are become new. {165c}  Now if all
things are become new, to wit, heart, mind, thoughts, desires, and
delights, it followeth by consequence that the company must be
answerable:  hence it is said, That they that believed were
together; that they went to their own company; that they were added
to the Church; that they were of one heart and of one soul; {165d}
and the like.  Now if it be objected that Mr. Badman was sick, and
so could not goe to the godly, yet he had a tongue in his head, and
could, had he had an heart, have spoken to some to call or send for
the godly to come to him.  Yea, he would have done so; yea the
company of all others, specially his fellow sinners, would, even in
every appearance of them before him, have been a burden and a grief
unto him.  His heart and affection standing bent to good, good
companions would have suited him best.  But his Companions were his
old Associates, his delight was in them, therefore his heart and
soul were yet ungodly.

Atten.  Pray how was he when he drew near his end? for I perceive
that what you say of him now, hath reference to him, and to his
actions, at the beginning of his sickness?  Then he could endure
company, and much talk; besides, perhaps then he thought he should
recover and not die, as afterwards he had cause to think, when he
was quite wasted with pining sickness, when he was at the graves
mouth.  But how was he, I say, when he was (as we say) at the
graves mouth, within a step of death? when he saw, and knew, and
could not but know, that shortly he must dye, and appear before the
Judgment of God?

Wise.  Why {166a} there was not any other alteration in him, than
what was made by his disease upon his body:  sickness, you know,
will alter the body, also pains and stitches will make men groan;
but for his mind he had no alteration there.  His mind was the
same, his heart was the same.  He was the self-same Mr. Badman
still:  not onely in Name but Conditions, and that to the very day
of his death:  yea, so far as could be gathered to the very moment
in which he died.

Atten.  Pray how was he in his death? was Death strong upon him? or
did he dye with ease, quietly?

Wise.  As quietly as a {166b} Lamb.  There seemed not to be in it,
to standers by, so much as a strong struggle of Nature:  and as for
his Mind, it seemed to be wholly at quiet.  But pray why do you ask
me this question?

Atten.  Not for mine own sake, but for others.  For there is such
{166c} an opinion as this among the ignorant:  That if a man dies,
as they call it, like a Lamb, that is, quietly, and without that
consternation of mind that others shew in their death, they
conclude, and that beyond all doubt, that such an one is gone to
Heaven, and is certainly escaped the wrath to come.

Wise.  There is no Judgment to be made by a quiet death, of the
Eternal state of him that so dieth.  Suppose one man should die
quietly, another should die suddenly, and a third should die under
great consternation of spirit; no man can Judge of their eternall
condition by the manner of any of these kinds of deaths.  He that
dies quietly, suddenly, or under consternation of spirit, may goe
to Heaven, or may goe to Hell; no man can tell whether a man goes,
by any such manner of death.  The {167a} Judgment therefore that we
make of the eternall condition of a man must be gathered from
another consideration:  To wit, Did the man die in his sins? did he
die in unbelief? did he die before he was born again? then he is
gone to the Devil and hell, though he died never so quietly.
Again, Was the man a good man? had he faith and holiness? was he a
lover and a Worshipper of God by Christ, according to his Word?
Then he is gone to God and Heaven, how suddenly, or in what
consternation of mind soever he died:  But Mr. Badman was naught,
his life was evil, his wayes were evil; evil to his end:  he
therefore went to Hell and to the Devil, how quietly soever he
died.

Indeed there is, in some cases, a Judgment to be made of a mans
eternal condition by the manner of the death he dieth. {167b}  As
suppose now a man should murder himself, or live a wicked life, and
after that die in utter despair; these men without doubt do both of
them goe to Hell.  And here I will take an occasion to speak of two
of Mr. Badmans Brethren, (for you know I told you before that he
had Brethren,) and of the manner of their death.  One of them
killed himself, and the other after a wicked life died in utter
despair.  Now I should not be afraid to conclude of both these,
that they went by, and through their death to hell.

Atten.  Pray tell me concerning the first, how he made away
himself?

Wise.  Why, he took a knife and cut his own Throat, and immediately
gave up the Ghost and died.  Now what can we judge of such a mans
condition; since the Scripture saith, No murderer hath eternall
life, &c. but that it must be concluded, that such an one is gone
to Hell.  He was a murderer, a Self-murderer; and he is the worst
murderer, one that slays his own body and soul:  nor doe we find
mention made of any but cursed ones that doe such kind of deeds.  I
say, no mention made in holy Writ of any others, but such, that
murder themselves.

And this is the sore Judgment of God upon men, when God shall, for
the sins of such, give them up to be their own Executioners, or
rather to execute his Judgment and Anger upon themselves.  And let
me earnestly give this Caution to sinners.  Take heed, Sirs, break
off your sins, lest God serves you as he served Mr. Badmans
Brother:  That is, lest he gives you up to be your own Murderers.

Atten.  Now you talk of this.  I did once know a man, {168a} a
Barber, that took his own Raisor, and cut his own Throat, and then
put his head out of his Chamber-window, to shew the neighbours what
he had done, and after a little while died.

Wise.  I can tell you {168b} a more dreadful thing than this:  I
mean as to the manner of doing the fact. {168c}  There was about
twelve years since, a man that lived at Brafield by Northampton,
(named John Cox) that murdered himself; the manner of his doing of
it was thus.  He was a poor man, and had for some time been sick
(and the time of his sickness was about the beginning of Hay-time;)
and taking too many thoughts how he should live afterwards, if he
lost his present season of work, he fell into deep despair about
the world, and cryed out to his wife the morning before he killed
himself, saying, We are undone.  But quickly after, he desired his
wife to depart the room, Because, said he, I will see if I can get
any rest; so she went out:  but he instead of sleeping, quickly
took his Raisor, and therewith cut up a great hole in his side, out
of which he pulled, and cut off some of his guts, and threw them,
with the blood up and down the Chamber.  But this not speeding of
him so soon as he desired, he took the same Raisor and therewith
cut his own throat.  His wife then hearing of him sigh and fetch
his wind short, came again into the room to him, and seeing what he
had done, she ran out and called in some Neighbours, who came to
him where he lay in a bloody manner, frightfull to behold.  Then
said one of them to him, Ah! John, what have you done? are you not
sorry for what you have done?  He answered roughly, 'Tis too late
to be sorry.  Then said the same person to him again, Ah! John,
pray to God to forgive thee this bloody act of thine.  At the
hearing of which Exhortation, he seemed much offended, and in angry
manner said, Pray! and with that flung himself away to the wall,
and so after a few gasps died desperately.  When he had turned him
of his back, to the wall, the blood ran out of his belly as out of
a boul, and soaked quite through the bed to the boards, and through
the chinks of the boards it ran pouring down to the ground.  Some
said, that when the neighbours came to see him, he lay groaping
with his hand in his bowels, reaching upward, as was thought, that
he might have pulled or cut out his heart.  'Twas said also, that
some of his Liver had been by him torn out and cast upon the
boards, and that many of his guts hung out of the bed on the side
thereof.  But I cannot confirm all particulars; but the general of
the story, with these circumstances above mentioned, is true; I had
it from a sober and credible person, who himself was one that saw
him in this bloody state, and that talked with him, as was hinted
before.

Many other such dreadful things might be told you, but these are
enough, and too many too, if God in his wisdom had thought
necessary to prevent them.

Atten.  This is a dreadful Story:  and I would to God that it might
be a warning to others to instruct them to fear before God, and
pray, lest he gives them up to doe as John Cox hath done.  For
surely self-murderers cannot goe to Heaven:  and therefore, as you
have said, he that dieth by his own hands, is certainly gone to
Hell.  But speak a word or two of the other man you mentioned.

Wise.  What? of a wicked man dying in Despair?

Atten.  Yes, of a wicked man dying in despair.

Wise.  Well then:  {169a} This Mr. Badmans other Brother was a very
wicked man, both in Heart and Life; I say in Heart, because he was
so in Life, nor could anything reclaim him; neither good Men, good
Books, good Examples, nor Gods Judgements.  Well, after he had
lived a great while in his sins, God smote with a sickness of which
he died.  Now in his sickness his Conscience began to be awakened,
and he began to roar out of his ill-spent Life, insomuch that the
Town began to ring of him.  Now when it was noysed about, many of
the Neighbours came to see him, and to read by him, as is the
common way with some; but all that they could doe, {170a} could not
abate his terror, but he would lie in his Bed gnashing of his
teeth, and wringing of his wrists, concluding upon the Damnation of
his Soul, and in that horror and despair he dyed; not calling upon
God, but distrusting in his Mercy, and Blaspheming of his Name.

Atten.  This brings to my mind a man that a Friend of mine told me
of. {170b}  He had been a wicked liver; so when he came to die, he
fell into despair, and having concluded that God had no mercy for
him he addressed himself to the Devil for favour, saying, Good
Devil be good unto me.

Wise.  This is almost like Saul, who being forsaken of God, went to
the Witch of Endor, and so to the Devil for help. {170c}  But alas,
should I set my self to collect these dreadful Stories, it would be
easie in little time to present you with hundreds of them:  But I
will conclude as I began; They that are their own Murderers, or
that die in Despair, after they have lived a life of wickedness, do
surely go to Hell.

And here I would put in a Caution:  Every one that dieth under
consternation of spirit; that is, under amazement and great fear,
do not therefore die in Despair:  For a good man may have this for
his bands in his death, and yet go to Heaven and Glory.  For, as I
said before, He that is a good man, a man that hath Faith and
Holiness, a lover and Worshipper of God by Christ, according to his
Word, may die in consternation of spirit:  for Satan will not be
wanting to assault good men upon their death-bed, but they are
secured by the Word and Power of God; yea, and are also helped,
though with much agony of spirit, to exercise themselves in Faith
and Prayer, the which he that dieth in Despair, can by no means
doe.  But let us return to Mr. Badman, and enter further Discourse
of the manner of his Death.

Atten.  I think you and I are both of a mind; for just now I was
thinking to call you back to him also.  And pray now, since it is
your own motion to return again to him, let us discourse a little
more of his quiet and still death.

Wise.  With all my heart.  You know we were speaking before of the
manner of Mr. Badmans death:  {171a} How that he dyed very stilly
and quietly; upon which you made observation, that the common
people conclude, that if a man dyes quietly, and as they call it,
like a Lamb, he is certainly gone to Heaven:  when alas, if a
wicked man dyes quietly, if a man that has all his dayes lived in
notorious sin, dyeth quietly; his quiet dying is so far off from
being a sign of his being saved, that it is an uncontrollable proof
of his damnation.  This was Mr. Badmans case, he lived wickedly
even to the last, and then went quietly out of the world:
therefore Mr. Badman is gone to Hell.

Att.  Well, but since you are upon it, and also so confident in it,
to wit, that a man that lives a wicked life till he dyes, and then
dyes quietly, is gone to Hell; let me see hat shew of proof you
have for this your opinion.

Wise.  My first argument is drawn from the Necessity of repentance:
No man can be saved except he repents, nor can he repent that sees
not, that knows not that he is a sinner, and he that knows himself
to be a sinner, will, I will warrant him, be molested for the time
by that knowledge. {171b}  This, as it is testified by all the
Scriptures, so it is testified by Christian experience.  He that
knows of himself to be a sinner, is molested, especially if that
knowledge comes not to him untill he is cast upon his death-bed;
molested, I say, before he can dye quietly.  Yea, he is molested,
dejected and cast down, he is also made to cry out, to hunger and
thirst after mercy by Christ, and if at all he shall indeed come to
die quietly, I mean with that quietness that is begotten by Faith
and Hope in Gods mercy (to the which Mr. Badman and his brethren
were utter strangers,) his quietness is distinguished by all
Judicious observers, by what went before it, by what it flows from,
and also by what is the fruit thereof.

I must confess I am no admirer of sick-bed repentance, for I think
verily it is seldom {171c} good for any thing:  but I say, he that
hath lived in sin and profaneness all his dayes, as Mr. Badman did,
and yet shall dye quietly, that is, without repentance steps in
'twixt his life and death, he is assuredly gone to Hell, and is
damned.

Atten.  This does look like an argument indeed; for Repentance must
come, or else we must goe to Hell-fire:  and if a lewd liver shall
(I mean that so continues till the day of his death), yet goe out
of the world quietly, 'tis a sign that he died without repentance,
and so a sign that he is damned.

Wise.  I am satisfied in it, for my part, and that from the
Necessity, and Nature of repentance.  It is necessary, because God
calls for it, and will not pardon sin without it:  Except ye repent
ye shall all likewise perish.  This is that which God hath said,
and he will prove but a fool-hardy man that shall yet think to goe
to Heaven and glory without it.  Repent, for the Ax is laid to the
root of the tree, every tree therefore that bringeth not forth good
fruit, (but no good fruit can be where there is not sound
repentance) shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire. {172a}
This was Mr. Badmans case, he had attending of him a sinfull life,
and that to the very last, and yet dyed quietly, that is, without
repentance; he is gone to Hell and is damned.  For the Nature of
repentance, I have touched upon that already, and shewed, that it
never was where a quiet death is the immediate companion of a
sinfull life; and therefore Mr. Badman is gone to Hell.

Secondly, {172b} My second argument is drawn from that blessed Word
of Christ, While the strong man armed keeps the house, his goods
are in peace, till a stronger than he comes:  but the strong man
armed kept Mr. Badmans house, that is, his heart, and soul, and
body, for he went from a sinfull life quietly, out of this world:
the stronger did not disturb by intercepting with sound repentance,
betwixt his sinful life and his quiet death:  Therefore Mr. Badman
is gone to Hell.

The strong man armed is the Devil, and quietness is his security.
The Devil never fears losing of the sinner, if he can but keep him
quiet:  can he but keep him quiet in a sinfull life, and quiet in
his death, he is his own.  Therefore he saith, his goods are in
peace; that is, out of danger.  There is no fear of the Devils
losing such a soul, I say, because Christ, who is the best Judge in
this matter, saith, his goods are in peace, in quiet, and out of
danger.

Atten.  This is a good one too; {173a} for doubtless, peace and
quiet with sin, is one of the greatest signs of a damnable state.

Wise.  So it is.  Therefore, when God would shew the greatness of
his anger against sin and sinners in one word, he saith, They are
joyned to Idols, let them alone. {173b}  Let them alone, that is,
disturb them not; let them goe on without controll; let the Devil
enjoy them peaceably, let him carry them out of the world
unconverted quietly.  This is one of the sorest of Judgments, and
bespeaketh the burning anger of God against sinfull men.  See also
when you come home, the fourteenth Verse of the Chapter last
mentioned in the Margent:  I will not punish your daughters when
they commit Whoredom.  I will let them alone, they shall live and
dye in their sins.  But,

Thirdly, My third argument {173c} is drawn from that saying of
Christ:  He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts;
that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their
hearts, and be converted, and I should heal them. {173d}

There are three things that I will take notice of from these words.

1.  The first is, That there can be no conversion to God where the
eye is darkned, and the heart hardened.  The eye must first be made
to see, and the heart to break and relent under and for sin, or
else there can be no conversion.  He hath blinded their eyes, and
hardned their hearts, lest they should see, and understand and (So)
be converted.  And this was clearly Mr. Badmans case, he lived a
wicked life, and also died with his eyes shut, and heart hardened,
as is manifest, in that a sinful life was joyned with a quiet
death; and all for that he should not be converted, but partake of
the fruit of his sinfull life in Hell fire.

2.  The second thing that I take notice of from these words is,
That this is a dispensation and manifestation of Gods anger against
a man for his sin.  When God is angry with men, I mean, when he is
so angry with them, this among many is one of the Judgments that he
giveth them up unto, to wit, to blindness of mind, and hardness of
heart, which he also suffereth to accompany them till they enter in
at the gates of death.  And then, and there, and not short of then
and there, their eyes come to be opened.  Hence it is said of the
rich man mentioned in Luke, He dyed, and in Hell he lifted up his
eyes:  {174a} Implying that he did not lift them up before:  He
neither saw what he had done, nor whither he was going, till he
came to the place of execution, even into Hell.  He died asleep in
his soul; he dyed bespotted, stupified, and so consequently for
quietness, like a Child or Lamb, even as Mr. Badman did:  this was
a sign of Gods anger; he had a mind to damn him for his sins, and
therefore would not let him see nor have an heart to repent for
them, lest he should convert, and his damnation, which God had
appointed, should be frustrate:  lest they should be converted, and
I should heal them.

3.  The third thing that I take notice of from hence, is, That a
sinfull life and a quiet death annexed to it, is the ready, the
open, the beaten, the common high-way to Hell:  there is no surer
sign of Damnation, than for a man to dye quietly after a sinfull
life.  I do not say that all wicked men, that are molested at their
death with a sence of sin and fears of Hell, do therefore goe to
Heaven, (for some are also made to see, and are left to despair
(not converted by seeing) that they might go roaring out of this
world to their place:)  But I say, there is no surer sign of a mans
Damnation, than to dye quietly after a sinful life; than to sin,
and dye with his eyes shut; than to sin, and dye with an heart that
cannot repent.  He hath blinded their eyes and hardened their
heart, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand
with their heart; (no, not so long as they are in this world) lest
they should see with their eyes, and understand with their heart,
and should be converted, and I should heal them. {174b}

God has a Judgment for wicked men; God will be even with wicked
men:  God knows how to reserve the ungodly to the day of Judgment
to be punished:  {174c} And this is one of his wayes by which he
doth it.  Thus it was with Mr. Badman.

4.  Fourthly, {174d} It is said in the Book of Psalms, concerning
the wicked, There is no bands in their death, but their strength is
firm.  By no bands, he means no troubles, no gracious
chastisements, no such corrections for sin as fall to be the Lot of
Gods people for theirs; yea, that many times falls to be theirs, at
the time of their death.  Therefore he adds concerning the wicked,
They are not troubled (then) like other men, neither are they
plagued like other men; but go as securely out of the world, as if
they had never sinned against God, and put their own souls into
danger of damnation.  There is no band in their death.  They seem
to go unbound, and set at liberty, out of this world, though they
have lived notoriously wicked all their dayes in it.  The Prisoner
that is to dye at the Gallows for his wickedness, must first have
his Irons knock't off his legs; so he seems to goe most at liberty,
when indeed he is going to be executed for his transgressions.
Wicked men also have no bands in their death, they seem to be more
at liberty when they are even at the Wind-up of their sinfull life,
than at any time besides.

Hence you shall have them boast of their Faith and Hope in Gods
Mercy, when they lye upon their death-bed; yea, you shall have them
speak as confidently of their salvation, as if they had served God
all their dayes:  when the truth is, the bottom of this their
boasting is, because they have no bands in their death.

Their sin and base life comes not into their mind to correct them,
and bring them to repentance; but presumptuous thoughts, and an
hope and faith of the Spiders (the Devils) making, possesseth their
soul, to their own eternal undoing. {175a}

Hence wicked mens hope, is said to dye, not before, but with them;
they give up the Ghost together.  And thus did Mr. Badman.  His
sins and his hope went with him to the Gate, but there his hope
left him, because it dyed there; but his sins went in with him, to
be a worm to gnaw him in his conscience for ever and ever.

The opinion therefore of the common people concerning this kind of
dying, is {175b} frivolous and vain; for Mr. Badman died like a
Lamb, or as they call it, like a Chrisom child, quietly and without
fear.  I speak not this with reference to the strugling of nature
with death, but as to the strugling of the conscience with the
Judgment of God.  I know that Nature will struggle with death.  I
have seen a Dog and Sheep dye hardly:  And thus may a wicked man
doe, because there is an antipathy betwixt nature and death.  But
even while, even then, when Death and Nature are strugling for
mastery, the soul, the conscience, may be as besotted, as benummed,
as senceless and ignorant of its miserable state, as the block or
bed on which the sick lyes:  And thus they may dye like a Chrisom
child in shew, but indeed like one who by the Judgment of God is
bound over to eternal damnation; and that also by the same Judgment
is kept from seeing what they are, and whither they are going, till
they plunge down among the flames.

And as it is a very great Judgment of God on wicked men that so
dye, (for it cuts them off from all possibility of repentance, and
so of salvation) {176a} so it is as great a Judgment upon those
that are their companions that survive them.  For by the manner of
their death, they dying so quietly, so like unto chrisom children,
as they call it, they are hardened, and take courage to go on in
their course.

For comparing their life with their death, their sinful cursed
lives with their child-like, Lamb-like death, they think that all
is well, that no damnation is happened to them; Though they lived
like Devils incarnate, yet they dyed like harmless ones.  There was
no whirl-wind, no tempest, no band, nor plague in their death:
They dyed as quietly as the most godly of them all, and had as
great faith and hope of salvation, and would talk as boldly of
salvation as if they had assurance of it.  But as was their hope in
life, so was their death:  Their hope was without tryal, because it
was none of Gods working, and their death was without molestation,
because so was the Judgment of God concerning them.

But I say, at this their survivors take heart to tread their steps,
and to continue to live in the breach of the Law of God; yea they
carry it statelily in their villanies; for so it follows in the
Psalm.  There is no bands in their death, but their strength is
firm, &c.  Therefore pride compasseth them (the survivors) about as
a chain, violence covereth them as a garment. {176b}  Therefore
they take courage to do evil, therefore they pride themselves in
their iniquity.  Therefore, Wherefore?  Why, because their fellows
died, after they had lived long in a most profane and wicked life,
as quietly and as like to Lambs, as if they had been innocent.

Yea, they are bold, by seeing this, to conclude, that God, either
does not, or will not take notice of their sins.  They speak
wickedly, they speak loftily.  They speak wickedly of sin, for that
they make it better than by the Word it is pronounced to be.  They
speak wickedly concerning oppression, that they commend, and count
it a prudent act.  They also speak loftily:  They set their mouth
against the Heavens, &c.  And they say, How doth God know, and is
there knowledge in the most High?  And all this, so far as I can
see, ariseth in their hearts from the beholding of the quiet and
lamb-like death of their companions. {177a}

Behold these are the ungodly that prosper in the world, {177b}
(that is, by wicked ways) they increase in riches.

This therefore is a great Judgment of God, both upon that man that
dyeth in his sins, and also upon his companion that beholdeth him
so to dye.  He sinneth, he dyeth in his sins, and yet dyeth
quietly.  What shall his companion say to this?  What Judgment
shall he make how God will deal with him, by beholding the lamb-
like death of his companion?  Be sure, he cannot, as from such a
sight say, Wo be to me, for Judgment is before him:  He cannot
gather, that sin is a dreadful and a bitter thing, by the child-
like death of Mr. Badman.  But must rather, if he judgeth according
to what he sees, or according to his corrupted reason, conclude
with the wicked ones of old, That every one that doth evil, is good
in the sight of the Lord, and he delighteth in them; or where is
the God of Judgment? {177c}

Yea, this is enough to puzzle the wisest man.  David himself, was
put to a stand, by beholding the quiet death of ungodly men.
Verily, sayes he, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and have washed
my hands in innocency.  Psal. 73. 13.  They, to appearance fare
better by far than I:  Their eyes stand out with fatness, they have
more than heart can wish; But all the day long have I been plagued,
and chastned every morning.  This, I say, made David wonder, yea,
and Job and Jeremiah too:  But he goeth into the Sanctuary, and
then he understands their end, nor could he understand it before.
I went into the Sanctuary of God:  What place was that? why there
where he might enquire of God, and by him be resolved of this
matter:  Then, says he, understood I their end.  Then I saw, that
thou hast set them in slippery places, and that thou castest them
down to destruction.  Castest them down, that is, suddenly, or as
the next words say, As in a moment they are utterly consumed with
terrors:  which terrors did not cease them on their sick-bed, for
they had no bands in their death.  The terrors therefore ceased
them there, where also they are holden in them for ever.  This he
found out, I say, but not without great painfulness, grief and
pricking in his reins:  so deep, so hard and so difficult did he
find it, rightly to come to a determination in this matter.

And indeed, this is a deep Judgment of God towards ungodly sinners;
it is enough to stagger a whole world, only the Godly that are in
the world have a Sanctuary to go to, where the Oracle and Word of
God is, by which his Judgements, and a reason of many of them are
made known to, and understood by them.

Atten.  Indeed this is a staggering dispensation.  It is full of
the wisdom and anger of God.  And I believe, as you have said, that
it is full of Judgment to the world.  Who would have imagined, that
had not known Mr. Badman, and yet had seen him die, but that he had
been a man of an holy life and conversation, since he died so
stilly, so quietly, so like a Lamb or Chrisom child?  Would they
not, I say, have concluded, that he was a righteous man? or that if
they had known him and his life, yet to see him die so quietly,
would they not have concluded that he had made his peace with God?
Nay further, if some had known that he had died in his sins, and
yet that he died so like a Lamb, would they not have concluded,
that either God doth not know our sins, or that he likes them; or
that he wants power, or will, or heart, or skill to punish them;
since Mr. Badman himself went from a sinfull life so quietly, so
peaceably, and so like a Lamb as he did?

Wise.  Without controversie, this is an heavy judgment of God upon
wicked men; (Job 21. 23) one goes to Hell in peace, another goes to
Hell in trouble; one goes to Hell being sent thither by his own
hands; another goes to Hell, being sent thither by the hand of his
companion; one goes thither with his eyes shut, and another goes
thither with his eyes open; one goes thither roaring, and another
goes thither boasting of Heaven and Happiness all the way he goes:
One goes thither like Mr. Badman himself, and others go thither as
did his Brethren.  But above all, Mr. Badmans death, as to the
manner of dying, is the fullest of Snares and Traps to wicked men;
therefore they that die as he, are the greatest stumble to the
world:  They goe, and goe, they go on peaceably from Youth to old
Age, and thence to the Grave, and so to Hell, without noyse:  They
goe as an Ox to the slaughter, and as a fool to the correction of
the Stocks; that is, both sencelesly and securely.  O! but being
come at the gates of Hell!  O! but when they see those gates set
open for them:  O! but when they see that that is their home, and
that they must go in thither, then their peace and quietness flies
away for ever:  Then they roar like Lions, yell like Dragons, howl
like Dogs, and tremble at their Judgment, as do the Devils
themselves.  Oh! when they see they must shoot the Gulf and Throat
of Hell! when they shall see that Hell hath shut her ghastly Jaws
upon them! when they shall open their eyes, and find themselves
within the belly and bowels of Hell! then they will mourn, and
weep, and hack, and gnash their teeth for pain.  But this must not
be (or if it must, yet very rarely) till they are gone out of the
sight and hearing of those mortals whom they do leave behind them
alive in the world.

Atten.  Well, my good Neighbour Wiseman, I perceive that the Sun
grows low, and that you have come to a conclusion with Mr. Badmans
Life and Death; and therefore I will take my leave of you.  Only
first, let me tell you, I am glad that I have met with you to day,
and that our hap was to fall in with Mr. Badmans state.  I also
thank you for your freedom with me, in granting of me your reply to
all my questions:  I would only beg your Prayers; that God will
give me much grace, that I may neither live nor die as did Mr.
Badman.

Wise.  My good Neighbour Attentive, I wish your welfare in Soul and
Body; and if ought that I have said of Mr.  Badmans Life and-Death,
may be of Benefit unto you, I shall be heartily glad; only I desire
you to thank God for it, and to pray heartily for me, that I with
you may be kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation.

Atten.  Amen.  Farewell.

Wise.  I wish you heartily Farewell.



MARGIN NOTES



(General note.  When Mr. Badman was printed much of the text was
annotated with notes in the margins.  These are unlike our modern
footnotes in that they may apply to a range of text rather than at
a single point.  However, in this Project Gutenberg eText it has
not been possible to reproduce the margin notes as such and hence
they have been turned into footnotes.  The footnote numbering isn't
strictly consecutive but rather is the page the margin note appears
on followed by a single letter.--DP)

{1a}  In this Project Gutenberg eText italics have been dropped as
they are excessive but otherwise the text, complete with
capitalisation, punctuation, spelling etc., is as in the edition
transcribed.--DP

{1b}  Not included in this Project Gutenberg eText as we have
already released "The Holy War."--DP

{1c}  John Brown, D.D.

{2a}  The symbol used in the original book (a hand pointing) cannot
be reproduced.  In this Project Gutenberg eText it will therefore
be rended as a footnote:  NOTE.--DP

{20a}  Original sin is the root of Actual transgressions.

{20b}  Mark 7.

{21a}  Job 11. 12.  Ezek. 16.  Exod. 13. 13.  Chap. 34. 20.

{21b}  Rom. 5.

{21c}  Badman addicted to Lying from a child.

{21d}  A Lie knowingly told demonstrates that the heart is
desperately hard.

{22a}  The Lyers portion.  Rev. 21. 8. 27.  Chap. 22. 15.

{22b}  Prov. 22. 15.  Chap. 23. 13, 14.

{22c}  Joh. 8. 44.

{22d}  The Devils Brat.

{22e}  Acts 5. 3, 4.

{22f}  The Father and Mother of a Lie.

{23a}  Mark.

{23b}  Some will tell a Lie for a Peny profit.

{23c}  An Example for Lyers.  Acts 5.

{24a}  A Spirit of Lying accompanyed with other sins.

{24b}  Badman given to pilfer.

{24c}  Badman would rob his Father.

{24d}  Exod. 20. 15.

{25a}  Zech. 5. 3.

{25b}  Jer. 2. 26.  How Badman did use to carry it when his Father
used to chide him for his sins.

{25c}  Badman more firmly knit to his Companions than either to
Father or Mother.

{25d}  Badman would rejoyce to think that his Parents death were at
hand.

{26a}  1 Sam. 2. 25.

{26b}  Badman counted his thieving no great matter.

{26c}  NOTE.

{26d}  The Story of old Tod.

{26e}  Young Thieves takes notice.

{27a}  NOTE.

{27b}  Old Tod began his way to the Gallows by robbing of Orchards
and the like.

{28a}  Badman could not abide the Lords Day.

{28b}  Why Badman could not abide the Lords Day.

{29a}  God proves the heart what it is, by instituting of the Lords
day, and setting it apart to his service.

{29b}  Gen. 2. 2.  Exod. 31. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.  Mar. 16. 1.  Acts
20. 7.  1 Cor. 16. 1, 2.  Mar. 2. 27, 28.  Revel. 1. 10.

{29c}  Isa. 5. 8, 13.--Could not see where this fits in the text.--
DP

{29d}  Chap. 56. 2.

{29e}  Amos 8. 5.

{30a}  Heb.  4. 9.

{30b}  How Badman did use to spend the Lords Day.

{30c}  Ephes. 5. 6.

{31a}  Badman given to Swearing and Cursing.

{31b}  Rom. 6. 13.

{31c}  Swearing and Cursing a badge of Mr. Badmans honour.

{31d}  Difference betwixt Swearing and Cursing.

{31e}  What Swearing is.

{32a}  Exod. 20. 7.

{32b}  A man may sin in swearing to a truth.  Jer. 5. 2.

{32c}  He that swears to a Lie, concludes that God is as wicked as
himself.

{32d}  Zech. 5. 3.  Jer. 7. 9.  Hos. 4. 2, 3.

{33a}  Six Causes of vain Swearing.

{33b}  Jam. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9.

{34a}  How Cursing is distinguished from Swearing.

{34b}  Of Cursing, what it is.

{34c}  2 Sam. 16. 6, 7, 8.

{34d}  1 King. 2. 8.

{34e}  How the profane ones of our times Curse.

{35a}  Job 30. 31.

{35b}  Badmans way of Cursing.

{35c}  The Damme Blade.

{35d}  Badman would curse his Father, &c.

{35e}  Badman would curse his Fathers Cattel.

{36a}  Job 15.  Eccles. 7. 22.

{36b}  Four causes of Cursing.

{36c}  The dishonour it brings to God.

{36d}  Jam. 3. 9.

{37a}  Swearing and Cursing, are sins against the light of Nature.

{37b}  Gen. 31.

{37c}  Examples of Gods anger against them that Swear and Curse.

{37d}  NOTE.

{38a}  NOTE.

{40a}  Psal. 109. 17,18.

{40b}  A grievous thing to bring up Children wickedly.

{41a}  Badman put to be an Apprentice.

{41b}  Young Badmans Master, and his qualifications.

{42a}  A bad Master, a bad thing.

{42b}  How many ways a Master may be the ruin of an Apprentice.

{43a}  Children are great observers of what older folks doe.

{43b}  1 Sam. 2.

{43c}  Badman had all advantages to be good, but continued Badman
still.

{43d}  All good things abominable to Badman.

{44a}  Good counsel to Badman like Little-Ease.  Prov. 9. 8.  Chap.
15. 12.

{44b}  How Badman used to behave himself at Sermons.

{45a}  NOTE.

{45b}  The desperate words of one H. S. who once was my Companion.
He was own bother to Ned, of whom you read before.

{45c}  Job 21. 14.  Zech. 1. 11, 12, 13.

{45d}  Zech. 7. 13.

{46a}  Gen. 21. 9, 10.  2 King. 2. 23, 24.

{46b}  Badmans Acquaintance.

{46c}  A Sign of Gods Anger.

{46d}  Rom. 1. 28.

{46e}  Psal. 125. 5.

{46f}  2 Thess. 2. 10, 11, 12.

{47a}  Prov. 12. 20.

{47b}  The Devils Decoys.

{47c}  Prov. 1. 29.

{47d}  NOTE.

{47e}  This was done at Bedford.

{48a}  Prov. 7. 12, 13.

{48b}  Prov. 5. 11.

{48c}  2 Pet. 2. 12, 13.

{48d}  Badman becomes a frequenter of Taverns.

{48e}  NOTE.

{48f}  A Story for a Drunkard.

{49a}  Four evils attend drunkenness.

{49b}  Prov. 23. 20, 21.

{49c}  Eccles. 7. 17.

{49d}  Prov. 23. 29, 30.

{50a}  1 Cor. 6. 10.

{50b}  The fifth evil the worst.

{50c}  Prov. 23. 34, 35.

{50d}  An Objection answered.

{50e}  Habak. 2, 9, 10, 11, 12.  Ver. 5, 15.

{51a}  Badmans Masters Purse paid for his drunkenness.

{51b}  A Caution for Masters.

{51c}  NOTE.

{52a}  NOTE.

{52b}  Badmans third companion addicted to Uncleanness.

{52c}  Sins of great men dangerous.

{53a}  Prov. 5. 8.

{53b}  Chap. 7. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

{53c}  Signs of a whore.

{54a}  The sin of Uncleanness cried out against.

{54b}  What evils attend this sin.  Prov. 6. 26.

{54c}  Gen. 38. 18.

{54d}  Prov. 31. 1, 2.

{54e}  NOTE.

{54f}  A Story for unclean persons to take notice of.

{55a}  More evils attend this sin.

{55b}  NOTE.

{55c}  Job 31. 1, 2, 3.

{56a}  Prov. 6. 33.

{56b}  NOTE.

{57a}  NOTE.

{57b}  NOTE.

{58c}  Prov.  6. 26.

{59a}  Chap.  23. 27.  Prov.  2. 18, 19.  Chap. 7. 25, 26, 27.

{59b}  Prov.  22. 14.

{59c}  Ephes.  5. 5.

{59d}  NOTE.

{59e}  Desperate words.

{59a}  NOTE.

{59b}  Gen. 39. 10.

{59c}  Of chaste Joseph.

{60a}  Many are made whores by promises of Marriage, &c.

{60b}  Clarks Looking-glass for Sinners, Chap. 2. Pag. 12.

{60c}  Badman and his Master abhor one another.

{60d}  Prov.  29. 27.

{61a}  Young Badman runs away from his Master.

{61b}  He gets a new Master like himself.

{61c}  A sign of Gods anger upon young Badman.

{62a}  Demonstration of Gods anger towards him.

{62b}  Gen. 18. 18, 19.

{62c}  Psal.  7. 14.

{62d}  Jam.  1. 15.

{63a}  It concerns Parents to put their Children into good
Families.

{63b}  Masters should also beware what Servants they entertain.

{63c}  Young Badman and his second Master cannot agree.

{63d}  Acts 16. 16.

{63e}  Reasons of their disagreeing.

{64a}  Acts 16. 17, 18, 19, 20.

{64b}  Ro. 14. 22.

{64c}  Bad Masters condemn themselves when they for badness beat
their Bad servants.

{64d}  1 King. 16. 7.

{65a}  Why young Badman did not run away from this Master though he
did beat him.

{65b}  Why Badman could bear his last Masters reproof better than
he could the first.

{65c}  By what means Badman came to be compleated in his
wickedness.

{66a}  Badman out of his time.

{66b}  He goes home to his Father.

{66c}  He refrains himself for Money.

{66d}  Severity what it inclines to.

{67a}  We are better at giving then taking good Counsel.

{67b}  This is to be considered.

{68a}  A good woman and her bad son.

{68b}  Mr. Badman sets up for himself, and quickly runs to the
lands end.

{69a}  The reason of his runing out.

{69b}  Eccle. 11, 9.

{69c}  New companions.

{69d}  Mr. Badmans temper.

{69e}  Pro. 29. 3.  Chap. 13. 20.

{69f}  Pro. 28. 7.

{69g}  Pro. 28. 19.

{70a}  Pro. 23. 21.

{70b}  His Behaviour under his decays.

{70c}  How he covered his decayes.

{70d}  Badman is for a rich Wife.

{70e}  Badman has a godly Maid in his eye.

{71a}  He seeks to get her, why, and how.

{71b}  He calls his Companions together, and they advise him how to
get her.

{71c}  Badman goes to the Damosel as his Counsel advised him.

{72a}  Badmans complement, his lying complement.

{72b}  Neglect of Counsel about marriage dangerous.

{73a}  Badman obtains his desire, is married, &c.

{73b}  His carriage judged ungodly and wicked.

{73c}  Mat. 23.

{73d}  The great alteration that quickly happened to Badmans wife.

{73e}  Mala. 3. 15.

{73f}  Expectation of Judgment is for such things.

{73g}  Job. 21. 30, 31, 32.

{74a}  An example of Gods anger on such as have heretofore
committed this sin of Mr. Badman.  Gen 34.

{74b}  NOTE.

{74c}  After Badman is married, his Creditors come upon him, and
his wives Portion pays for that which his whores were feasted with
before he was married.

{75a}  Now she reaps the fruits of her unadvisedness.

{75b}  Now Badman has got him a wife by Religion, he hangs it by as
a thing out of use, and entertains his old Companions.

{75c}  He drives good company from his wife.

{75d}  He goes to his Whores.

{76a}  He rails at his wife.

{76b}  He seeks to force his wife from her Religion.

{76c}  He mocks at her Preachers.

{76d}  He mocks his wife in her dejections.

{76e}  He refuses to let her go out to good company.

{77a}  She gets out sometimes by stealth.

{77b}  Her repentance and complaint.

{77c}  Psal. 120

{77d}  The evil of being unequally yoaked together.

{78a}  2 Cor. 6. 13.

{78b}  Gen. 3. 15.

{78c}  Deut. 2. 43.  (This doesn't exist but is as given in the
text.  DP)

{78d}  Good counsel to those godly maids that are to marry.

{79a}  A caution to young women.

{79b}  Let Mr. Badmans wife be your Example.

{80a}  Deut. 7. 4, 5.  (Rather unnecessary footnote.  DP)

{80b}  1 Cor. 7. 39.  2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16.

{80c}  Rules for those that are to marry.

{80d}  If you love your Souls take heed.

{81a}  Duet 7.

{81b}  Psal. 106. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40.

{81c}  Badmans Children that he had by this good woman.

{81d}  Nehem. 13. 24.

{82a}  How the ungodly Father and godly Mother doe strive for the
Children that God doth give them.

{82b}  2 King. 17.

{83a}  The advantages that Children have, whose Parents are both
godly.

{84a}  The disadvantages that the Children of ungodly Parents have.

{84b}  Job 30. 8.

{84c}  A contest betwixt Mr. Badman and his wife.

{85a}  Ephes. 5. 28.

{85b}  With what weapons Badman did deal with his wife.

{85c}  Mr. Badmans heart discovered as to its enmity against the
friends of his wife.

{86a}  Mark

{86b}  NOTE.

{87a}  NOTE.

{88a}  New discourse of Mr. Badman.

{88b}  Mr. Badman plays a new prank.

{89a}  Mr. Badmans perfection.

{90a}  How Mr. Badman came to enjoy himself.

{90b}  2 Chron. 28. 22.  1 King 21. 25.  Gen. 13. 13.

{90c}  Job 21. 17.

{90d}  There are abundance like Mr. Badman.

{91a}  Pro. 24. 9.

{91b}  He that would be bad is bad.

{91c}  Matt 5. 28.

{91d}  Pro. 23. 7.  Mat. 5.  Rom. 7. 7.

{92a}  A bad heart makes a bad man.

{92b}  1 Sam. 24. 13.  Mat. 7. 16, 17, 18.

{92c}  Mar. 7. 20, 21, 22, 23.

{93a}  Mr. Badman had an art to break, and to get money that way.

{93b}  How he managed things in order to his breaking.

{93c}  He breaks.

{94a}  Mr. Badmans suger words to his Creditors.

{94b}  Badmans friend.

{94c}  What Mr. Badman propounds to his Creditors.

{94d}  They at last agree, and Mr. Badman gains by breaking.

{95a}  There is no plea for his dishonesty.

{96a}  An answer to two questions.

{96b}  1.  Q[u]estion.

{96c}  Levit. 19. 13.

{96d}  The hainousness of this sin.

{96e}  1 Thess. 4. 6.

{96f}  fair warning.

{97a}  Colos. 3. 25.

{97b}  Fair warning again.

{97c}  He that designedly commits this sin is like the Devil.

{97d}  2.  Question.

{98a}  How those that are Banckrupts should deal with their
consciences.

{98b}  Good advice.

{98c}  Rom. 12. 11.

{98d}  1 Tim. 5. 8.

{98e}  Pro. 18. 9.

{98f}  Good counsel again.

{99a}  How to find that thy decay came by the Judgment of God, or
by thy miscarriage.

{99b}  Another question.

{99c}  Pro. 10. 3.  1 Pet. 5. 6.

{99d}  Lam. 3. 33.

{100a}  Good advice again.  Deut. 32. 15.

{100b}  James 1. 9, 10.

{100c}  Consider four things.

{100d}  Job 1. 21.  Chap. 2. 8.

{100e}  Psal. 49. 6.

{100f}  Jam. 2. 5.

{101a}  Honest dealing with Creditors.

{101b}  Pro. 16. 33.

{102a}  Jer. 15. 10, 11.  Pro. 16. 7.

{102b}  A heavy blot upon Religion.

{103a}  If Knaves will make profession their cloak to be vile, who
can help it?

{103b}  1 Cor. 6. 8, 9, 10.  2 Tim. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

{103c}  Matt. 18. 6, 7, 8.

{103d}  Let such be disowned of all good men.

{103e}  Jer. 17. 11.

{104a}  Ezek. 20. 38, 39.

{104b}  2 Cor. 7. 2.

{104c}  Mar. 10. 19.

{104d}  1 Sam. 12. 3.

{104e}  Ver. 4.

{105a}  A question.

{105b}  An answer.

{105c}  2 King. 4. 1, 2.

{105d}  Hag. 1. 9.

{105e}  God does sometimes blow upon his own people.  How they
should doe at that time.

{105f}  Philip. 4. 12.

{106a}  More of Mr. Badmans fraudulent dealing.  He used deceitful
weights and scales.

{107a}  Levit. 19. 35, 36.

{107b}  Of Just weights and measures.

{107c}  Ezek. 45. 10.

{107d}  Pro. 20. 23.  Chap. 11. 1.

{107e}  The evil of deceitful Balances, Weights and Measures.

{107f}  Deut. 25. 13, 14, 15, 16.

{108a}  The Old and New Law commands all men to be honest and
upright in their weights and measures.

{108b}  Luke 6. 88.

{108c}  Pat Scriptures for our purpose.

{109a}  Where false weights and measures are to be found.

{109b}  1.  With evil doers.

{109c}  Mic. 6. 10.

{109d}  2.  With the merciless and Oppressors.

{109e}  Hos. 12. 7.

{109f}  3.  With such as would swallow up the poor.

{109g}  Amos 8. 4, 5, 6, 7.

{110a}  4.  With impure ones.

{110b}  Mic. 6. 11.

{110c}  Dan. 5. 27.

{111a}  How Mr. Badman did cheat, and hide his cheating.

{111b}  Good Weights and a bad Ballance a deep piece of Knavery.

{112a}  Mat. 23.

{112b}  A cloak of Religion to blind Mr. Cheats Knavery.

{112c}  Some plead Custom to cheat.

{112d}  Deut. 16. 20.

{113a}  They get nothing that cozen and cheat.

{113b}  Mar. 9.

{113c}  Prov. 10. 3.  Jer. 15. 13.  Chap. 17. 3.

{113d}  Job 27. 17.

{113e}  Pro. 13. 22.

{114a}  More of Mr. Badmans Bad tricks.

{114b}  Amos 8.

{114c}  Another art to cheat withall.

{115a}  Zeph. 1. 9.

{115b}  Servants observe these words.

{115c}  Of Extortion.

{115d}  1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.

{116a}  Who are Extortioners.

{116b}  Hucksters.

{116c}  Pro. 22. 16, 22.

{117a}  Deut. 23. 19.

{118a}  Whether it be lawful for a man to make the best of his own.
Proved in negative by 8 reasons.

{118b}  Good conscience must be used in selling.

{118c}  We must not make a prey of our neighbours Ignorance.

{118d}  Nor of his Neighbours Necessity.

{119a}  Nor of his Fondness of our commodity.

{119b}  We must use good conscience in buying.

{119c}  Gen. 23. 8, 9.

{119d}  1 Chron. 21, 22. 24.

{119e}  Levit. 25. 14.

{120a}  Charity must be used in our dealings.

{120b}  1 Cor. 16. 14.

{120c}  1 Cor. 13.

{120d}  Ephes. 4. 25.

{120e}  There may be and is sin in trading.

{121a}  Matt. 7. 12.

{121b}  A man in trading must not offer violence to the Law of
nature.

{121c}  Job. 37. 7.

{121d}  We must not abuse the Gift we have in the knowledge of
earthly things.

{121e}  1 Cor. 10. 13.  (Don't see where this fits into text.  DP)

{121f}  An eye to the glory of God in all we should have.

{121g}  Colo. 3. 17.

{121h}  Acts, 24. 15, 16.

{122a}  Levit. 25. 14.

{122b}  Badman used to laugh at them that told him of his faults.

{122c}  Luke. 16. 13, 14, 15.  Chap. 6. 25.

{123a}  A question.

{123b}  An answer.

{123c}  Preparations to be a good dealer.

{123d}  Eccle. 5. 10, 11.

{123e}  1 Tim. 6. 7, 8, 9.

{124a}  Ezek. 22. 13.

{124b}  Pro. 15. 17.  Chap 16. 8.  1 Sam. 2. 5.  Pro. 5. 21.

{124c}  Job 14. 17.

{124d}  Eccles. 5. 13, 14, 15.

{124e}  Prov. 20. 14.

{125a}  Amos 8. 5.

{125b}  A Judgment of God.  2 King. 7.

{125c}  Pro. 11. 26.

{125d}  Isa. 58. 6, 7, 8.

{125e}  Philip. 4. 5.

{126a}  Mr. Badman a very proud man.

{126b}  Of pride in general.

{126c}  Pro. 21. 24.

{126d}  Pride sticks close to nature.

{127a}  Pro. 8. 13.  Chap. 29. 23.  Isa. 25. 11.  Mal. 4. 1.

{128a}  Proud men do not love to be called proud.

{128b}  Two sorts of pride.

{128c}  Pro. 16. 5.  Chap. 21. 4.  Eccle. 7. 8.

{128d}  Isa. 3. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

{128e}  Wicked men do hate that word that reproves their vice.

{129a}  Signes of a proud man in general.

{129b}  Pro. 30. 13.

{129c}  Pro. 17. 19.

{129d}  Mar. 7.

{129e}  In particular.

{129f}  Psal. 10. 2.

{129g}  Psal. 10. 4.

{129h}  Pro. 13. 10.

{129i}  Psal. 119. 51.

{129j}  Ver. 122.

{129k}  Jer. 13. 17.

{129l}  Chap. 43. 2.

{129m}  Mal. 3. 15.

{129n}  Of outward pride.

{130a}  1 Tim. 2. 2.  (Don't see where this fits in the text.  DP)

{130b}  1 Pet. 3. 3, 4, 5.

{130c}  Mr. Badman was not for having pride called pride.

{130d}  Professors guilty of the sin of pride.

{131a}  Jer. 3. 3.

{131b}  1 Tim. 2. 9.

{131c}  1 Pet. 3. 1, 2, 3.

{131d}  Jer. 23. 15.

{131e}  Ezra. 9. 2.

{131f}  Pride in professors a shame and stumbling-block to the
world.

{132a}  NOTE.

{132b}  Why pride is in such request.

{132c}  1 Reason.  Mar. 7. 22, 23.

{132d}  Obad. 3.

{132e}  1 Joh. 2. 16.

{132f}  1 Pet. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

{133a}  3 Reason.

{133b}  4 Reason.

{133c}  Isa. 6.

{133d}  5 Reason.

{134a}  The evil effects of the sin of Pride.

{134b}  1 Evil effect.  1 Tim. 3. 6.

{134c}  2 Evil effect.  Psal. 138. 9.

{134d}  3 Evil effect.

{135a}  Jam. 4. 6.

{135b}  4  Evil effect.  Pro. 16. 25.

{135c}  5 Evil effect.  Pro. 11. 2.  Prov. 16. 8.

{135d}  6 Evil effect.  1 Tim. 3. 6.

{135e}  A general character of Mr. Badman.

{135f}  Psalm. 36. 1.

{135g}  A brief relation of Mr. Badmans ways.

{136a}  Isa. 26. 10.

{136b}  Isa. 9. 13.

{136c}  Isa. 26. 11.

{136d}  Psal. 29. 5.  (Cannot see where this fits in the text.  DP)

{136e}  Pro. 17. 6.  (Cannot see where this fits in the text.  DP)

{136f}  Isa. 26. 10.

{136g}  Mr. Badmans judgment of the Scriptures.

{136h}  Good men Mr. Badmans song.

{137a}  Psal. 50. 19. 20.

{137b}  Rom. 3. 7, 8.

{137c}  Jer. 23. 10.

{137d}  When the wicked watch, Gods people should be wary.

{137e}  Badman an angry, envious man.

{138a}  Pro. 14. 16.

{138b}  Eccle. 7. 9.

{138c}  Whence Envy flows.

{138d}  Pro. 27. 3, 4.

{138e}  Envie the worst of the four.

{138f}  Gal. 5. 19, 20.

{139a}  Pro. 14. 30.

{139b}  Envy is the father and mother of a many wickednesses.

{139c}  Jam. 3. 14, 15.

{139d}  Some of the births of Envy.

{139e}  Job. 5. 2.

{139f}  Matt. 27. 18.

{139g}  Mar. 15. 10.

{139h}  Acts 7. 9.

{139i}  Isa. 11. 13.

{139j}  Acts 13. 14.  (Cannot see where this fits in the text.  DP)

{140a}  A rare thing.

{140b}  Mr. Badman under some trouble of mind.

{140c}  Mr. Badman brake his legg.

{140d}  He swears.

{140e}  He prays.

{141a}  It has no good effect upon him.

{141b}  NOTE.

{141c}  How many sins do accompany drunkenness.

{141d}  Acts 17. 30, 31, 32.

{142a}  Job 34. 24, 25, 26.

{142b}  An open stroak.

{142c}  pag. 41.

{143a}  Mr. Badman fallen sick.

{143b}  His conscience is wounded.

{143c}  He cryes out in his sickness.

{143d}  His Atheism will not help him now.

{144a}  A dreadful example of Gods anger.

{144b}  NOTE.

{144c}  What Mr. Badman did more when he was sick.

{145a}  Great alteration made in Mr. Badman.

{145b}  The Town-talk of Mr. Badmans change.

{145c}  His wife is comforted.

{146a}  Mr. Badman recovers and returns to his old course.

{146b}  Ignorant physicians kill souls while they cure bodyes.

{147a}  Gen. 4. 13. 14.  Exo. 9. 27.  1 Sam. 15. 24.  Matt. 27. 3,
4, 5.

{147b}  The true symptoms of conversion wanting in all Mr. Badmans
sence of sin and desires of mercy.

{147c}  Exo. 19. 28.  Acts 8. 24.

{147d}  Luke 16. 27, 28.

{147e}  Of sick-bed repentance, and that it is to be suspected.

{148a}  Hos. 7. 14.

{148b}  A sign of the desperateness of mans heart.

{148c}  Deut. 1. 34, 35.

{148d}  Psal. 78. 34, 35, 36, 37.

{149a}  Mr. Badmans wifes heart is broken.

{149b}  Her Christian speech.

{149c}  Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24.

{149d}  Her talk to her friends.  (Don't see how this relates to
the text.  DP)

{150a}  Ps. 35. 13.

{150b}  Her talk to her husband.

{151a}  He diverts her discourse.

{151b}  Her speech to her children that were rude.

{151c}  Rev. 7. 16.  Chap. 21. 3, 4.

{151d}  Her speech to her darling.

{152a}  Heb. 3. 14.

{152b}  Ephes. 5. 11.

{152c}  Her death.

{153a}  NOTE.

{153b}  One of her children converted by her dying words.

{153c}  Mat. 23.

{154a}  Mr. Badmans base language.

{154b}  He marryes again, and how he got this last wife.

{154c}  What she was, and how they lived.

{154d}  Clarks Looking Glass.

{155a}  Amo. 7. 16, 17.

{156a}  He is punished in his last wife for his bad carriages
towards his first.

{156b}  He is not at all the better.

{156c}  None did pity him for his sorrow, but looked upon it as a
just reward.

{156d}  Badman and this last wife part as poor as Howlets.

{157a}  Mr Badmans sickness and diseases of which he died.

{157b}  Badmans name stinks when he is dead.

{157c}  Pro. 10. 7.

{158a}  That Mr. Badman dies impenitent is proved.

{158b}  1  Proof that he died impenitent.

{159a}  Isa. 6.  Ro. 11.

{159b}  No sence of sin, no repentance proved.

{159c}  Acts 2.  Chap. 9.  Chap. 16.

{159d}  Psal. 38. 18.

{159e}  2 Sam. 12.

{159f}  Job 10. 2.  Chap. 34. 32.

{159g}  Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20.

{160a}  Job 20. 11.  Prov. 5. 22.

{160b}  Matt. 25.  Isa. 66. 24.  Mar. 9. 44.

{160c}  Every sight and sence of sin cannot produce repentance.

{160d}  2 proof that he died impenitent.

{161a}  1 King.  21. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.

{161b}  Psal. 41. 6.

{161c}  How Badman carried it to good men when they came to visit
him in his last sickness.

{163a}  Job. 21. 14.

{163b}  Jer. 2. 25.  Zech. 7. 11, 12.  Acts. 28. 26, 27.

{163c}  3  Proof that he died impenitent.

{163d}  Acts 9. 11.

{163e}  Psal. 18. 14.

{163f}  Job 36. 13.

{164a}  Psal. 51. 1.  Psal. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4.  Psal. 38.

{164b}  4 Proof that he died impenitent.

{165a}  Acts. 9. 26. 28.

{165b}  Psal. 119. 63.

{165c}  2 Cor. 5. 17.

{165d}  Acts. 4. 32, 33.  Chap. 2. 44, 45, 46, 47.

{166a}  How Mr. Badman was when near his End.

{166b}  He died like a Lamb.

{166c}  The opinion of the Ignorant about his manner of dying.

{167a}  How we must judge whether men dye well or no.

{167b}  When we may judge of a mans eternal state by the manner of
his death.

{168a}  NOTE.

{168b}  NOTE.

{168c}  The story of John Cox.

{169a}  Of dying in Despair.

{170a}  NOTE.

{170b}  NOTE.

{170c}  1 Sam. 28.

{170d}  Psal. 73. 4.  (Don't see where this fits into the text.
DP)

{171a}  Further discourse of Mr. Badmans death.

{171b}  He that after a sinfull life dies quietly, that is, without
repentance, goes to Hell.  1 Proof

{171c}  Sick-bed repentance seldom good for any thing.

{172a}  Luke 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

{172b}  2 Proof.

{173a}  Peace in a sinfull state is a sign of damnation.

{173b}  Hos 4. 17.

{173c}  3 Proof.

{173d}  Joh. 12. 40.

{174a}  Luk. 16. 22.

{174b}  Rom. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.  Acts 28. 26, 27.

{174c}  2 Pet. 2.

{174d}  4 Proof.  Psal. 73. 4, 5, 6.

{175a}  Job 8. 13, 14.

{175b}  A frivolous opinion.

{176a}  When a wicked man dyes in his sins quietly, it is a
Judgment of God upon his wicked beholder.

{176b}  Ver. 6.

{177a}  Ver. 8. 9, 10, 11.

{177b}  Vers. 12.

{177c}  Mala. 2. 17.


