
                     The Works

                        OF

                    LORD  BYRON


         A NEW, REVISED AND ENLARGED EDITION
                 WITH ILLUSTRATIONS.


                  Poetry. Vol. VII.


                     EDITED BY
            ERNEST HARTLEY COLERIDGE, M.A.,
                    HON. F.R.S.L.


                      LONDON:
            JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET.
          NEW YORK: CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS.

                       1904.




PREFACE TO THE SEVENTH VOLUME.


Of the seventy-three "Epigrams and Jeux d'Esprit," which are printed at
the commencement of this volume, forty-five were included in Murray's
one-volume edition of 1837, eighteen have been collected from various
publications, and ten are printed and published for the first time.

The "Devil's Drive," which appears in Moore's _Letters and Journals_,
and in the sixth volume of the Collected Edition of 1831 as an
"Unfinished Fragment" of ninety-seven lines, is now printed and
published for the first time in its entirety (248 lines), from a MS. in
the possession of the Earl of Ilchester. "A Farewell Petition to J.C.H.
Esq.;" "My Boy Hobbie O;" "[Love and Death];" and "Last Words on
Greece," are reprinted from the first volume of _Murray's Magazine_
(1887).

A few imperfect and worthless poems remain in MS.; but with these and
one or two other unimportant exceptions, the present edition of the
Poetical Works may be regarded as complete.

In compiling a "Bibliography of the successive Editions and Translations
of Lord Byron's Poetical Works," I have endeavoured, in the first
instance, to give a full and particular account of the collected
editions and separate issues of the poems and dramas which were open to
my inspection; and, secondly, to extract from general bibliographies,
catalogues of public and private libraries, and other sources
bibliographical records of editions which I have been unable to examine,
and were known to me only at second-hand. It will be observed that the
_title-pages_ of editions which have passed through my hands are
aligned; the _titles_ of all other editions are italicized.

I cannot pretend that this assortment of bibliographical entries is even
approximately exhaustive; but as "a sample" of a bibliography it will, I
trust, with all its imperfections, be of service to the student of
literature, if not to the amateur or bibliophile. With regard to
nomenclature and other technicalities, my aim has been to put the
necessary information as clearly and as concisely as possible, rather
than to comply with the requirements of this or that formula. But the
path of the bibliographer is beset with difficulties. "Al Sirat's
arch"--"the bridge of breadth narrower than the thread of a famished
spider, and sharper than the edge of a sword" (see _The Giaour_, line
483, _note_ I)--affords an easier and a safer foothold.

To the general reader a bibliography says little or nothing; but, in one
respect, a bibliography of Byron is of popular import. It affords
scientific proof of an almost unexampled fame, of a far-reaching and
still potent influence. Teuton and Latin and Slav have taken Byron to
themselves, and have made him their own. No other English poet except
Shakespeare has been so widely read and so frequently translated. Of
_Manfred_ I reckon one Bohemian translation, two Danish, two Dutch,
three French, nine German, three Hungarian, three Italian, two Polish,
one Romaic, one Roumanian, four Russian, and three Spanish translations,
and, in all probability, there are others which have escaped my net. The
question, the inevitable question, arises--What was, what is, the secret
of Byron's Continental vogue? and why has his fame gone out into all
lands? Why did Goethe enshrine him, in the second part of _Faust_, "as
the representative of the modern era ... undoubtedly to be regarded as
the greatest genius of our century?" (_Conversations of Goethe_, 1874,
p. 265).

It is said, and with truth, that Byron's revolutionary politics
commended him to oppressed nationalities and their sympathizers; that he
was against "the tramplers"--Castlereagh, and the Duke of Wellington,
and the Holy Alliance; that he stood for liberty. Another point in his
favour was his freedom from cant, his indifference to the pieties and
proprieties of the Britannic Muse; that he had the courage of his
opinions. Doubtless in a time of trouble he was welcomed as the champion
of revolt, but deeper reasons must be sought for an almost exclusive
preference for the works of one poet and a comparative indifference to
the works of his rivals and contemporaries. He fulfilled another,
perhaps a greater ideal. An Englishman turns to poetry for the
expression in beautiful words of his happier and better feelings, and he
is not contented unless poetry tends to make him happier or
better--happier because better than he would be otherwise. His favourite
poems are psalms, or at least metrical paraphrases, of life. Men of
other nations are less concerned about their feelings and their souls.
They regard the poet as the creator, the inventor, the maker _par
excellence_, and he who can imagine or make the greatest _eidolon_ is
the greatest poet. _Childe Harold_ and _The Corsair_, _Mazeppa_ and
_Manfred, Cain_ and _Sardanapalus_ were new creations, new types, forms
more real than living man, which appealed to their artistic sense, and
led their imaginations captive. "It is a mark," says Goethe (_Aus meinem
Leben: Dichtung und Wahreit_, 1876, iii. 125), "of true poetry, that, as
a secular gospel, it knows how to free us from the earthly burdens which
press upon us, by inward serenity, by outward charm.... The most lively,
as well as the gravest works have the same end--to moderate both
pleasure and pain through a happy mental representation." It is passion
translated into action, the pageantry of history, the transfiguration
into visible lineaments of living moods and breathing thoughts which are
the notes of this "secular gospel," and for one class of minds work out
a secular redemption.

It was not only the questionable belief that he was on the side of the
people, or his ethical and theological audacities, or his prolonged
Continental exile, which won for Byron a greater name abroad than he has
retained at home; but the character of his poetry. "The English may
think of Byron as they please" (_Conversations of Goethe_, 1874, p.
171), "but this is certain, that they can show no poet who is to be
compared to him. He is different from all the others, and, for the most
part, greater." The English may think of him as they please! and for
them, or some of them, there is "a better oenomel," a _vinum Dæmonum_,
which Byron has not in his gift. The evidence of a world-wide fame will
not endear a poet to a people and a generation who care less for the
matter than the manner of verse, or who _believe_ in poetry as the
symbol or "_credo_" of the imagination or the spirit; but it should
arrest attention and invite inquiry. A bibliography is a dull epilogue
to a poet's works, but it speaks with authority, and it speaks last.
_Finis coronat opus!_

I must be permitted to renew my thanks to Mr. G.F. Barwick,
_Superintendent of the Reading Room_, Mr. Cyril Davenport, and other
officials of the British Museum, of all grades and classes, for their
generous and courteous assistance in the preparation and completion of
the Bibliography. The consultation of many hundreds of volumes of one
author, and the permission to retain a vast number in daily use, have
entailed exceptional labour on a section of the staff. I have every
reason to be grateful.

I am indebted to Mr. A.W. Pollard, of the British Museum, for advice and
direction with regard to bibliographical formulas; to Mr. G.L. Calderon,
late of the staff, for the collection and transcription of the
title-pages of Polish, Russian, and Servian translations; and to Mr. R.
Nisbet Bain for the supervision and correction of the proofs of Slavonic
titles.

To Mr. W.P. Courtney, the author of _Bibliotheca Cornubiensis_, I owe
many valuable hints and suggestions, and the opportunity of consulting
some important works of reference.

I have elsewhere acknowledged the valuable information with regard to
certain rare editions and pamphlets which I have received from Mr. H.
Buxton Forman, C.B.

My especial thanks for laborious researches undertaken on my behalf, and
for information not otherwise attainable, are due to M. J.E. Aynard, of
Lyons; Signor F. Bianco; Professor Max von Förster, of Wurtzburg;
Professor Lajos Gurnesovitz, of Buda Pest; Dr. Holzhausen, of Bonn; Mr.
Leonard Mackall, of Berlin; Miss Peacock; Miss K. Schlesinger; M.
Voynich, of Soho Square; Mr. Theodore Bartholomew, of the University
Library of Cambridge; Mr. T.D. Stewart, of the Croydon Public Library;
and the Librarians of Trinity College, Cambridge, and University
College, St. Andrews.

I have also to thank, for special and generous assistance, Mr. J.P.
Anderson, late of the British Museum, the author of the "Bibliography of
Byron's Works" attached to the Life of Lord Byron by the Hon. Roden Noel
(1890); Miss Grace Reed, of Philadelphia, for bibliographical entries of
early American editions; and Professor Vladimir Hrabar, of the
University of Dorpat, for the collection and transcription of numerous
Russian translations of Byron's Works.

To Messrs. Clowes, the printers of these volumes, and to their reader,
Mr. F.T. Peachey, I am greatly indebted for the transcription of
Slavonic titles included in the Summary of the Bibliography, and for
interesting and useful information during the progress of the work.

In conclusion, I must once more express my acknowment of the industry
and literary ability of my friend Mr. F.E. Taylor, of Chertsey, who has
read the proofs of this and the six preceding volumes.

The Index is the work of Mr. C. Eastlake Smith.

ERNEST HARTLEY COLERIDGE.

November, 1903.




CONTENTS OF VOL. VII.


Preface to Vol. VII. of the Poems.                                 _v_

         JEUX D'ESPRIT AND MINOR POEMS, 1798-1824.

Epigram on an Old Lady who had some Curious Notions respecting the    1
Soul. First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 28.

Epitaph on John Adams, of Southwell. First published, _Letters and    1
Journals_, 1830, i. 106.

A Version of Ossian's Address to the Sun. First published,            2
_Atlantic Monthly_, December, 1898.

Lines to Mr. Hodgson. Written on board the Lisbon Packet. First       4
published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 230-232.

[To Dives. A Fragment.] First published, _Lord Byron's Works_,        7
1833, xvii. 241.

Farewell Petition to J.C.H., Esq^re.^ First published, _Murray's      7
Magazine_, 1887, vol. i. pp. 290, 291.

Translation of the Nurse's Dole in the _Medea_ of Euripides. First   10
published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 227.

My Epitaph. First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 240.   10

Substitute for an Epitaph. First published, _Lord Byron's Works_,    11
1832, ix. 4.

Epitaph for Joseph Blacket, late Poet and Shoemaker. First           11
published, _Lord Byron's Works_, 1832, ix. 10.

On Moore's Last Operatic Farce, or Farcical Opera. First published,  12
_Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 295 (_note_).

[R.C. Dallas.] First published, _Life, Writings, Opinions, etc._,    12
1825, ii. 192.

An Ode to the Framers of the Frame Bill. First published, _Morning   13
Chronicle_, March 2, 1812.

To the Honorable Mr. George Lamb. First published, _The Two          15
Duchesses_, by Vere Foster, 1898, p. 374.

[La Revanche.] _MS.M_.                                               15

To Thomas Moore. Written the Evening before his Visit to Mr. Leigh   16
Hunt in Horsemonger Lane Gaol, May 19, 1813. First published,
_Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 401.

On Lord Thurlow's Poems. First published, _Letters and Journals_,    17
1830, i. 396.

To Lord Thurlow. First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, i.   19
397.

The Devil's Drive. First published (stanzas 1-5, 8, 10-12, 17, 18),  21
_Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 471-474; and (stanzas 6, 7, 9,
13-16, 19-27) from a MS. in the possession of the Earl of
Ilchester.

Windsor Poetics. First published, _Poetical Works_, Paris, 1819,     35
vi. 125.

[Another Version.] On a Royal Visit to the Vaults. From an           36
autograph MS. in the possession of the Hon. Mrs. Norbury, now for
the first time printed.

Ich Dien. From an autograph MS. in the possession of Mr. A.H.        36
Hallam Murray, now for the first time printed.

Condolatory Address, To Sarah Countess of Jersey. First published,   37
_The Champion_, July 31, 1814.

Fragment of an Epistle to Thomas Moore. First published, _Letters    39
and Journals_, 1830, i. 561, 562 (_note_).

Answer to----'s Professions of Affection. _MS_.                      40

On Napoleon's Escape from Elba. First published, _Letters and        41
Journals_, 1830, i. 611.

Endorsement to the Deed of Separation, in the April of 1816. First   41
published, _Poetical Works_, 1831, vi. 454.

[To George Anson Byron (?).] First published, _Nicnac_, March 25,    41
1823.

Song for the Luddites. First published, _Letters and Journals_,      42
1830, ii. 58.

To Thomas Moore ("What are you doing now?"). First published,        23
_Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 58, 59.

To Mr. Murray ("To hook the Reader," etc.). First published,         44
_Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 91.

Versicles. First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 87.    45

Quem Deus vult perdere prius dementat. First published, _Letters_,
1900, iv.                                                            45

To Thomas Moore ("My boat is on the shore"). First published,        46
_Waltz_, London, 1821, p. 29.

Epistle from Mr. Murray to Dr. Polidori. First published, _Letters   47
and Journals_, 1830, ii. 139-141.

Epistle to Mr. Murray. First published (stanzas 1, 2, 4, 7-9),       51
_Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 156, 157; and (stanzas 3, 5, 6,
10, 11) _Letters_, 1900, iv. 191-193.

On the Birth of John William Rizzo Hoppner. First published,         54
_Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 134.

[E Nihilo Nihil; or, An Epigram Bewitched.] _MS.M_.                  55

To Mr. Murray. First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii.    56
171.

Ballad. To the Tune of "Sally in our Alley." _MS.M_.                 58

Another Simple Ballat. _MS.M_.                                       61

Epigram. From the French of Rulhiéres. First published, _Letters     62
and Journals_, 1830, ii. 235.

Epilogue. First published, _Philadelphia Record_, December 28,       63
1891.

On my Wedding-Day. First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830,    64
ii. 294.

Epitaph for William Pitt. First published, _Letters and Journals_,   64
1830, ii. 295.

Epigram ("In digging up your bones, Tom Paine"). First published,    65
_Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 295.

Epitaph ("Posterity will ne'er survey"). First published, _Lord      65
Byron's Works_, 1833, xvii. 246.

Epigram ("The world is a bundle of hay"). First published, _Letters  65
and Journals_, 1830, ii. 494.

My Boy Hobbie O. First published, _Murray's Magazine_, March, 1887,  66
vol. i. pp. 292, 293.

Lines, Addressed by Lord Byron to Mr. Hobhouse on his Election for   69
Westminster. First published, _Miscellaneous Poems_, 1824.

A Volume of Nonsense. First published, _Letters_, 1900, v. 83.       70

Stanzas. First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 377.     70

To Penelope. First published, Medwin's _Conversations_, 1824 p. 106. 71

The Charity Ball. First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830,     71
ii. 540.

Epigram, On the Braziers' Address, etc. First published, _Letters    72
and Journals_, 1830, ii. 442.

On my Thirty-third Birthday. First published, _Letters and           73
Journals_, 1830, ii. 414.

Martial, Lib. I. Epig. I. First published, _Lord Byron's Works_,     74
1833, xvii. 245.

Bowles and Campbell. First published, _The Liberal_, 1823, No. II.   74
p. 398.

Elegy. First published, Medwin's _Conversations_, 1824, p. 121.      75

John Keats. First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 506.  76

From the French ("Ægle, beauty and poet," etc.). First published,    76
_The Liberal_, 1823, No. II. p. 396.

To Mr. Murray ("For Orford," etc.). First published, _Letters and    76
Journals_, 1830, ii. 517.

[Napoleon's Snuff-box.] First published, _Conversations of Lord      77
Byron_, 1824, p. 235.

The New Vicar of Bray. First published, _Works_ (Galignani), 1831,   78
p. 116.

Lucietta. A Fragment. _MS.M_.                                        81

Epigrams. First published, _The Liberal_, No. I. October 18, 1822,   81
p. 164.

The Conquest. First published, _Lord Byron's Works_, 1833, xvii.     82
246.

Impromptu ("Beneath Blessington's eyes"). First published, _Letters  82
and Journals_, 1830, ii. 635.

Journal in Cephalonia. First published, _Letters_, 1901, vi. 238.    83

Song to the Suliotes. _MS.M_.                                        83

[Love and Death.] First published, _Murray's Magazine_, February,    84
1887, vol. i. pp. 145, 146.

Last Words on Greece. First published, _Murray's Magazine_,          85
February, 1887, vol. i. p. 146.

On this Day I complete my Thirty-sixth Year. First published,        86
_Morning Chronicle_, October 29, 1824.

A BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE SUCCESSIVE EDITIONS AND TRANSLATIONS OF LORD   89
BYRON'S _POETICAL WORKS_.

   NOTES--

Note (1).--On Genuine and Spurious Issues of _English Bards, and    305
Scotch Reviewers_.

Note (2).--Correspondence between the First Edition as numbered and 307
the Present Issue as numbered.

Note (3).--The Annotated Copies of the Fourth Edition of 1811       310

APPENDIX TO BIBLIOGRAPHY                                            314

CONTENTS OF BIBLIOGRAPHY                                            317

SUMMARY OF BIBLIOGRAPHY                                             319

INDEX                                                               349

INDEX TO FIRST LINES                                                449




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

1.  Mrs. Birdmere's House, Southwell                                   2

2.  Annesley Hall                                                     38

3.  Diadem Hill (Annesley Park), where Lord Byron parted             304
    from Mary Chaworth

4.  The Prison Called Tasso's Cell, in the Hospital of               348
    Sant'Anna, at Ferrara




JEUX D'ESPRIT AND MINOR POEMS, 1798-1824.



                    EPIGRAM ON AN OLD LADY WHO HAD
              SOME CURIOUS NOTIONS RESPECTING THE SOUL.

    IN Nottingham county there lives at Swan Green,[1]
      As curst an old Lady as ever was seen;
    And when she does die, which I hope will be soon,
      She firmly believes she will go to the Moon!

                                                                     1798.
                   [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 28.]

FOOTNOTES:

[1] "Swan Green" should be "Swine Green." It lay about a quarter of a
mile to the east of St. James's Lane, where Byron lodged in 1799, at the
house of a Mr. Gill. The name appears in a directory of 1799, but by
1815 it had been expunged or changed _euphoniæ gratiâ_. (See _A New Plan
of the Town of Nottingham_, ... 1744.)

Moore took down "these rhymes" from the lips of Byron's nurse, May Gray,
who regarded them as a first essay in the direction of poetry. He
questioned their originality.



                 EPITAPH ON JOHN ADAMS, OF SOUTHWELL,
                 A CARRIER, WHO DIED OF DRUNKENNESS.

    JOHN ADAMS lies here, of the parish of Southwell,
    A _Carrier_ who _carried_ his can to his mouth well;
    He carried so much and he carried so fast,
    He could carry no more--so was carried at last;
    For the liquor he drank being too much for one,
    He could not _carry_ off;--so he's now _carri-on_.

                                                        _September_, 1807.
                  [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 106.]


[Illustration: MRS. BIRDMERE'S HOUSE, SOUTHWELL.]



              A VERSION OF OSSIAN'S ADDRESS TO THE SUN.

                       FROM THE POEM "CARTHON."

    O THOU! who rollest in yon azure field,
    Round as the orb of my forefather's shield,
    Whence are thy beams? From what eternal store
    Dost thou, O Sun! thy vast effulgence pour?
    In awful grandeur, when thou movest on high,
    The stars start back and hide them in the sky;
    The pale Moon sickens in thy brightening blaze,
    And in the western wave avoids thy gaze.
    Alone thou shinest forth--for who can rise
    Companion of thy splendour in the skies!
    The mountain oaks are seen to fall away--
    Mountains themselves by length of years decay--
    With ebbs and flows is the rough Ocean tost;
    In heaven the Moon is for a season lost,
    But thou, amidst the fullness of thy joy,
    The same art ever, blazing in the sky!
    When tempests wrap the world from pole to pole,
    When vivid lightnings flash and thunders roll,
    Thou far above their utmost fury borne,
    Look'st forth in beauty, laughing them to scorn.
    But vainly now on me thy beauties blaze--
    Ossian no longer can enraptured gaze!
    Whether at morn, in lucid lustre gay,
    On eastern clouds thy yellow tresses play,
    Or else at eve, in radiant glory drest,
    Thou tremblest at the portals of the west,
    I see no more! But thou mayest fail at length,
    Like Ossian lose thy beauty and thy strength,
    Like him--but for a season--in thy sphere
    To shine with splendour, then to disappear!
    Thy years shall have an end, and thou no more
    Bright through the world enlivening radiance pour,
    But sleep within thy clouds, and fail to rise,
    Heedless when Morning calls thee to the skies!
    Then now exult, O Sun! and gaily shine,
    While Youth and Strength and Beauty all are thine.
    For Age is dark, unlovely, as the light
    Shed by the Moon when clouds deform the night,
    Glimmering uncertain as they hurry past.
    Loud o'er the plain is heard the northern blast,
    Mists shroud the hills, and 'neath the growing gloom,
    The weary traveller shrinks and sighs for home.

                                                                     1806.
                 [First published, _Atlantic Monthly_, December, 1898.][2]

FOOTNOTES:

[2] [I am indebted to the courtesy of Mr. Pierre De La Rose for sending
me a copy of the foregoing _Version of Ossian's Address to the Sun_,
which was "Privately printed at the Press of Oliver B. Graves,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, June the Tenth, MDCCCXCVIII.," and was
reprinted in the _Atlantic Monthly_ in December, 1898. A prefatory note
entitled, "From Lord Byron's Notes," is prefixed to the Version: "In
Lord Byron's copy of _The Poems of Ossian_ (printed by Dewick and
Clarke, London, 1806), which, since 1874, has been in the possession of
the Library of Harvard University as part of the Sumner Bequest. The
notes which follow appear in Byron's hand." (For the _Notes_, see the
_Atlantic Monthly_, 1898, vol. lxxxii. pp. 810-814.)

It is strange that Byron should have made two versions (for another
"version" from the Newstead MSS., see _Poetical Works_, 1898, i.
229-231) of the "Address to the Sun," which forms the conclusion of
"Carthon;" but the Harvard version appears to be genuine. It is to be
noted that Byron appended to the earlier version eighteen lines of his
own composition, by way of moral or application.]



                        LINES TO MR. HODGSON.

                 WRITTEN ON BOARD THE LISBON PACKET.

                                  1.

    HUZZA! Hodgson[3], we are going,
      Our embargo's off at last;
    Favourable breezes blowing
      Bend the canvas o'er the mast.
    From aloft the signal's streaming,
      Hark! the farewell gun is fired;
    Women screeching, tars blaspheming,
      Tell us that our time's expired.
        Here's a rascal
        Come to task all,
      Prying from the Custom-house;
        Trunks unpacking
        Cases cracking,
      Not a corner for a mouse
    Scapes unsearched amid the racket,
    Ere we sail on board the Packet.

                                  2.

    Now our boatmen quit their mooring,
      And all hands must ply the oar;
    Baggage from the quay is lowering,
      We're impatient, push from shore.
    "Have a care! that case holds liquor--
      Stop the boat--I'm sick--oh Lord!"
    "Sick, Ma'am, damme, you'll be sicker,
      Ere you've been an hour on board."
        Thus are screaming
        Men and women,
      Gemmen, ladies, servants, Jacks;
        Here entangling,
        All are wrangling,
      Stuck together close as wax.--
    Such the general noise and racket,
    Ere we reach the Lisbon Packet.

                                  3.

    Now we've reached her, lo! the Captain,
      Gallant Kidd,[4] commands the crew;
    Passengers their berths are clapt in,
      Some to grumble, some to spew.
    "Hey day! call you that a cabin?
      Why't is hardly three feet square!
    Not enough to stow Queen Mab in--
      Who the deuce can harbour there?"
        "Who, sir? plenty--
        Nobles twenty
      Did at once my vessel fill."--
        "Did they? Jesus,
        How you squeeze us!
      Would to God they did so still!
    Then I'd 'scape the heat and racket
    Of the good ship, Lisbon Packet."

                                  4.

    Fletcher! Murray! Bob![5] where are you?
      Stretched along the deck like logs--
    Bear a hand, you jolly tar, you!
      Here's a rope's end for the dogs.
    Hobhouse muttering fearful curses,
      As the hatchway down he rolls,
    Now his breakfast, now his verses,
      Vomits forth--and damns our souls.
        "Here's a stanza[6]
        On Braganza--
      Help!"--"A couplet?"--"No, a cup
        Of warm water--"
        "What's the matter?"
      "Zounds! my liver's coming up;
    I shall not survive the racket
    Of this brutal Lisbon Packet."

                                  5.

    Now at length we're off for Turkey,
      Lord knows when we shall come back!
    Breezes foul and tempests murky
      May unship us in a crack.
    But, since Life at most a jest is,
      As philosophers allow,
    Still to laugh by far the best is,
      Then laugh on--as I do now.
        Laugh at all things,
        Great and small things,
      Sick or well, at sea or shore;
        While we're quaffing,
        Let's have laughing--
      Who the devil cares for more?--
    Some good wine! and who would lack it,
    Ev'n on board the Lisbon Packet?

                                          Falmouth Roads, _June_ 30, 1809.
              [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 230-232.]

FOOTNOTES:

[3] [For Francis Hodgson (1781-1852), see _Letters_, 1898, i. 195,
_note_ 1.]

[4] [Compare Peter Pindar's _Ode to a Margate Hoy_--
    "Go, beauteous Hoy, in safety ev'ry inch!
    That storm should wreck thee, gracious Heav'n forbid!
    Whether commanded by brave Captain Finch
    Or equally tremendous Captain Kidd."]

[5] [Murray was "Joe" Murray, an ancient retainer of the "Wicked Lord."
Bob was Robert Rushton, the "little page" of "Childe Harold's Good
Night." (See _Poetical Works_, 1899, ii. 26, _note_ 1.)]

[6] [For "the stanza," addressed to the "Princely offspring of
Braganza," published in the _Morning Post_, December 30, 1807, see
_English Bards, etc._, line 142, _note_ 1, _Poetical Works_, 1898, i.
308, 309.]



                      [TO DIVES.[7] A FRAGMENT.]

    UNHAPPY Dives! in an evil hour
      'Gainst Nature's voice seduced to deeds accurst!
      Once Fortune's minion now thou feel'st her power;
      Wrath's vial on thy lofty head hath burst.
      In Wit, in Genius, as in Wealth the first,
      How wondrous bright thy blooming morn arose!
      But thou wert smitten with th' unhallowed thirst
      Of Crime unnamed, and thy sad noon must close
    In scorn and solitude unsought the worst of woes.

                                                                     1809.
                 [First published, _Lord Byron's Works_, 1833, xvii. 241.]

FOOTNOTES:

[7] [Dives was William Beckford. See _Childe Harold_, Canto I. stanza
xxii. line 6, _Poetical Works_, 1899, ii. 37, _note_ 1.]



                FAREWELL PETITION TO J.C.H., ESQ^RE^.

    O THOU yclep'd by vulgar sons of Men
    Cam Hobhouse![8] but by wags Byzantian Ben!
    Twin sacred titles, which combined appear
    To grace thy volume's front, and gild its rear,
    Since now thou put'st thyself and work to Sea
    And leav'st all Greece to _Fletcher_[9] and to me,
    Oh, hear my single muse our sorrows tell,
    _One_ song for _self_ and Fletcher quite as well--

    First to the _Castle_ of that man of woes
    Dispatch the letter which _I must_ enclose,
    And when his lone Penelope shall say
    _Why, where_, and _wherefore_ doth my William stay?
    Spare not to move her pity, or her pride--
    By all that Hero suffered, or defied;
    The _chicken's toughness_, and the _lack_ of _ale_
    The _stoney mountain_ and the _miry vale_
    The _Garlick_ steams, which _half_ his meals enrich,
    The _impending vermin_, and the threatened _Itch_,
    That _ever breaking_ Bed, beyond repair!
    The hat too _old_, the coat too _cold_ to wear,
    The Hunger, _which repulsed from Sally's door_
    Pursues her grumbling half from shore to shore,
    Be these the themes to greet his faithful Rib
    So may thy pen be smooth, thy tongue be glib!

    This duty done, let me in turn demand
    Some friendly office in my native land,
    Yet let me ponder well, before I ask,
    And set thee swearing at the tedious task.

    First the Miscellany![10]--to Southwell town
    _Per coach_ for Mrs. _Pigot_ frank it down,
    So may'st them prosper in the paths of Sale,[11]
    And Longman smirk and critics cease to rail.

    All hail to Matthews![12] wash his reverend feet,
    And in my name the man of Method greet,--
    Tell him, my Guide, Philosopher, and Friend,
    Who cannot love me, and who will not mend,
    Tell him, that not in vain I shall assay
    To tread and trace our "old Horatian way,"[13]
    And be (with prose supply my dearth of rhymes)
    What better men have been in better times.

    Here let me cease, for why should I prolong
    My notes, and vex a _Singer_ with a _Song_?
    Oh thou with pen perpetual in thy fist!
    Dubbed for thy sins a stark Miscellanist,
    So pleased the printer's orders to perform
    For Messrs. _Longman_, _Hurst_ and _Rees_ and _Orme_.
    Go--Get thee hence to Paternoster Row,
    Thy patrons wave a duodecimo!
    (Best form for _letters_ from a distant land,
    It fits the pocket, nor fatigues the hand.)
    Then go, once more the joyous work commence[14]
    With stores of anecdote, and grains of sense,
    Oh may Mammas relent, and Sires forgive!
    And scribbling Sons grow dutiful and live!

                                       Constantinople, _June_ 7^th^, 1810.
       [First published, _Murray's Magazine_, 1887, vol. i. pp. 290, 291.]

FOOTNOTES:

[8] [For John Cam Hobhouse (1786-1869), afterwards Lord Broughton de
Gyfford, see _Letters_, 1898, i. 163, _note_ i.]

[9] [Fletcher was an indifferent traveller, and sighed for "a' the
comforts of the saut-market." See Byron's letters to his mother,
November 12, 1809, June 28, 1810.--_Letters_, 1898, i. 256, 281.]

[10] [Hobhouse's Miscellany (otherwise known as the _Miss-sell-any_) was
published in 1809, under the title of _Imitations and Translations from
The Ancient and Modern Classics_. Byron contributed nine original poems.
The volume was not a success. "It foundered ... in the Gulph of
Lethe."--Letter to H. Drury, July 17, 1811, _Letters_, 1898, i. 319.]

[11] [The word "Sale" may have a double meaning. There may be an
allusion to George Sale, the Orientalist, and translator of the Koran.]

[12] ["In Matthews I have lost my 'guide, philosopher, and
friend.'"--Letter to R.C. Dallas, September 7, 1811, _Letters_, 1898,
ii. 25. (For Charles Skinner Matthews, see _Letters_, 1898, i. 150,
_note_ 3.)]

[13] [Compare--
    "In short, the maxim for the amorous tribe is
    Horatian, 'Medio tu tutissimus ibis.'"
                   _Don Juan_, Canto V. stanza xvii. lines 8, 9.

The "doctrine" is Horatian, but the words occur in Ovid, _Metam._, lib.
ii. line 137.--_Poetical Works_, 1902, vi. 273, _note_ 2.]

[14] [Hobhouse's _Journey through Albania and other Provinces of
Turkey_, 4^to^, was published by James Cawthorn, in 1813.]



                  TRANSLATION OF THE NURSE'S DOLE IN
                      THE _MEDEA_ OF EURIPIDES.

    OH how I wish that an embargo
    Had kept in port the good ship Argo!
    Who, still unlaunched from Grecian docks,
    Had never passed the Azure rocks;
    But now I fear her trip will be a
    Damn'd business for my Miss Medea, etc., etc.[15]

                                                             _June_, 1810.
                  [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 227.]

FOOTNOTES:

[15] ["I am just come from an expedition through the Bosphorus to
the Black Sea and the Cyanean Symplegades, up which last I scrambled
with as great risk as ever the Argonauts escaped in their hoy. You
remember the beginning of the nurse's dole in the _Medea_ [lines 1-7],
of which I beg you to take the following translation, done on the
summit;--[A 'damned business'] it very nearly was to me; for, had not
this sublime passage been in my head, I should never have dreamed of
ascending the said rocks, and bruising my carcass in honour of the
ancients."--Letter to Henry Drury, June 17, 1810, _Letters_, 1898, i.
276.

Euripides, _Medea_, lines 1-7--
    Εἴθ' ὤφελ' Ἀργοῦς μὴ διαπτάσθαι σκάφος κ.τ.λ.
    [Ei)/th' ô)/phel' A)rgou~s mê\ diapta/sthai ska/phos k.t.l.]
]



                           MY EPITAPH.[16]

    YOUTH, Nature, and relenting Jove,
    To keep my lamp _in_ strongly strove;
    But Romanelli was so stout,
    He beat all three--and _blew_ it _out_.

                                                          _October_, 1810.
                  [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 240.]

FOOTNOTES:

[16] ["The English Consul ... forced a physician upon me, and in three
days vomited and glystered me to the last gasp. In this state I made my
epitaph--take it."--Letter to Hodgson, October 3, 1810, _Letters_, 1898,
i. 298.]



                      SUBSTITUTE FOR AN EPITAPH.

    KIND Reader! take your choice to cry or laugh;
    Here HAROLD lies--but where's his Epitaph?
    If such you seek, try Westminster, and view
    Ten thousand just as fit for him as you.

                                                             Athens, 1810.
                     [First published, _Lord Byron's Works_, 1832, ix. 4.]



                   EPITAPH FOR JOSEPH BLACKET, LATE
                       POET AND SHOEMAKER.[17]

    STRANGER! behold, interred together,
    The _souls_ of learning and of leather.
    Poor Joe is gone, but left his _all_:
    You'll find his relics in a _stall_.
    His works were neat, and often found
    Well stitched, and with _morocco_ bound.
    Tread lightly--where the bard is laid--
    He cannot mend the shoe he made;
    Yet is he happy in his hole,
    With verse immortal as his _sole_.
    But still to business he held fast,
    And stuck to Phoebus to the _last_.
    Then who shall say so good a fellow
    Was only "leather and prunella?"
    For character--he did not lack it;
    And if he did, 'twere shame to "Black-it."

                                                    Malta, _May_ 16, 1811.
                    [First published, _Lord Byron's Works_, 1832, ix. 10.]

FOOTNOTES:

[17] [For Joseph Blacket (1786-1810), see _Letters_, 1898, i. 314,
_note_ 2; see, too, _Poetical Works_, 1898, i. 359, _note_ 1, and
441-443, _note_ 2. The _Epitaph_ is of doubtful authenticity.]



        ON MOORE'S LAST OPERATIC FARCE, OR FARCICAL OPERA.[18]

      GOOD plays are scarce,
      So Moore writes _farce_:
    The poet's fame grows brittle[i]--
      We knew before
      That _Little_'s Moore,
    But now't is Moore that's _little_.

                                                     _September_ 14, 1811.
         [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 295 (_note_).]

FOOTNOTES:

[i] _Is fame like his so brittle_?--[_MS_.]

[18] ["On a leaf of one of his paper books I find an epigram, written at
this time, which, though not perhaps particularly good, I consider
myself bound to insert."--Moore, _Life_, p. 137, _note_ 1. The reference
is to Moore's _M.P.; or, The Blue Stocking_, which was played for the
first time at the Lyceum Theatre, September 9, 1811. For Moore's _nom de
plume_, "The late Thomas Little, Esq.," compare Praed's _The Belle of
the Ball-Room_--

    "If those bright lips had quoted Locke,
    I might have thought they murmured Little."]



                          [R.C. DALLAS.][19]

    YES! wisdom shines in all his mien,
    Which would so captivate, I ween,
      Wisdom's own goddess Pallas;
    That she'd discard her fav'rite owl,
    And take for pet a brother fowl,
      Sagacious R.C. Dallas.

       [First published, _Life, Writings, Opinions, etc._, 1825, ii. 192.]

FOOTNOTES:

[19] ["A person observing that Mr. Dallas looked very wise on a certain
occasion, his Lordship is said to have broke out into the following
impromptu."--_Life, Writings, Times, and Opinions of Lord Byron_, 1825,
ii. 191.]



           AN ODE[20] TO THE FRAMERS OF THE FRAME BILL.[21]

                                  1.

    OH well done Lord E---- n! and better done R----r![22]
      Britannia must prosper with councils like yours;
    Hawkesbury, Harrowby, help you to guide her,
      Whose remedy only must _kill_ ere it cures:
    Those villains; the Weavers, are all grown refractory,
     Asking some succour for Charity's sake--
    So hang them in clusters round each Manufactory,
      That will at once put an end to _mistake_.[23]

                                  2.

    The rascals, perhaps, may betake them to robbing,
      The dogs to be sure have got nothing to eat--
    So if we can hang them for breaking a bobbin,
      'T will save all the Government's money and meat:
    Men are more easily made than machinery--
      Stockings fetch better prices than lives--
    Gibbets on Sherwood will heighten the scenery,
      Shewing how Commerce, how Liberty thrives!

                                  3.

    Justice is now in pursuit of the wretches,
      Grenadiers, Volunteers, Bow-street Police,
    Twenty-two Regiments, a score of Jack Ketches,
      Three of the Quorum and two of the Peace;
    Some Lords, to be sure, would have summoned the Judges,
      To take their opinion, but that they ne'er shall,
    For LIVERPOOL such a concession begrudges,
      So now they're condemned by _no Judges_ at all.

                                  4.

    Some folks for certain have thought it was shocking,
      When Famine appeals and when Poverty groans,
    That Life should be valued at less than a stocking,
      And breaking of frames lead to breaking of bones.
    If it should prove so, I trust, by this token,
      (And who will refuse to partake in the hope?)
    That the frames of the fools may be first to be _broken_,
      Who, when asked for a _remedy_, sent down a _rope_.

            [First published, _Morning Chronicle, Monday, March_ 2, 1812.]
                     [See a _Political Ode by Lord Byron, hitherto unknown
                  as his production_, London, John Pearson, 46, Pall Mall,
            1880, 8º. See, too, Mr. Pearson's prefatory Note, pp. 5, etc.]

FOOTNOTES:

[20] ["LORD BYRON TO EDITOR OF THE _MORNING CHRONICLE_.

Sir,--I take the liberty of sending an alteration of the two last lines
of stanza 2^d^, which I wish to run as follows:--

    'Gibbets on Sherwood will _heighten_ the scenery,
    Shewing how commerce, _how_ liberty thrives.'

I wish you could insert it tomorrow for a particular reason; but I feel
much obliged by your inserting it at all. Of course do _not_ put my name
to the thing--believe me,

                  Your obliged
             and very obedient servant,
                                       BYRON.
8, St. James's Street,
     _Sunday, March_ 1, 1812."]

[21] [For Byron's maiden speech in the House of Lords, February 27,
1812, see _Letters_, 1898, ii. 424-430.]

[22] [Richard Ryder (1766-1832), second son of the first Baron Harrowby,
was Home Secretary, 1809-12.]

[23] Lord E., on Thursday night, said the riots at Nottingham arose from
a "_mistake_."



                TO THE HON^BLE^ M^RS^ GEORGE LAMB.[24]

                                  1.

    The sacred song that on mine ear
      Yet vibrates from that voice of thine,
    I heard, before, from one so dear--
      'T is strange it still appears divine.

                                  2.

    But, oh! so sweet that _look_ and _tone_
      To her and thee alike is given;
    It seemed as if for me alone
      That _both_ had been recalled from Heaven!

                                  3.

    And though I never can redeem
      The vision thus endeared to me;
    I scarcely can regret my dream,
      When realised again by thee.

                                                                     1812.
                  [First published in _The Two Duchesses_, by Vere Foster,
                                                            1898, p. 374.]

FOOTNOTES:

[24] [Caroline Rosalie Adelaide St. Jules (1786-1862) married, in 1809,
the Hon. George Lamb (see _English Bards, etc_., line 55, _Poetical
Works_, 1898, i. 300, note 1), fourth son of the first Viscount
Melbourne.]



                            [LA REVANCHE.]

                                  1.

    There is no more for me to hope,
      There is no more for thee to fear;
    And, if I give my Sorrow scope,
      That Sorrow thou shalt never hear.
      Why did I hold thy love so dear?
      Why shed for such a heart one tear?
    Let deep and dreary silence be
    My only memory of thee!

                                  2.

    When all are fled who flatter now,
      Save thoughts which will not flatter then;
    And thou recall'st the broken vow
      To him who must not love again--
      Each hour of now forgotten years
      Thou, then, shalt number with thy tears;
    And every drop of grief shall be
    A vain remembrancer of me!

                                                           Undated, ?1812.
                   [From an autograph MS. in the possession of Mr. Murray,
                                          now for the first time printed.]



                           TO THOMAS MOORE.

        WRITTEN THE EVENING BEFORE HIS VISIT TO MR. LEIGH HUNT
               IN HORSEMONGER LANE GAOL, MAY 19, 1813.

    OH you, who in all names can tickle the town,
    Anacreon, Tom Little, Tom Moore, or Tom Brown,--[25]
    For hang me if I know of which you may most brag,
    Your Quarto two-pounds, or your Two-penny Post Bag;

           *       *       *       *       *

    But now to my letter--to _yours_ 'tis an answer--
    To-morrow be with me, as soon as you can, sir,
    All ready and dressed for proceeding to spunge on
    (According to compact) the wit in the dungeon--[26]
    Pray Phoebus at length our political malice
    May not get us lodgings within the same palace!
    I suppose that to-night you're engaged with some codgers,
    And for Sotheby's Blues[27] have deserted Sam Rogers;
    And I, though with cold I have nearly my death got,
    Must put on my breeches, and wait on the Heathcote;[28]
    But to-morrow, at four, we will both play the _Scurra_,
    And you'll be Catullus, the Regent Mamurra.[29]

                  [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 401.]

FOOTNOTES:

[25] [Moore's "_Intercepted Letters; or, The Twopenny Post-Bag_, By
Thomas Brown, the Younger," was published in 1813.]

[26] [James Henry Leigh Hunt (1784-1859) was imprisoned February, 1813,
to February, 1815, for a libel on the Prince Regent, published in the
_Examiner_, March 12, 1812.--_Letters_, 1898, ii. 205-208, _note_ 1.]

[27] [For "Sotheby's Blues," see Introduction to _The Blues, Poetical
Works_, 1901, iv. 570, _et ibid_., 579, 580.]

[28] [Katherine Sophia Manners was married in 1793 to Sir Gilbert
Heathcote. See _Letters_, 1898, ii. 402, 406.]

[29] [See _Catullus_, xxix. 1-4--

    "Quis hoc potest videre? quis potest pati,
    Nisi impudicus et vorax et aleo,
    Mamurram habere, quod Comata Gallia
    Habebat uncti et ultima Britannia?" etc.]



                     ON LORD THURLOW'S POEMS.[30]

                                  1.

    WHEN Thurlow this damned nonsense sent,
    (I hope I am not violent)
    Nor men nor gods knew what he meant.

                                  2.

    And since not even our Rogers' praise
    To common sense his thoughts could raise--
    Why _would_ they let him print his lays?

                                  3.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                  4.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                  5.

    To me, divine Apollo, grant--O!
    Hermilda's[31] first and second canto,
    I'm fitting up a new portmanteau;

                                  6.

    And thus to furnish decent lining,
    My own and others' bays I'm twining,--
    So, gentle Thurlow, throw me thine in.

                                                             June 2, 1813.
                  [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 396.]

FOOTNOTES:

[30] [One evening, in the late spring or early summer of 1813, Byron and
Moore supped on bread and cheese with Rogers. Their host had just
received from Lord Thurlow [Edward Hovell Thurlow, 1781-1829] a copy of
his _Poems on Several Occasions_ (1813), and Byron lighted upon some
lines to Rogers, "On the Poem of Mr. Rogers, entitled 'An Epistle to a
Friend.'" The first stanza ran thus--

    "When Rogers o'er this labour bent,
    Their purest fire the Muses lent,
    T' illustrate this sweet argument."

"Byron," says Moore, "undertook to read it aloud;--but he found it
impossible to get beyond the first two words. Our laughter had now
increased to such a pitch that nothing could restrain it. Two or three
times he began; but no sooner had the words 'When Rogers' passed his
lips, than our fit burst forth afresh,--till even Mr. Rogers himself ...
found it impossible not to join us. A day or two after, Lord Byron sent
me the following:--'My dear Moore, "When Rogers" must not see the
enclosed, which I send for your perusal.'"--_Life_, p. 181; _Letters_,
1898, ii. 211-213, _note_ 1.]

Thurlow's poems are by no means contemptible. A sonnet, "To a Bird, that
haunted the Water of Lacken, in the Winter," which Charles Lamb
transcribed in one of Coleridge's note-books, should be set over against
the absurd lines, "On the Poems of Mr. Rogers."

    "O melancholy bird, a winter's day
      Thou standest by the margin of the pool;
      And, taught by God, dost thy whole being school
    To Patience, which all evil can allay:
    God has appointed thee the fish thy prey;
      And giv'n thyself a lesson to the fool
      Unthrifty, to submit to moral rule,
    And his unthinking course by thee to weigh.
      There need not schools nor the professor's chair,
    Though these be good, true wisdom to impart;
      He, who has not enough for these to spare
    Of time, or gold, may yet amend his heart,
      And teach his soul by brooks and rivers fair,
    Nature is always wise in every part."

_Select Poems_, 1821, p. 90.

[See "Fragments of Criticism," _Works of Charles Lamb_, 1903, iii. 284.]

[31] [_Hermilda in Palestine_ was published in 1812, in quarto, and
twice reissued in 1813, as part of _Poems on Various Occasions_ (8vo).
The Lines upon Rogers' _Epistle to a Friend_ appeared first in the
_Gentleman's Magazine_ for April, 1813, vol. 83, p. 357, and were
reprinted in the second edition of _Poems, etc._, 1813, pp. 162, 163.
The lines in italics, which precede each stanza, are taken from the last
stanza of Lord Thurlow's poem.]



                         TO LORD THURLOW.[32]

                                  1.

        "_I lay my branch of laurel down_."

    "_THOU_ lay thy branch of _laurel_ down!"
      Why, what thou'st stole is not enow;
    And, were it lawfully thine own,
      Does Rogers want it most, or thou?
    Keep to thyself thy withered bough,
      Or send it back to Doctor Donne:[33]
    Were justice done to both, I trow,
      He'd have but little, and thou--none.

                                  2.

        "_Then, thus, to form Apollo's crown_."

    A crown! why, twist it how you will,
    Thy chaplet must be foolscap still.
    When next you visit Delphi's town,
      Enquire amongst your fellow-lodgers,
    They'll tell you Phoebus gave his crown,
      Some years before your birth, to Rogers.

                                  3.

        "_Let every other bring his own_."

    When coals to Newcastle are carried,
      And owls sent to Athens, as wonders,
    From his spouse when the Regent's unmarried,
      Or Liverpool weeps o'er his blunders;
    When Tories and Whigs cease to quarrel,
      When Castlereagh's wife has an heir,
    Then Rogers shall ask us for laurel,
      And thou shalt have plenty to spare.

                  [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 397.]

FOOTNOTES:

[32] ["On the same day I received from him the following additional
scraps ['To Lord Thurlow']. The lines in Italics are from the eulogy
that provoked his waggish comments."--_Life_, p. 181. The last stanza of
Thurlow's poem supplied the text--

    "Then, thus, to form Apollo's crown,
    (Let ev'ry other bring his own,)
    I lay my branch of laurel down."]

[33] [Lord Thurlow affected an archaic style in his Sonnets and other
verses. In the Preface to the second edition of _Poems, etc._, he
writes, "I think that our Poetry has been continually declining since
the days of Milton and Cowley ... and that the golden age of our
language is in the reign of Queen Elizabeth."]



                      THE DEVIL'S DRIVE.[ii][34]

                                  1.

    THE Devil returned to Hell by two,
      And he stayed at home till five;
    When he dined on some homicides done in _ragoût_,
      And a rebel or so in an _Irish_ stew,
    And sausages made of a self-slain Jew,
    And bethought himself what next to do,
      "And," quoth he, "I'll take a drive.
    I walked in the morning, I'll ride to-night;
    In darkness my children take most delight,
      And I'll see how my favourites thrive.                             10

                                  2.

    "And what shall I ride in?" quoth Lucifer, then--
      "If I followed my taste, indeed,
    I should mount in a waggon of wounded men,
      And smile to see them bleed.
    But these will be furnished again and again,
      And at present my purpose is speed;
    To see my manor as much as I may,
    And watch that no souls shall be poached away.

                                  3.

    "I have a state-coach at Carlton House,
      A chariot in Seymour-place;[35]                                    20
    But they're lent to two friends, who make me amends
      By driving my favourite pace:
    And they handle their reins with such a grace,
    I have something for both at the end of the race.

                                  4.

    "So now for the earth to take my chance,"
      Then up to the earth sprung he;
    And making a jump from Moscow to France,
      He stepped across the sea,
    And rested his hoof on a turnpike road,
    No very great way from a Bishop's abode.[36]                         30

                                  5.

    But first as he flew, I forgot to say,
    That he hovered a moment upon his way,
      To look upon Leipsic plain;
    And so sweet to his eye was its sulphury glare,
    And so soft to his ear was the cry of despair,
      That he perched on a mountain of slain;
    And he gazed with delight from its growing height,
    Nor often on earth had he seen such a sight,
      Nor his work done half as well:
    For the field ran so red with the blood of the dead,                 40
      That it blushed like the waves of Hell!
    Then loudly, and wildly, and long laughed he:
    "Methinks they have little need here of _me_!"

                                  6.

    Long he looked down on the hosts of each clime,
      While the warriors hand to hand were--
    Gaul--Austrian and Muscovite heroes sublime,
    And--(Muse of Fitzgerald arise with a rhyme!)
      A quantity of _Landwehr_![37]
          Gladness was there,
    For the men of all might and the monarchs of earth,                  50
    There met for the wolf and the worm to make mirth,
      And a feast for the fowls of the Air!

                                  7.

    But he turned aside and looked from the ridge
      Of hills along the river,
    And the best thing he saw was a broken bridge,[38]
      Which a Corporal chose to shiver;
    Though an Emperor's taste was displeased with his haste,
      The Devil he thought it clever;
    And he laughed again in a lighter strain,
      O'er the torrent swoln and rainy,                                  60
    When he saw "on a fiery steed" Prince Pon,
    In taking care of Number _One_--
    Get drowned with a great _many_!

                                  8.

    But the softest note that soothed his ear
      Was the sound of a widow sighing;
    And the sweetest sight was the icy tear,
    Which Horror froze in the blue eye clear
      Of a maid by her lover lying--
    As round her fell her long fair hair,
    And she looked to Heaven with that frenzied air                      70
    Which seemed to ask if a God were there!
    And stretched by the wall of a ruined hut,
    With its hollow cheek, and eyes half shut,
      A child of Famine dying:
    And the carnage _begun_, when _resistance_ is done,
      And the fall of the vainly flying!

                                  9.

    Then he gazed on a town by besiegers taken,
      Nor cared he who were winning;
    But he saw an old maid, for years forsaken,
      Get up and leave her spinning;                                     80
    And she looked in her glass, and to one that did pass,
    She said--"pray are the rapes beginning?"[39]

                                 10.

    But the Devil has reached our cliffs so white,
      And what did he there, I pray?
    If his eyes were good, he but saw by night
      What we see every day;
    But he made a tour and kept a journal
    Of all the wondrous sights nocturnal,
    And he sold it in shares to the _Men_ of the _Row_,
    Who bid pretty well--but they _cheated_ him, though!                 90

                                 11.

    The Devil first saw, as he thought, the _Mail_,
      Its coachman and his coat;
    So instead of a pistol he cocked his tail,
      And seized him by the throat;
    "Aha!" quoth he, "what have we here?
    'T is a new barouche, and an ancient peer!"[40]

                                 12.

    So he sat him on his box again,
      And bade him have no fear,
    But be true to his club, and staunch to his rein,
      His brothel and his beer;                                         100
    "Next to seeing a Lord at the Council board,
    I would rather see him here."

                                 13.

    Satan hired a horse and gig
      With promises to pay;
    And he pawned his horns for a spruce new wig,
      To redeem as he came away:
    And he whistled some tune, a waltz or a jig,
      And drove off at the close of day.

                                 14.

    The first place he stopped at--he heard the Psalm
      That rung from a Methodist Chapel:                                110
    "'T is the best sound I've heard," quoth he, "since my palm
      Presented Eve her apple!
    When _Faith_ is all, 't is an excellent sign,
    That the _Works_ and Workmen both are mine."

                                 15.

    He passed Tommy Tyrwhitt,[41] that standing jest,
      To princely wit a Martyr:
    But the last joke of all was by far the best,
      When he sailed away with "the Garter"!
    "And"--quoth Satan--"this Embassy's worthy my sight,
    Should I see nothing else to amuse me to night.                     120
    With no one to bear it, but Thomas à Tyrwhitt,
    This ribband belongs to an 'Order of Merit'!"

                                 16.

    He stopped at an Inn and stepped within
      The Bar and read the "Times;"
    And never such a treat, as--the epistle of one "Vetus,"[42]
      Had he found save in downright crimes:
    "Though I doubt if this drivelling encomiast of War
    Ever saw a field fought, or felt a scar,
    Yet his fame shall go farther than he can guess,
    For I'll keep him a place in my _hottest Press_;                    130
    And his works shall be bound in Morocco _d'Enfer_,
    And lettered behind with his _Nom de Guerre_."

                                 17.

    The Devil gat next to Westminster,
      And he turned to "the room" of the Commons;
    But he heard as he purposed to enter in there,
      That "the Lords" had received a summons;
    And he thought, as "a _quondam_ Aristocrat,"
    He might peep at the Peers, though to _hear_ them were flat;
    And he walked up the House so like one of his own,
    That they say that he stood pretty near the throne.                 140

                                 18.

    He saw the Lord Liverpool seemingly wise,
      The Lord Westmoreland certainly silly,
    And Jockey of Norfolk--a man of some size--
      And Chatham, so like his friend Billy;[43]
    And he saw the tears in Lord Eldon's eyes,
      Because the Catholics would _not_ rise,
      In spite of his prayers and his prophecies;
    And he heard--which set Satan himself a staring--
    A certain Chief Justice say something like _swearing_.[44]
    And the Devil was shocked--and quoth he, "I must go,                150
    For I find we have much better manners below.
    If thus he harangues when he passes my border,
    I shall hint to friend Moloch to call him to order."

                                 19.

    Then the Devil went down to the humbler House,
      Where he readily found his way
    As natural to him as its hole to a Mouse,
      He had been there many a day;
    And many a vote and soul and job he
      Had bid for and carried away from the Lobby:
    But there now was a "call" and accomplished debaters                160
    Appeared in the glory of hats, boots and gaiters--
    _Some_ paid rather more--but _all_ worse dressed
          than Waiters!

                                 20.

    There was Canning for War, and Whitbread for peace,
      And others as suited their fancies;
    But all were agreed that our debts should increase
      Excepting the Demagogue Francis.
    That rogue! how could Westminster chuse him again
      To leaven the virtue of these honest men!
    But the Devil remained till the Break of Day
      Blushed upon Sleep and Lord Castlereagh:[45]                      170
    Then up half the house got, and Satan got up
      With the drowsy to snore--or the hungry to sup:--
    But so torpid the power of some speakers, 't is said,
    That they sent even him to his brimstone bed.

                                 21.

    He had seen George Rose--but George was grown dumb,
       And only lied in thought![46]
    And the Devil has all the pleasure to come
      Of hearing him talk as he ought.
    With the falsest of tongues, the sincerest of men--
      His veracity were but deceit--                                    180
    And Nature must first have unmade him again,
    Ere his breast or his face, or his tongue, or his pen,
    Conceived--uttered--looked--or wrote down letters ten,
    Which Truth would acknowledge complete.

                                 22.

    Satan next took the army list in hand,
      Where he found a new "Field Marshal;"
    And when he saw this high command
      Conferred on his Highness of Cumberland,[47]
    "Oh! were I prone to cavil--or were I not the Devil,
      I should say this was somewhat partial;                           190
    Since the only wounds that this Warrior gat,
    Were from God knows whom--and the Devil knows what!"

                                 23.

    He then popped his head in a royal Ball,
      And saw all the Haram so hoary;
    And who there besides but Corinna de Staël![48]
      Turned Methodist and Tory!
    "Aye--Aye"--quoth he--"'t is the way with them all,
      When Wits grow tired of Glory:
    But thanks to the weakness, that thus could pervert her,
    Since the dearest of prizes to me's a deserter:                     200
    _Mem_--whenever a sudden conversion I want,
    To send to the school of Philosopher Kant;
    And whenever I need a critic who can gloss over
    All faults--to send for Mackintosh to write up the Philosopher."[49]

                                 24.

    The Devil waxed faint at the sight of this Saint,
      And he thought himself of eating;
    And began to cram from a plate of ham
      Wherewith a Page was retreating--
    Having nothing else to do (for "the friends" each so near
      Had sold all their souls long before),                            210
    As he swallowed down the bacon he wished himself a Jew
      For the sake of another crime more:
    For Sinning itself is but half a recreation,
    Unless it ensures most infallible Damnation.

                                 25.

    But he turned him about, for he heard a sound
      Which even his ear found faults in;
    For whirling above--underneath--and around--
      Were his fairest Disciples Waltzing![50]
    And quoth he--"though this be--the _premier pas_ to me,
      Against it I would warn all--                                     220
    Should I introduce these revels among my younger devils,
      They would all turn perfectly carnal:
    And though fond of the flesh--yet I never could bear it
    Should quite in my kingdom get the upper hand of Spirit."

                                 26.

    The Devil (but 't was over) had been vastly glad
      To see the new Drury Lane,
    And yet he might have been rather mad
      To see it rebuilt in vain;
    And had he beheld their "Nourjahad,"[51]
      Would never have gone again:                                      230
    And Satan had taken it much amiss,
    They should fasten such a piece on a friend of his--
    Though he knew that his works were somewhat sad,
    He never had found them _quite_ so bad:
    For this was "the book" which, of yore, Job, sorely smitten,
    Said, "Oh that _mine_ enemy, _mine_ enemy had written"!

                                 27.

    Then he found sixty scribblers in separate cells,[52]
      And marvelled what they were doing,
    For they looked like little fiends in their own little hells,
      Damnation for others brewing--                                    240
    Though their paper seemed to shrink, from the heat of their ink,
      They were only _coolly_ reviewing!
    And as one of them wrote down the pronoun "_We_,"
      "That Plural"--says Satan--"means _him_ and _me_,
    With the Editor added to make up the three
    Of an Athanasian Trinity,
    And render the believers in our 'Articles' sensible,
    How many must combine to form _one_ Incomprehensible"!

                                                       _December_ 9, 1813.
           [Stanzas 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, 11, 12, 17, 18, first published,
                   _Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 471-474: stanzas 6, 7,
           9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19-27, now published for the first time from
             an autograph MS. in the possession of the Earl of Ilchester.]

FOOTNOTES:

[ii] The Devil's Drive. _A Sequel to Porson's_ Devil's Walk.--[MS. H.]

[34] ["I have lately written a wild, rambling, unfinished rhapsody,
called 'The Devil's Drive,' the notion of which I took from Porson's
_Devil's Walk_."--_Journal_, December 17, 18, 1813, _Letters_, 1898, ii.
378. "Though with a good deal of vigour and imagination, it is," says
Moore, "for the most part rather clumsily executed, wanting the point
and condensation of those clever verses of Coleridge and Southey, which
Lord Byron, adopting a notion long prevalent, has attributed to Porson."
The _Devil's Walk_ was published in the _Morning Post_, September 6,
1799. It has been published under Porson's name (1830, ed. H. Montague,
illustrated by Cruikshank). (See _Poetical Works_, 1898, i. 30, _note_
1.)]

[35] [Lord Yarmouth, nicknamed "Red Herrings," the eldest son of the
Regent's elderly favourite, the Marchioness of Hertford (the "Marchesa"
of the _Twopenny Post-Bag_), lived at No. 7, Seamore Place, Mayfair.
Compare Moore's "Epigram:" "'I want the Court Guide,' said my lady, 'to
look If the House, Seymour Place, be at 30 or 20,'" etc.--_Poetical
Works_, 1850, p. 165.]

[36] [The allusion may be to a case which was before the courts, the
Attorney-General _v_. William Carver and Brownlow Bishop of Winchester
(see _Morning Chronicle_, November 17, 1813). Carver held certain
premises under the Bishop of Winchester, at the entrance of Portsmouth
Harbour, which obstructed the efflux and reflux of the tide. "The fact,"
said Mr. Serjeant Lens, in opening the case for the Crown, "was of great
magnitude to the entire nation, since it effected the security, and even
the existence of one of the principal harbours of Great Britain."]

[37] [The Russian and Austrian troops at the battle of Leipsic, October
16, 1813, were, for the most part, veterans, while the Prussian
contingent included a large body of militia.]

[38] [For the incident of the "broken bridge" Byron was indebted to the
pages of the _Morning Chronicle_ of November 8, 1813, "Paris Papers,
October 30"--

"The Emperor had ordered the engineers to form fougades under the grand
bridge which is between Leipsic and Lindenau, in order to blow it up at
the latest moment, and thus to retard the march of the enemy and give
time to our baggage to file off. General Dulauloy had entrusted the
operation to Colonel Montford. The Colonel, instead of remaining on the
spot to direct it, and to give the signal, ordered a corporal and four
sappers to blow up the bridge the instant the enemy should appear. The
corporal, an ignorant fellow, and ill comprehending the nature of the
duty with which he was charged, upon hearing the first shot discharged
from the ramparts of the city, set fire to the fougades and blew up the
bridge. A part of the army was still on the other side, with a park of
80 pieces of artillery and some hundreds of waggons. The advance of this
part of the army, who were approaching the bridge, seeing it blow up,
conceived it was in the power of the enemy. A cry of dismay spread from
rank to rank. 'The enemy are close upon our rear, and the bridges are
destroyed!' The unfortunate soldiers dispersed, and endeavoured to
effect their escape as well as they could. The Duke of Tarentum swam
across the river. Prince Poniatowsky, mounted on a spirited horse,
darted into the water and appeared no more. The Emperor was not informed
of this disaster until it was too late to remedy it.... Colonel Montfort
and the corporal of the sappers have been handed over to a
court-martial."]

[39] [Compare _Don Juan_, Canto VIII. stanza cxxxii. line 4. Sir Walter
Scott (_Journal_, October 30, 1826 [1890, i. 288]), tells the same story
of "an old woman who, when Carlisle was taken by the Highlanders in
1745, chose to be particularly apprehensive of personal violence, and
shut herself up in a closet, in order that she might escape ravishment.
But no one came to disturb her solitude, and ... by and by she popped
her head out of her place of refuge with the pretty question, 'Good
folks, can you tell me when the ravishing is going to begin?'" In 1813
Byron did not know Scott, and must have stolen the jest from some older
writer. It is, probably, of untold antiquity.]

[40] [The "Four-Horse" Club, founded in 1808, was incorrectly styled the
Four-in-Hand Club, and the Barouche Club. According to the Club rules,
the barouches were "yellow-bodied, with 'dickies,' the horses bay, with
rosettes at their heads, and the harness silver-mounted. The members
wore a drab coat reaching to the ankles, with three tiers of pockets,
and mother-o'-pearl buttons as large as five-shilling pieces. The
waistcoat was blue, with yellow stripes an inch wide; breeches of plush,
with strings and rosettes to each knee; and it was _de rigueur_ that the
hat should be 3-1/2 inches deep in the crown." (See _Driving_, by the
Duke of Beaufort, K.G., 1894, pp. 251-258.)

The "ancient peer" may possibly be intended for the President of the
Club, Philip Henry, fifth Earl of Chesterfield (1755-1815), who was a
member of the Privy Council, and had been Postmaster-General and Master
of the Horse.]

[41] [Sir Thomas Tyrwhitt (_circ_. 1762-1833) was the son of the Rev.
Edmund Tyrwhitt, Rector of Wickham Bishops, etc., and nephew of Thomas
Tyrwhitt, the editor of the _Canterbury Tales_. He was Private Secretary
to the Prince of Wales, auditor of the Duchy of Cornwall (1796), and
Lord Warden of the Stannaries (1805). He was knighted May 8, 1812. He
was sent in the following year in charge of the Garter mission to the
Czar, and on that occasion was made a Knight of the Imperial Order of
St. Anne, First Class. He held the office of Gentleman Usher of the
Black Rod, 1812-1832. "Tommy Tyrwhitt" was an important personage at
Carlton House, and shared with Colonel McMahon the doubtful privilege of
being a confidential servant of the Prince Regent. Compare Letter III.
of Moore's _Twopenny Post-Bag_, 1813, p. 12. "From G.R. to the E. of
Y----th."

    "I write this in bed while my whiskers are airing,
    And M--c has a sly dose of jalap preparing
    For poor T--mm--y T--rr--t at breakfast to quaff--
    As I feel I want something to give me a laugh,
    And there's nothing so good as old T--mm--y kept close
    To his Cornwall accounts, after taking a dose!"

See _Gentleman's Magazine_, March, 1833, vol. 103, pt. i. pp. 275, 276.]

[42] ["Vetus" [Edward Sterling] contributed a series of letters to the
_Times_, 1812, 1813. They were afterwards republished. Vetus was not a
Little Englander, and his political sentiments recall the _obiter dicta_
of contemporary patriots; _e.g._ "the only legitimate basis for a
treaty, if not on the part of the Continental Allies, at least for
England herself [is] that she should conquer all she can, and keep all
she conquers. This is not by way of retaliation, however just, upon so
obdurate and rapacious an enemy--but as an indispensable condition of
her own safety and existence." The letters were reviewed under the
heading of "Illustrations of Vetus," in the _Morning Chronicle_,
December 2, 10, 16, 18; 1813. The reviewer and Byron did not take the
patriotic view of the situation.]

[43] [Robert Banks Jenkinson (1770-1828), second Earl of Liverpool, on
the assassination of Perceval, became Prime Minister, June 7, 1812; John
Fane (1759-1841), tenth Earl of Westmoreland, was Lord Privy Seal,
1798-1827; Charles Howard (1746-1815), eleventh Duke of Norfolk, known
as "Jockey of Norfolk," was a Protestant and a Liberal, and at one time
a friend of the Prince of Wales. Wraxall, _Posthumous Memoirs_, 1836, i.
29, says that "he might have been mistaken for a grazier or a butcher by
his dress and appearance." He figures _largely_ in Gillray, see _e.g._
"Meeting of the Moneyed Interest," December, 1798. John Pitt
(1756-1835), second Earl of Chatham, the hero of the abortive Walcheren
expedition, had been made a general in the army January 1, 1812. He
"inherited," says Wraxall, _ibid._, iii. 129, "his illustrious father's
form and figure; but not his mind."]

[44] [Edward Law (1750-1818), first Baron Ellenborough, Lord Chief
Justice of the King's Bench, 1802-18, was given to the use of strong
language. His temper (see Moore's "Sale of the Tools") was "none of the
best." On one occasion, speaking in the House of Lords (March 22, 1813)
with regard to the "delicate investigation," he asserted that the
accusation ["that the persons intrusted had thought fit to fabricate an
unauthorized document"] "was as false as hell;" and by way of protest
against the tedious harangues of old Lord Darnley, "I am answerable to
God for my time, and what account can I give at the day of judgment if I
stay here longer?"]

[45] [Compare Moore's "Insurrection of the Papers"--

    "Last night I toss'd and turn'd in bed,
    But could not sleep--at length I said,
    'I'll think of Viscount C--stl--r--gh,
    And of his speeches--that's the way.'"]

[46] [George Rose (1744-1818) was at this time Treasurer of the Navy.
Wraxall, who quotes the "Probationary Odes" with regard to his alleged
duplicity, testifies that he "knew him well in his official capacity,
during at least twelve years, and never found him deficient in honour or
sincerity" (_Posthumous Memoirs_, 1836, i. 148). Moore ("Parody of a
Celebrated Letter") makes the Regent conceive how shocked the king would
be to wake up sane and find "that R--se was grown honest, or
W--stm--rel--nd wiser."]

[47] [Ernest Augustus (1771-1851), Duke of Cumberland and King of
Hanover, fifth son of George III., was gazetted as Field-Marshal
November 27, 1813. His "wounds," which, according to the Duke's sworn
testimony, were seventeen in number, were inflicted during an encounter
with his valet, Joseph Sellis (? Sélis), a Piedmontese, who had
attempted to assassinate the Prince (June 1, 1810), and, shortly
afterwards, was found with his throat cut. A jury of Westminster
tradesmen brought in a verdict of _felo de se_ against Sellis. The event
itself and the trial before the coroner provoked controversy and the
grossest scandal. The question is discussed and the Duke exonerated of
the charges brought against him, by J.H. Jesse, _Memoirs, etc., of
George III._, 1864, iii. 545, 546, and by George Rose, _Diaries, etc._,
1860, ii. 437-446. The scandal was revived in 1832 by the publication of
a work entitled _The Authentic Memoirs of the Court of England for the
last Seventy Years._ The printer and publisher of the work was found
guilty. (See _The Trial of Josiah Phillips for a Libel on the Duke of
Cumberland_, 1833.)]

[48] ["At half-past nine [Wednesday, December 8, 1813] there was a grand
dress party at Carlton House, at which her Majesty and the Prince Regent
most graciously received the following distinguished characters from the
Russian Court, viz. the Count and Countess Leiven, Mad. La Barrone
(_sic_) de Staël, Monsieur de Staël," etc.--_Morning Chronicle_,
December 10, 1813.]

[49] [In the review of Madame de Staël's _De L'Allemagne_ (_Edinburgh
Review_, October, 1813, vol. 22, pp. 198-238), Sir James Mackintosh
enlarged upon and upheld the "opinions of Kant" as creative and seminal
in the world of thought. In the same article he passes in review the
systems of Hobbes, Paley, Bentham, Reid, etc., and finds words of praise
and admiration for each in turn. See, too, a passage (p. 226) in which
he alludes to Coleridge as a living writer, whose "singular character
and unintelligible style" might, in any other country but England, have
won for him attention if not approval. His own "conversion" from the
extreme liberalism of the _Vindiciæ Gallicæ_ of 1791 to the philosophic
conservatism of the _Introductory Discourse_ (1798) to his lecture on
_The Law of Nature and Nations_, was regarded with suspicion by
Wordsworth and Coleridge, who, afterwards, were still more effectually
"converted" themselves.]

[50] [See Introduction to _The Waltz, Poetical Works_, 1898, i. 475.]

[51] [_Illusion, or the Trances of Nourjahad_, a melodrama founded on
_The History of Nourjahad_, By the Editor of Sidney Bidulph (Mrs.
Frances Sheridan, _née_ Chamberlaine, 1724-1766), was played for the
first time at Drury Lane Theatre, November 25, 1813. Byron was
exceedingly indignant at being credited with the authorship or
adaptation. (See Letter to Murray, November 27, 1813, _Letters_, 1898,
ii. 288, _note_ 1.) Miss Sophia Lee, who wrote some of the _Canterbury
Tales_, "made a very elegant musical drama of it" (_Memoirs of Mrs. F.
Sheridan_, by Alicia Lefanu, 1824, p. 296); but this was not the
_Nourjahad_ of Drury Lane.]

[52] [Millbank Penitentiary, which was built in the form of a pentagon,
was finally taken in hand in the spring of 1813. Solitary confinement in
the "cells" was, at first, reserved as a punishment for
misconduct.--_Memorials of Millbank_, by Arthur Griffiths, 1875, i. 57.]



                           WINDSOR POETICS.

         LINES COMPOSED ON THE OCCASION OF HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS
            THE PRINCE REGENT BEING SEEN STANDING BETWEEN
              THE COFFINS OF HENRY VIII. AND CHARLES I.,
                    IN THE ROYAL VAULT AT WINDSOR.

    FAMED for contemptuous breach of sacred ties,
    By headless Charles see heartless Henry lies;
    Between them stands another sceptred thing--
    It moves, it reigns--in all but name, a king:

      Charles to his people, Henry to his wife,
    --In him the double tyrant starts to life:
    Justice and Death have mixed their dust in vain,
    Each royal Vampire wakes to life again.
    Ah, what can tombs avail!--since these disgorge
    The blood and dust of both--to mould a George.[53]

                [First published, _Poetical Works_, Paris, 1819, vi. 125.]



                          [ANOTHER VERSION.]

                 ON A ROYAL VISIT TO THE VAULTS.[54]

     [OR CAESAR'S DISCOVERY OF C.I. AND H. 8. IN YE SAME VAULT.]

    FAMED for their civil and domestic quarrels
    See heartless Henry lies by headless Charles;
    Between them stands another sceptred thing,
    It lives, it reigns--"aye, every inch a king."
    Charles to his people, Henry to his wife,
    In him the double tyrant starts to life:
    Justice and Death have mixed their dust in vain.
    The royal Vampires join and rise again.
    What now can tombs avail, since these disgorge
    The blood and dirt[55] of both to mould a George!

FOOTNOTES:

[53] ["I cannot conceive how the _Vault_ has got about; but so it is. It
is too _farouche_; but truth to say, my satires are not very
playful."--Letter to Moore, March 12, 1814, _Letters_, 1899, iii. 57-58.
Moore had written to him, "Your lines about the bodies of Charles and
Henry are, I find, circulated with wonderful avidity; even some clods in
this neighbourhood have had a copy sent to them by some 'young ladies in
town.'"--_Ibid_., p. 57, _note_ 3.

The discovery "that King Charles I. was buried in the vault of King
Henry VIII.," was made on completing the mausoleum which George III.
caused to be built in the tomb-house. The Prince Regent was informed of
the circumstance, and on April 1, 1813, the day after the funeral of his
mother-in-law, the Duchess of Brunswick, he superintended in person the
opening of the leaden coffin, which bore the inscription, "King Charles,
1648" (_sic_). See _An Account of what appeared on Opening the Coffin of
King Charles the First_, by Sir H. Halford, Bart., 1813, pp. 6, 7.
Cornelia Knight, in her _Autobiography_ (1861, i. 227), notes that the
frolic prince, the "Adonis of fifty," who was in a good humour, and "had
given to Princess Charlotte the centre sapphire of Charles's crown,"
acted "the manner of decapitation on my shoulders." He had "forgotten"
Cromwell, who, as Lord Auchinleck reminded Dr. Johnson, had "gart kings
ken that they had a _lith_ in their neck!"]

[54] [From an autograph MS. in the possession of the Hon. Mrs. Norbury.

The first wrapper has written upon it, "The original Impromptu within is
in the handwriting of the noble author Lord Byron, given to Mr. Norbury
[private secretary to Lord Granville] by Mr. Dallas, his Lordship's
valued relative."

Second wrapper, "Autograph of Lord Byron--tres précieux."

Third (outside) wrapper, "Autographe célèbre de Lord Byron."]

[55][

    Πηλὸν αἵματι πεφυραμἑνον [Greek: Pêlὸn ai(/mati pephyramhenon]
    "Clay kneaded with blood."

Suetonius, in _Tiberium_, cap. 57.]



                              ICH DIEN.

    FROM this emblem what variance your motto evinces,
    For the _Man_ is his country's--the Arms are the Prince's!

                                                                    ?1814.
                               [From an autograph MS. in the possession of
                  Mr. A.H. Hallam Murray, now for the first time printed.]



                         CONDOLATORY ADDRESS

         TO SARAH COUNTESS OF JERSEY, ON THE PRINCE REGENT'S
                RETURNING HER PICTURE TO MRS. MEE.[56]

    WHEN the vain triumph of the imperial lord,
    Whom servile Rome obeyed, and yet abhorred,
    Gave to the vulgar gaze each glorious bust,
    That left a likeness of the brave, or just;
    What most admired each scrutinising eye
    Of all that decked that passing pageantry?
    What spread from face to face that wondering air?
    The thought of Brutus[57]--for his was not there!
    That absence proved his worth,--that absence fixed
    His memory on the longing mind, unmixed;                             10
    And more decreed his glory to endure,
    Than all a gold Colossus could secure.

    If thus, fair Jersey, our desiring gaze
    Search for thy form, in vain and mute amaze,
    Amidst those pictured charms, whose loveliness,
    Bright though they be, thine own had rendered less:
    If he, that VAIN OLD MAN, whom truth admits
    Heir of his father's crown, and of his wits,
    If his corrupted eye, and withered heart,
    Could with thy gentle image bear to part;                            20
    That tasteless shame be _his_, and ours the grief,
    To gaze on Beauty's band without its chief:
    Yet Comfort still one selfish thought imparts,
    We lose the portrait, but preserve our hearts.

    What can his vaulted gallery now disclose?
    A _garden_ with all flowers--except the rose;--
    A _fount_ that only wants its living stream;
    A _night_, with every star, save Dian's beam.
    Lost to our eyes the present forms shall be,
    That turn from tracing them to dream of thee;                        30
    And more on that recalled resemblance pause,
    Than all he _shall_ not force on our applause.

    Long may thy yet meridian lustre shine,
    With all that Virtue asks of Homage thine:
    The symmetry of youth--the grace of mien--
    The eye that gladdens--and the brow serene;
    The glossy darkness of that clustering hair,[58]
    Which shades, yet shows that forehead more than fair!
    Each glance that wins us, and the life that throws
    A spell which will not let our looks repose,                         40
    But turn to gaze again, and find anew
    Some charm that well rewards another view.
    These are not lessened, these are still as bright,
    Albeit too dazzling _for a dotard's sight_;
    And those must wait till ev'ry charm is gone,
    To please the paltry heart that pleases none;--
    That dull cold sensualist, whose sickly eye
    In envious dimness passed thy portrait by;
    Who racked his little spirit to combine
    Its hate of _Freedom's_ loveliness, and _thine_.                     50

                                                           _May_ 29, 1814.
                       [First published in _The Champion_, July 31, 1814.]

FOOTNOTES:

[56] ["The gentlemen of the _Champion_, and Perry, have got hold (I know
not how) of the condolatory Address to Lady Jersey on the
picture-abduction by our Regent, and have published them--with my name,
too, smack--without even asking leave, or inquiring whether or no! Damn
their impudence, and damn every thing. It has put me out of patience,
and so, I shall say no more about it."--Letter to Moore, August 3, 1814,
_Letters_, 1899, iii. 118. For Byron's letter to Lady Jersey, of May 29,
1814, and a note from her with reference to a lost(?) copy of the
verses, _vide ibid_., p. 85. Mrs. Anne Mee (1775?-1851) was a
miniature-painter, who was employed by the Prince Regent to take the
portraits of fashionable beauties.]

[57] [Compare _Childe Harold_, Canto IV. stanza lix. line 3, _Poetical
Works_, 1899, ii. 374, _note_ 2.]

[58] [See _Conversations ... with the Countess of Blessington_, 1834,
p. 50.]


[Illustration: ANNESLEY HALL.]



               FRAGMENT OF AN EPISTLE TO THOMAS MOORE.

    "WHAT say _I_?"--not a syllable further in prose;
    I'm your man "of all measures," dear Tom,--so here goes!
    Here goes, for a swim on the stream of old Time,
    On those buoyant supporters, the bladders of rhyme.
    If our weight breaks them down, and we sink in the flood,
    We are smothered, at least, in respectable mud,
    Where the divers of Bathos lie drowned in a heap,
    And Southey's last Pæan has pillowed his sleep;
    That _Felo de se_ who, half drunk with his Malmsey,
    Walked out of his depth and was lost in a calm sea,                  10
    Singing "Glory to God" in a spick and span stanza,
    The like (since Tom Sternhold was choked) never man saw.[59]

    The papers have told you, no doubt, of the fusses,
    The fêtes, and the gapings to get at these Russes,[60]--
    Of his Majesty's suite, up from coachman to Hetman,--
    And what dignity decks the flat face of the great man.
    I saw him, last week, at two balls and a party,--
    For a Prince, his demeanour was rather too hearty.
    You know, _we_ are used to quite different graces,

           *       *       *       *       *

    The Czar's look, I own, was much brighter and brisker,               20
    But then he is sadly deficient in whisker;
    And wore but a starless blue coat, and in kersey-
    mere breeches whisked round, in a waltz with the Jersey,[61]
    Who, lovely as ever, seemed just as delighted
    With Majesty's presence as those she invited.

           *       *       *       *       *

           *       *       *       *       *

                                                             _June_, 1814.
      [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 561, 562 (note).]

FOOTNOTES:

[59] [The two first stanzas of Southey's "_Carmen Triumphale_, for the
Commencement of the Year 1814," end with the line--

    "Glory to God--Deliverance for Mankind!"]

[60] ["The newspapers will tell you all that is to be told of emperors,
etc. They have dined, and supped, and shown their flat faces in all
thoroughfares and several saloons."--Letter to Moore, June 14, 1814,
_Letters_, 1899, iii. 93, 94.

From June 6 to June 27, 1814, the Emperor of Russia, and the King of
Prussia were in England. Huge crowds watched all day and night outside
the Pulteney Hotel (105, Piccadilly), where the Emperor of Russia
stayed. Among the foreigners in London were Nesselrode, Metternich,
Blücher, and Platoff, Hetman of the Cossacks. The two latter were the
heroes of the mob. _Ibid_., p. 93, _note_ 1.]

[61] ["The Emperor," says Lady Vernon (_Journal of Mary Frampton_, pp.
225, 226), "is fond of dancing.... He waltzed with Lady Jersey, whom he
admires, to the great discomposure of the Regent, who has quarrelled
with her."]



              ANSWER TO----'S PROFESSIONS OF AFFECTION.

    IN hearts like thine ne'er may I hold a place
    Till I renounce all sense, all shame, all grace--
    That seat,--like seats, the bane of Freedom's realm,
    But dear to those presiding at the helm--
    Is basely purchased, not with gold alone;
    Add Conscience, too, this bargain is your own--
    'T is thine to offer with corrupting art
    The _rotten borough_[62] of the human heart.

                                                                    ?1814.
                  [From an autograph MS., now for the first time printed.]

FOOTNOTES:

[62] [The phrase, "rotten borough," was used by Sir F. Burdett,
_Examiner_, October 12, 1812.]



                 ON NAPOLEON'S ESCAPE FROM ELBA.[63]

    ONCE fairly set out on his party of pleasure,
    Taking towns at his liking, and crowns at his leisure,
    From Elba to Lyons and Paris he goes,
    Making _balls for_ the ladies, and _bows to_ his foes.

                                                         _March 27, 1815._
                  [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, i. 611.]

FOOTNOTES:

[63] [It may be taken for granted that the "source" of this epigram was
a paragraph in the _Morning Chronicle_ of March 27, 1815: "In the
_Moniteur_ of Thursday we find the Emperor's own account of his _jaunt_
from the Island of Elba to the palace of the Thuilleries. It seems
certainly more like a jaunt of pleasure than the progress of an invader
through a country to be gained."]



                ENDORSEMENT TO THE DEED OF SEPARATION,
                        IN THE APRIL OF 1816.

    A YEAR ago you swore, fond she!
      "To love, to honour," and so forth:
    Such was the vow you pledged to me,
      And here's exactly what 't is worth.

                       [First published, _Poetical Works_, 1831, vi. 454.]



                    [TO GEORGE ANSON BYRON(?)[64]]

                                  1.

    AND, dost thou ask the reason of my sadness?
      Well, I will tell it thee, unfeeling boy!
    'Twas ill report that urged my brain to madness,
      'Twas thy tongue's venom poisoned all my joy.

                                  2.

    The sadness which thou seest is not sorrow;
      My wounds are far too deep for simple grief;
    The heart thus withered, seeks in vain to borrow
      From calm reflection, comfort or relief.

                                  3.

    The arrow's flown, and dearly shalt thou rue it;
      No mortal hand can rid me of my pain:
    My heart is pierced, but thou canst not subdue it--
      Revenge is left, and is not left in vain.

                                                                    ?1816.
                              [First published, _Nicnac_, March 25, 1823.]

FOOTNOTES:

[64] ["A short time before Lord Byron quitted England, in 1816, he
addressed these lines to an individual by whom he deemed himself
injured; they are but little known."--_Nicnac_, March 25, 1823.]



                      SONG FOR THE LUDDITES.[65]

                                  1.

    AS the Liberty lads o'er the sea
    Bought their freedom, and cheaply, with blood,
          So we, boys, we
      Will _die_ fighting, or _live_ free,
    And down with all kings but King Ludd!

                                  2.

    When the web that we weave is complete,
    And the shuttle exchanged for the sword,
      We will fling the winding sheet
      O'er the despot at our feet,
    And dye it deep in the gore he has poured.

                                  3.

    Though black as his heart its hue,
    Since his veins are corrupted to mud,
            Yet this is the dew
            Which the tree shall renew
    Of Liberty, planted by Ludd!

                                                        December 24, 1816.
                  [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 58.]

FOOTNOTES:

[65] [The term "Luddites" dates from 1811, and was applied first to
frame-breakers, and then to the disaffected in general. It was derived
from a half-witted lad named Ned Lud, who entered a house in a fit of
passion, and destroyed a couple of stocking-frames. The song was an
impromptu, enclosed in a letter to Moore of December 24, 1816. "I have
written it principally," he says, "to shock your neighbour [Hodgson?]
who is all clergy and loyalty--mirth and innocence--milk and water." See
_Letters_, 1900, iv. 30; and for General Lud and "Luddites," see
_Letters_, 1898, ii. 97, note 1.]



                           TO THOMAS MOORE.

    What are you doing now,
      Oh Thomas Moore?
    What are you doing now,
      Oh Thomas Moore?
    Sighing or suing now,
    Rhyming or wooing now,
    Billing or cooing now,
      Which, Thomas Moore?

    But the Carnival's coming,
      Oh Thomas Moore!
    The Carnival's coming,
      Oh Thomas Moore!
    Masking and humming,
    Fifing and drumming,
    Guitarring and strumming,
      Oh Thomas Moore!

                                                        December 24, 1816.
              [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 58, 59.]



                            TO MR. MURRAY.

    TO hook the Reader, you, John Murray,
      Have published "Anjou's Margaret,"[66]
    Which won't be sold off in a hurry
      (At least, it has not been as yet);
    And then, still further to bewilder him,
      Without remorse, you set up "Ilderim;"[67]
      So mind you don't get into debt,--
    Because--as how--if you should fail,
    These books would be but baddish bail.
    And mind you do _not_ let escape
      These rhymes to _Morning Post_ or Perry,
    Which would be _very_ treacherous--_very_,
    And get me into such a scrape!
      For, firstly, I should have to sally,
      All in my little boat, against a _Galley_;
    And, should I chance to slay the Assyrian wight,
    Have next to combat with the female Knight:
    And pricked to death expire upon her needle,
    A sort of end which I should take indeed ill!

                                                           March 25, 1817.
                  [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 91.]

FOOTNOTES:

[66] [_Margaret of Anjou_, by Margaret Holford, 1816.]

[67] [_Ilderim, a Syrian Tale_, by H. Gaily Knight, 1816.]



                              VERSICLES.

    I READ the "Christabel;"[68]
            Very well:
    I read the "Missionary;"[69]
            Pretty--very:
    I tried at "Ilderim;"
            Ahem!
    I read a sheet of "Marg'ret of _Anjou_;"
            _Can you_?
    I turned a page of Webster's "Waterloo;"[70]
            Pooh! pooh!
    I looked at Wordsworth's milk-white "Rylstone Doe;"[71]
            Hillo!
    I read "Glenarvon," too, by Caro Lamb;[72]
            God damn!

                                                           March 25, 1817.
                  [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 87.]

FOOTNOTES:

[68] [_Christabel, etc._, by S.T. Coleridge, 1816.]

[69] [_The Missionary of the Andes, a Poem_, by W.L. Bowles, 1815.]

[70] [_Waterloo and other Poems_, by J. Wedderburn Webster, 1816.]

[71] [_The White Doe of Rylstone, or the Fate of the Nortons, a Poem_,
by W. Wordsworth, 1815.]

[72] [_Glenarvon, a Novel_ [by Lady Caroline Lamb], 1816.]



              QUEM DEUS VULT PERDERE PRIUS DEMENTAT.[73]

    God maddens him whom't is his will to lose,
    And gives the choice of death or phrenzy--choose.

                               [First published, _Letters_, 1900, iv. 93.]

FOOTNOTES:

[73] [_À propos_ of Maturin's tragedy, _Manuel_ (_vide post_, p. 48,
_note_ 1), Byron "does into English" the Latin proverb by way of
contrast to the text, "Whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth; blessed be
the Name of the Lord" (Letter to Murray, April 2, 1817).]



                           TO THOMAS MOORE.

                                  1.

    My boat is on the shore,
      And my bark is on the sea;
    But, before I go, Tom Moore,
      Here's a double health to thee!

                                  2.

    Here's a sigh to those who love me,
      And a smile to those who hate;
    And, whatever sky's above me,
      Here's a heart for every fate.

                                  3.

    Though the Ocean roar around me,
      Yet it still shall bear me on;
    Though a desert shall surround me,
      It hath springs that may be won.

                                  4.

    Were't the last drop in the well,
      As I gasped upon the brink,
    Ere my fainting spirit fell,
      'T is to thee that I would drink.

                                  5.

    With that water, as this wine,
      The libation I would pour
    Should be--peace with thine and mine,
      And a health to thee, Tom Moore.[74]

                                                               July, 1817.
               [First published, _Waltz_, London, W. Benbow, 1821, p. 29.]

FOOTNOTES:

[74] ["This should have been written fifteen months ago; the first
stanza was."--Letter to Moore, July 10, 1817.]



             EPISTLE FROM MR. MURRAY TO DR. POLIDORI.[75]

    DEAR Doctor, I have read your play,
    Which is a good one in its way,--
    Purges the eyes, and moves the bowels,
    And drenches handkerchiefs like towels
    With tears, that, in a flux of grief,
    Afford hysterical relief
    To shattered nerves and quickened pulses,
    Which your catastrophe convulses.

      I like your moral and machinery;
    Your plot, too, has such scope for Scenery!                          10
    Your dialogue is apt and smart;
    The play's concoction full of art;
    Your hero raves, your heroine cries,
    All stab, and every body dies.
    In short, your tragedy would be
    The very thing to hear and see:
    And for a piece of publication,
    If I decline on this occasion,
    It is not that I am not sensible
    To merits in themselves ostensible,                                  20
    But--and I grieve to speak it--plays
    Are drugs--mere drugs, Sir--now-a-days.
    I had a heavy loss by _Manuel_--[76]
    Too lucky if it prove not annual,--
    And Sotheby, with his _Orestes_,[77]
    (Which, by the way, the old Bore's best is),
    Has lain so very long on hand,
    That I despair of all demand;
    I've advertised, but see my books,
    Or only watch my Shopman's looks;--                                  30
    Still _Ivan_, _Ina_,[78] and such lumber,
    My back-shop glut, my shelves encumber.

    There's Byron too, who once did better,
    Has sent me, folded in a letter,
    A sort of--it's no more a drama
    Than _Darnley_, _Ivan_, or _Kehama_;
    So altered since last year his pen is,
    I think he's lost his wits at Venice.

           *       *       *       *       *

           *       *       *       *       *

    In short, Sir, what with one and t' other,
    I dare not venture on another.                                       40
    I write in haste; excuse each blunder;
    The Coaches through the street so thunder!
    My room's so full--we've Gifford here
    Reading MS., with Hookham Frere,
    Pronouncing on the nouns and particles,
    Of some of our forthcoming Articles.

      The _Quarterly_--Ah, Sir, if you
    Had but the Genius to review!--
    A smart Critique upon St. Helena,
    Or if you only would but tell in a                                   50
    Short compass what--but to resume;
    As I was saying, Sir, the Room--
    The Room's so full of wits and bards,
    Crabbes, Campbells, Crokers, Freres, and Wards
    And others, neither bards nor wits:
    My humble tenement admits
    All persons in the dress of Gent.,
    From Mr. Hammond to Dog Dent.[79]

      A party dines with me to-day,
    All clever men, who make their way:                                  60
    Crabbe, Malcolm,[80] Hamilton,[81] and Chantrey,
    Are all partakers of my pantry.
    They're at this moment in discussion
    On poor De Staël's late dissolution.
    Her book,[82] they say, was in advance--
    Pray Heaven, she tell the truth of France!
    'T is said she certainly was married
    To Rocca, and had twice miscarried,
    No--not miscarried, I opine,--
    But brought to bed at forty-nine.                                    70
    Some say she died a Papist; some
    Are of opinion that's a Hum;
    I don't know that--the fellows Schlegel,[83]
    Are very likely to inveigle
    A dying person in compunction
    To try th' extremity of Unction.
    But peace be with her! for a woman
    Her talents surely were uncommon,
    Her Publisher (and Public too)
    The hour of her demise may rue--                                     80
    For never more within his shop he--
    Pray--was not she interred at Coppet?
    Thus run our time and tongues away;--
    But, to return, Sir, to your play:
    Sorry, Sir, but I cannot deal,
    Unless 't were acted by O'Neill.
    My hands are full--my head so busy,
    I'm almost dead--and always dizzy;
    And so, with endless truth and hurry,
    Dear Doctor, I am yours,                                             90
                JOHN MURRAY.

                                                          August 21, 1817.
              [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 139-141.
                   Lines 67-82 first published, _Letters_, 1900, iv. 161.]

FOOTNOTES:

[75] ["By the way," writes Murray, Aug. 5, 1817 (_Memoir, etc._, i.
386), "Polidori has sent me his tragedy! Do me the kindness to send by
return of post a _delicate_ declension of it, which I engage faithfully
to copy."

"I never," said Byron, "was much more disgusted with any human
production than with the eternal nonsense, and _tracasseries_, and
emptiness, and ill-humour, and vanity of this young person; but he has
some talent, and is a man of honour, and has dispositions of amendment.
Therefore use your interest for him, for he is improved and improvable;"
and, in a letter to Murray, Aug. 21, 1817, "You want a 'civil and
delicate declension' for the medical tragedy? Take it."--For J.W.
Polidori (1795-1821), see _Letters_, 1899, iii, 284 _note_ I.]

[76] [Maturin's second tragedy, _Manuel_, produced at Drury Lane, March
8, 1817, with Kean as "Manuel Count Valdis, failed, and after five
nights was withdrawn." It was published in 1817. "It is," says Byron
(letter to Murray, June 14, 1817), "the absurd work of a clever
man."--_Letters_, 1900, iv. 134, and _note_ I.]

[77] [Sotheby published, in 1814, _Five Tragedies_, viz. "The Confession,"
"Orestes," "Ivan," "The Death of Darnley," and "Zamorin and Zama."]

[78] [_Ina, A Tragedy_, by Mrs. Wilmot [Barberina Ogle (1768-1854),
daughter of Sir Chaloner Ogle], afterwards Lady Dacre, was produced at
Drury Lane, April 22, 1815. Her "tragedy," writes Byron to Moore, April
23, 1815, "was last night damned." See _Letters_, 1898, ii. 332, _note_
3, etc.; _ibid._, 1899, iii. 195, _note_ I.]

[79] [George Hammond (1763-1853) was a distinguished diplomatist, who
twice (1795-1806 and 1807-1809) held the office of Under-secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs. He is associated with the foundation of the
_Anti-Jacobin_ and the _Quarterly Review_. In the drawing-room of
Albemarle Street, he was Murray's "chief 4-o'clock man," until his
official duties compelled him to settle at Paris.--_Letters_, 1900, iv.
160, _note_ 1.

John Dent, M.P., a banker, was nicknamed "Dog Dent" because he was
concerned in the introduction of the Dog-tax Bill in 1796. In 1802 he
introduced a Bill to abolish bull-baiting.--_Ibid_]

[80] [Sir John Malcolm (1769-1833), soldier, administrator, and
diplomatist, published (January, 1815) his _History of
Persia.--Letters_, 1899, iii. 113, _note_ 1.]

[81] [For "Dark Hamilton," W.R. Hamilton (1777-1859), see _Childe
Harold_, Canto II. stanza xiii. _var_. I, _Poetical Works_, 1899, ii.
108, _note_ 1. Lines 61, 62 were added October 12, 1817.]

[82] [Madame de Staël's _Considérations sur la Révolution Française_ was
offered to Murray in June, 1816 (_Memoir, etc., 1891_, i. 316), and the
sum of £4000 asked for the work. During the negotiations, Madame de
Staël died (July 14, 1817), and the book was eventually published by
Messrs. Baldwin and Cradock.--_Letters_, 1900, iv. 94, _note_.]

[83] [Byron and the elder Schlegel met at Copet, in 1816, but they did
not take to each other. Byron "would not flatter him," perhaps because
he did not appreciate or flatter Byron.]



                        EPISTLE TO MR. MURRAY.

                                  1.

    MY dear Mr. Murray,
    You're in a damned hurry
      To set up this ultimate Canto;[84]
    But (if they don't rob us)
    You'll see Mr. Hobhouse
      Will bring it safe in his portmanteau.

                                  2.

    For the Journal you hint of,[85]
    As ready to print off,
      No doubt you do right to commend it;
    But as yet I have writ off
    The devil a bit of
      Our "Beppo:"--when copied, I'll send it.

                                  3.

    In the mean time you've "Galley"[86]
    Whose verses all tally,
      Perhaps you may say he's a Ninny,
    But if you abashed are
    Because of _Alashtar_,
      He'll piddle another _Phrosine_.[87]

                                  4.

    Then you've Sotheby's Tour,--[88]
    No great things, to be sure,--
      You could hardly begin with a less work;
    For the pompous rascallion,
    Who don't speak Italian
      Nor French, must have scribbled by guess-work.

                                  5.

    No doubt he's a rare man
    Without knowing German
      Translating his way up Parnassus,
    And now still absurder
    He meditates Murder
      As you'll see in the trash he calls _Tasso's_.

                                  6.

    But you've others his betters
    The real men of letters
      Your Orators--Critics--and Wits--
    And I'll bet that your Journal
    (Pray is it diurnal?)
      Will pay with your luckiest hits.

                                  7.

    You can make any loss up
    With "Spence"[89] and his gossip,
      A work which must surely succeed;
    Then Queen Mary's Epistle-craft,[90]
    With the new "Fytte" of "Whistlecraft,"
      Must make people purchase and read.

                                  8.

    Then you've General Gordon,[91]
    Who girded his sword on,
      To serve with a Muscovite Master,
    And help him to polish
    A nation so owlish,
      They thought shaving their beards a disaster.

                                  9.

    For the man, "_poor and shrewd_,"[92]
    With whom you'd conclude
      A compact without more delay,
    Perhaps some such pen is
    Still extant in Venice;
      But please, Sir, to mention _your pay_.

                                 10.

    Now tell me some news
    Of your friends and the Muse,
      Of the Bar, or the Gown, or the House,
    From Canning, the tall wit,
    To Wilmot,[93] the small wit,
      Ward's creeping Companion and _Louse_,

                                 11.

    Who's so damnably bit
    With fashion and Wit,
      That he crawls on the surface like Vermin,
    But an Insect in both,--
    By his Intellect's growth,
      Of what size you may quickly determine.[94]

                                                Venice, _January_ 8, 1818.
             [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 156, 157;
                stanzas 3, 5, 6, 10, 11, first published, _Letters_, 1900,
                                                             iv. 191-193.]

FOOTNOTES:

[84] [The Fourth Canto of _Childe Harold_.]

[85] [Murray bought a half-share in _Blackwood's Edinburgh Monthly
Magazine_ in August, 1818, and remained its joint proprietor till
December, 1819, when it became the property of William Blackwood. But
perhaps the reference is to Byron's Swiss Journal of September, 1816.]

[86] [Henry Gaily Knight (1786-1846), who was a contemporary of Byron at
Trinity College, Cambridge, was a poetaster, and, afterwards, a writer
of works on architecture. His Oriental verses supplied Byron with a
subject for more than one indifferent _jeu d'esprit_.]

[87] [_Phrosyne_, a Grecian tale, and _Alashtar_, an Arabian tale, were
published in 1817. In a letter to Murray, September 4, 1817, Byron
writes, "I have received safely, though tardily, the magnesia and
tooth-powder, _Phrosine_ and _Alashtar_. I shall clean my teeth with
one, and wipe my shoes with the other."--_Letters_, 1901, iv.]

[88] [Sotheby's _Farewell to Italy_ and _Occasional Poems_ were
published in 1818, as the record of a tour which he had taken in 1816-17
with his family, Professor Elmsley, and Dr. Playfair. For Byron's
unfinished skit on Sotheby's Tour, see _Letters_, 1900, iv. Appendix V.
pp. 452, 453.]

[89] [_Observations, Anecdotes, and Characters of Books and Men_, by the
Rev. Joseph Spence, arranged, with notes, by the late Edmund Malone,
Esq., 1 vol. 8vo, 1820.]

[90] [_The Life of Mary Queen of Scots_, by George Chalmers, 2 vols.
4to, 1819.]

[91] [Thomas Gordon (1788-1841) entered the Scots Greys in 1808. Two
years later he visited Ali Pasha (see _Letters_, 1898, i. 246, _note_ 1)
in Albania, and travelled in Persia and Turkey in the East. From 1813 to
1815 he served in the Russian Army. He wrote a _History of the Greek
Revolution_, 1832, 2 vols., but it does not appear that he was
negotiating with Murray for the publication of any work at this period.]

[92] _Vide_ your letter.

[93] [Probably Sir Robert John Wilmot (1784-1841) (afterwards Wilmot
Horton), Byron's first cousin, who took a prominent part in the
destruction of the "Memoirs," May 17, 1824. (For Lady Wilmot Horton, the
original of "She walks in beauty," see _Poetical Works_, 1900, iii. 381,
_note_ I.)]

[94] [Stanzas 12, 13, 14 cannot be published.]



           ON THE BIRTH OF JOHN WILLIAM RIZZO HOPPNER.[95]

    HIS father's sense, his mother's grace,
      In him, I hope, will always fit so;
    With--still to keep him in good case--
      The health and appetite of Rizzo.

                                                      _February_ 20, 1818.
                 [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 134.]

FOOTNOTES:

[95] [Richard Belgrave Hoppner (1786-1872), second son of John Hoppner,
R.A., was appointed English Consul at Venice, October, 1814. (See
_Letters_, 1900, iv. 83, _note_ I.) The quatrain was translated (see the
following poem) into eleven different languages--Greek, Latin, Italian
(also the Venetian dialect), German, French, Spanish, Illyrian, Hebrew,
Armenian, and Samaritan, and printed "in a small neat volume in the
seminary of Padua." For nine of these translations see _Works_, 1832,
xi. pp. 324-326, and 1891, p. 571. Rizzo was a Venetian surname. See W.
Stewart Rose's verses to Byron, "Grinanis, Mocenijas, Baltis, Rizzi,
Compassionate our cruel case," etc., _Letters_, iv. 212.]



                           [E NIHILO NIHIL;
                                  OR
                        AN EPIGRAM BEWITCHED.]

    OF rhymes I printed seven volumes--[96]
    The list concludes John Murray's columns:
    Of these there have been few translations[97]
    For Gallic or Italian nations;
    And one or two perhaps in German--
    But in this last I can't determine.
    But then I only sung of passions
    That do not suit with modern fashions;
    Of Incest and such like diversions
    Permitted only to the Persians,
    Or Greeks to bring upon their stages--
    But that was in the earlier ages
    Besides my style is the romantic,
    Which some call fine, and some call frantic;
    While others are or would seem _as_ sick
    Of repetitions nicknamed Classic.
    For my part all men must allow
    Whatever I was, I'm classic now.
    I saw and left my fault in time,
    And chose a topic all sublime--
    Wondrous as antient war or hero--
    Then played and sung away like Nero,
    Who sang of Rome, and I of Rizzo:
    The subject has improved my wit so,
    The first four lines the poet sees
    Start forth in fourteen languages!
    Though of seven volumes none before
    Could ever reach the fame of four,
    Henceforth I sacrifice all Glory
    To the Rinaldo of my Story:
    I've sung his health and appetite
    (The last word's not translated right--
    He's turned it, God knows how, to vigour)[98]
    I'll sing them in a book that's bigger.
    Oh! Muse prepare for thy Ascension!
    And generous Rizzo! thou my pension.

                                                         _February_, 1818.
                   [From an autograph MS. in the possession of Mr. Murray,
                                          now for the first time printed.]

FOOTNOTES:

[96] [Byron must have added the Fourth Canto of _Childe Harold_ to the
complete edition of the _Poetical Works_ in six volumes. See Murray's
list, dated "Albemarle Street, London, January, 1818." The seventh
volume of the Collected Works was not issued till 1819.]

[97] [A French translation of the _Bride of Abydos_ appeared in 1816, an
Italian translation of the _Lament of Tasso_ in 1817. Goethe (see
_Letters_, 1901, v. 503-521) translated fragments of _Manfred_ in 1817,
1818, but the earliest German translation of the entire text of
_Manfred_ was issued in 1819.]

[98] [See the last line of the Italian translation of the quatrain.]



                            TO MR. MURRAY.

                                  1.

    Strahan, Tonson, Lintot of the times,[99]
    Patron and publisher of rhymes,
    For thee the bard up Pindus climbs,
                          My Murray.


                                  2.

    To thee, with hope and terror dumb,
    The unfledged MS. authors come;
    Thou printest all--and sellest some--
                          My Murray.

                                  3.

    Upon thy table's baize so green
    The last new Quarterly is seen,--
    But where is thy new Magazine,[100]
                          My Murray?

                                  4.

    Along thy sprucest bookshelves shine
    The works thou deemest most divine--
    The Art of Cookery,[101] and mine,
                          My Murray.

                                  5.

    Tours, Travels, Essays, too, I wist,
    And Sermons, to thy mill bring grist;
    And then thou hast the _Navy List_,
                          My Murray.


                                  6.

    And Heaven forbid I should conclude,
    Without "the Board of Longitude,"[102]
    Although this narrow paper would,
                          My Murray.

                                                 Venice, _April 11_, 1818.
                 [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 171.]

FOOTNOTES:

[99] [William Strahan (1715-1785) published Johnson's _Dictionary_,
Gibbon's _Decline and Fall_, Cook's _Voyages, etc_. He was
great-grandfather of the mathematician William Spottiswoode (1825-1883).

Jacob Tonson (1656?-1736) published for Otway, Dryden, Addison, etc. He
was secretary of the Kit-Cat Club, 1700. He was the publisher (1712,
etc.) of the _Spectator_.

Barnaby Bernard Lintot (1675-1736) was at one time (1718) in partnership
with Tonson. He published Pope's _Iliad_ in 1715, and the _Odyssey_,
1725-26.]

[100] [See note 2, p. 51.]

[101] [Mrs. Rundell's _Domestic Cookery_, published in 1806, was one of
Murray's most successful books. In 1822 he purchased the copyright from
Mrs. Rundell for £2000 (see _Letters_, 1898, ii. 375; and _Memoir of
John Murray_, 1891, ii. 124).]

[102] [The sixth edition of _Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_ (1813) was
"printed by T. Davison, Whitefriars, for John Murray, Bookseller to the
Admiralty, and the Board of Longitude." Medwin (_Conversations_, 1824,
p. 259) attributes to Byron a statement that Murray had to choose
between continuing to be his publisher and printing the "Navy Lists,"
and "that there was no hesitation which way he should decide: the
Admiralty carried the day." In his "Notes" to the _Conversations_
(November 2, 1824) Murray characterized "the passage about the
Admiralty" as "unfounded in fact, and no otherwise deserving of notice
than to mark its absurdity."]



         BALLAD. TO THE TUNE OF "SALLEY IN OUR ALLEY."

                                  1.

    OF all the twice ten thousand bards
      That ever penned a canto,
    Whom Pudding or whom Praise rewards
      For lining a portmanteau;
    Of all the poets ever known,
      From Grub-street to Fop's Alley,[103]
    The Muse may boast--the World must own
      There's none like pretty Gally![104]

                                  2.

    He writes as well as any Miss,
      Has published many a poem;
    The shame is yours, the gain is his,
      In case you should not know 'em:
    He has ten thousand pounds a year--
      I do not mean to vally--
    His songs at sixpence would be dear,
      So give them gratis, Gaily!

                                  3.

    And if this statement should seem queer,
      Or set down in a hurry,
    Go, ask (if he will be sincere)
      His bookseller--John Murray.
    Come, say, how many have been sold,
      And don't stand shilly-shally,
    Of bound and lettered, red and gold,
      Well printed works of Gally.

                                  4.

    For Astley's circus Upton[105] writes,
      And also for the Surry; (_sic_)
    Fitzgerald weekly still recites,
      Though grinning Critics worry:
    Miss Holford's Peg, and Sotheby's Saul,
      In fame exactly tally;
    From Stationer's Hall to Grocer's Stall
      They go--and so does Gally.


                                  5.

    He rode upon a Camel's hump[106]
      Through Araby the sandy,
    Which surely must have hurt the rump
      Of this poetic dandy.
    His rhymes are of the costive kind,
      And barren as each valley
    In deserts which he left behind
      Has been the Muse of Gally.

                                  6.

    He has a Seat in Parliament,
      Is fat and passing wealthy;
    And surely he should be content
      With these and being healthy:
    But Great Ambition will misrule
      Men at all risks to sally,--
    Now makes a poet--now a fool,
      And _we_ know _which_--of Gally.

                                  7.

    Some in the playhouse like to row,
      Some with the Watch to battle,
    Exchanging many a midnight blow
      To Music of the Rattle.
    Some folks like rowing on the Thames,
      Some rowing in an Alley,
    But all the Row my fancy claims
      Is _rowing_--of my _Gally_.

                                                    _April_ 11, 1818.[107]

FOOTNOTES:

[103] [For Fop's Alley, see _Poetical Works_, 1898, i. 410, _note_ 2.]

[104] [H. Gally Knight (1786-1846) was at Cambridge with Byron.]

[105] [William Upton was the author of _Poems on Several Occasions_,
1788, and of the _Words of the most Favourite Songs, Duets, etc._, sung
at the Royal Amphitheatre, Westminster Bridge, etc. In the dedication to
Mrs. Astley he speaks of himself as the author of the _Black Cattle_,
_Fair Rosamond_, etc. He has also been credited with the words of James
Hook's famous song, _A Lass of Richmond Hill_, but this has been
disputed. (See _Notes and Queries_, 1878, Series V. vol. ix. p. 495.)]

[106] [Compare--

      "Th' unloaded camel, pacing slow.
    Crops the rough herbage or the tamarisk spray."

_Alashtar_ (by H.G. Knight), 1817, Canto I, stanza viii, lines 5, 6.]

[107] [From an autograph MS. in the possession of Mr. Murray, now for
the first time printed. For stanzas 3, 4, 6, see _Letters_, 1900, iv.
219, 220. For stanzas 1, 2, 3 of "Another Simple Ballat. To the tune of
Tally i.o. the Grinder" (probably a variant of Dibdin's song, "The
Grinders, or more Grist to the Mill"), _vide ibid._, pp. 220, 221.]



                        ANOTHER SIMPLE BALLAT.

                                  1.

    MRS. WILMOT sate scribbling a play,
      Mr. Sotheby sate sweating behind her;
    But what are all these to the Lay
      Of Gally i.o. the Grinder?
          Gally i.o. i.o., etc.

                                  2.

    I bought me some books tother day,
      And sent them down stairs to the binder;
    But the Pastry Cook carried away
      My Gally i.o. the Grinder.
          Gally i.o. i.o., etc.

                                  3.

    I wanted to kindle my taper,
      And called to the Maid to remind her;
    And what should she bring me for paper
      But Gally i.o. the Grinder.
          Gally i.o. i.o., etc.

                                  4.

    Among my researches for EASE
      I went where one's certain to find her:
    The first thing by her throne that one sees
      Is Gally i.o. the Grinder.
          Gally i.o. i.o., etc.

                                  5.

    Away with old Homer the blind--
      I'll show you a poet that's blinder:
    You may see him whene'er you've a mind
      In Gally i.o. the Grinder.
          Gally i.o. i.o., etc.

                                  6.

    Blindfold he runs groping for fame,
      And hardly knows where he will find her:
    She don't seem to take to the name
      Of Gally i.o. the Grinder.
          Gally i.o. i.o., etc.

                                  7.

    Yet the Critics have been very kind,
      And Mamma and his friends have been kinder;
    But the greatest of Glory's behind
      For Gally i.o. the Grinder.
          Gally i.o. i.o., etc.

                                                         _April_ 11, 1818.
                   [From an autograph MS. in the possession of Mr. Murray,
                                          now for the first time printed.]



                               EPIGRAM.

                  FROM THE FRENCH OF RULHIÈRES.[108]

    IF for silver, or for gold,
      You could melt ten thousand pimples
      Into half a dozen dimples,
    Then your face we might behold,
      Looking, doubtless, much more snugly,
      Yet even _then_ 'twould be damned ugly.

                                                        _August_ 12, 1819.
                 [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 235.]

FOOTNOTES:

[108] ["Would you like an epigram--a translation? It was written on some
Frenchwoman, by Rulhières, I believe."--Letter to Murray, August 12,
1819, _Letters_, 1900, iv. 346.

Claude Carloman de Rulhière (1718-1791), historian, poet, and
epigrammatist, was the author of _Anecdotes sur la revolution de Russie
en l'anneé_ 1762, _Histoire de l'anarchie de Pologne_ (1807), etc. His
epigrams are included in "Poésies Diverses," which are appended to _Les
jeux de Mains_, a poem in three cantos, published in 1808, and were
collected in his _Oeuvres Posthumes_, 1819; but there is no trace of the
original of Byron's translation. Perhaps it is _after_ de Rulhière, who
more than once epigrammatizes "Une Vieille Femme."]



                            EPILOGUE.[109]

                                  1.

    THERE'S something in a stupid ass,
      And something in a heavy dunce;
    But never since I went to school
      I heard or saw so damned a fool
    As William Wordsworth is for once.

                                  2.

    And now I've seen so great a fool
      As William Wordsworth is for once;
    I really wish that Peter Bell
      And he who wrote it were in hell,
    For writing nonsense for the nonce.

                                  3.

    It saw the "light in ninety-eight,"
      Sweet babe of one and twenty years![110]
    And then he gives it to the nation
      And deems himself of Shakespeare's peers!

                                  4.

    He gives the perfect work to light!
      Will Wordsworth, if I might advise,
    Content you with the praise you get
      From Sir George Beaumont, Baronet,
    And with your place in the Excise!

                                                                     1819.
              [First published, _Philadelphia Record_, December 28, 1891.]

FOOTNOTES:

[109] [The MS. of the "Epilogue" is inscribed on the margin of a copy of
Wordsworth's _Peter Bell_, inserted in a set of Byron's _Works_
presented by George W. Childs to the Drexel Institute. (From information
kindly supplied by Mr. John H. Bewley, of Buffalo, New York.)

The first edition of _Peter Bell_ appeared early in 1819, and a second
edition followed in May, 1819. In Byron's Dedication of _Marino
Faliero_, "To Baron Goethe," dated October 20, 1820 (_Poetical Works_,
1891, iv. 341), the same allusions to Sir George Beaumont, to
Wordsworth's "place in the Excise," and to his admission that _Peter
Bell_ had been withheld "for one and twenty years," occur in an omitted
paragraph first published, _Letters_, 1891, v. 101. So close a
correspondence of an unpublished fragment with a genuine document leaves
little doubt as to the composition of the "Epilogue."]

[110] [The missing line may be, "To _permanently_ fill a station," see
Preface to _Peter Bell_.]



                          ON MY WEDDING-DAY.

    HERE'S a happy New Year! but with reason
      I beg you'll permit me to say--
    Wish me _many_ returns of the _Season_,
      But as _few_ as you please of the _Day_.[111]

                                                        _January_ 2, 1820.
                 [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 294.]

FOOTNOTES:

[111] [Medwin (_Conversations_, 1824, p. 156) prints an alternative--

    "You may wish me returns of the season,
    Let us, prithee, have none of the day!"]



                      EPITAPH FOR WILLIAM PITT.

    WITH Death doomed to grapple,
      Beneath this cold slab, he
    Who lied in the Chapel
      Now lies in the Abbey.

                                                        _January_ 2, 1820.
                 [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 295.]



                               EPIGRAM.

    IN digging up your bones, Tom Paine,
      Will. Cobbett[112] has done well:
    You visit him on Earth again,
      He'll visit you in Hell.

or--

    You come to him on Earth again
      He'll go with you to Hell!

                                                        _January_ 2, 1820.
                 [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 295.]

FOOTNOTES:

[112] [Cobbett, by way of atonement for youthful vituperation (he called
him "a ragamuffin deist") of Tom Paine, exhumed his bones from their
first resting-place at New Rochelle, and brought them to Liverpool on
his return to England in 1819. They were preserved by Cobbett at
Normanby, Farnham, till his death in 1835, but were sold in consequence
of his son's bankruptcy in 1836, and passed into the keeping of a Mr.
Tilly, who was known to be their fortunate possessor as late as 1844.
(See _Notes and Queries_, 1868, Series IV. vol. i. pp. 201-203.)]



                               EPITAPH.

    POSTERITY will ne'er survey
      A nobler grave than this;
    Here lie the bones of Castlereagh:
      Stop traveller, * *

                                                        _January_ 2, 1820.
                 [First published, _Lord Byron's Works_, 1833, xvii. 246.]



                               EPIGRAM.

    The world is a bundle of hay,
      Mankind are the asses who pull;
    Each tugs it a different way,--
      And the greatest of all is John Bull!

                 [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 494.]



                        MY BOY HOBBIE O.[113]

                       New Song to the tune of

    "_Whare hae ye been a' day,
      My boy Tammy O.!
    Courting o' a young thing
      Just come frae her Mammie O._"

                                  1.

    HOW came you in Hob's pound to cool,
      My boy Hobbie O?
    Because I bade the people pull
      The House into the Lobby O.

                                  2.

    What did the House upon this call,
      My boy Hobbie O?
    They voted me to Newgate all,
      Which is an awkward Jobby O.

                                  3.

    Who are now the people's men,
      My boy Hobbie O?
    There's I and Burdett--Gentlemen
      And blackguard Hunt and Cobby O.

                                  4.

    You hate the house--_why_ canvass, then?
      My boy Hobbie O?
    Because I would reform the den
      As member for the Mobby O.

                                  5.

    Wherefore do you hate the Whigs,
      My boy Hobbie O?
    Because they want to run their rigs,
      As under Walpole Bobby O.

                                  6.

    But when we at Cambridge were
      My boy Hobbie O,
    If my memory don't err
      You founded a Whig Clubbie O.

                                  7.

    When to the mob you make a speech,
      My boy Hobbie O,
    How do you keep without their reach
      The watch within your fobby O?

                                  8.

    But never mind such petty things,
      My boy Hobbie O;
    God save the people--damn all Kings,
      So let us Crown the Mobby O!

                       Yours truly,

                  (Signed) _INFIDUS SCURRA_.

                                                        _March 23d_, 1820.
                        [First published _Murray's Magazine_, March, 1887,
                                                    vol. i. pp. 292, 293.]

FOOTNOTES:

[113] [John Cam Hobhouse (1786-1869) (see _Letters_, 1898, i. 163,
_note_ 1) was committed to Newgate in December, 1819, for certain
passages in a pamphlet entitled, _A Trifling Mistake in Thomas Lord
Erskine's recent Preface_, which were voted (December 10) a breach of
privilege. He remained in prison till the dissolution on the king's
death, February 20, 1820, when he stood and was returned for
Westminster. Byron's Liberalism was intermittent, and he felt, or, as
Hobhouse thought, pretended to feel, as a Whig and an aristocrat with
regard to the free lances of the Radical party. The sole charge in this
"filthy ballad," which annoyed Hobhouse, was that he had founded a Whig
Club when he was an undergraduate at Cambridge. He assured Murray (see
his letter, November, 1820, _Letters_, vol. iv. Appendix XI. pp.
498-500) that he was not the founder of the club, and that Byron himself
was a member. "As for his Lordship's vulgar notions about the _mob_" he
adds, "they are very fit for the Poet of the _Morning Post_, and for
nobody else." There is no reason to suppose that Byron was in any way
responsible for the version as sent to the _Morning Post_.]

                 "MY BOY HOBBY O.

                [ANOTHER VERSION.]

        To the Editor of the _Morning Post_.

Sir,--A copy of verses, to the tune of '_My boy Tammy_,' are repeated
in literary circles, and said to be written by a Noble Lord of the
highest poetical fame, upon his quondam friend and annotator. My memory
does not enable me to repeat more than the first two verses quite
accurately, but the humourous spirit of the Song may be gathered from
these:--

                   1.

    Why were you put in Lob's pond,
      My boy, HOBBY O? (_bis_)
    For telling folks to pull the House
      By the ears into the Lobby O!

                   2.

    Who are your grand Reformers now,
      My boy, HOBBY O? (_bis_)
    There's me and BURDETT,--gentlemen,
      And Blackguards HUNT and COBBY O!

                   3.

    Have you no other friends but these,
      My boy, HOBBY O? (_bis_)
    Yes, Southwark's Knight,[*] the County BYNG,
      And in the City, BOBBY O!

[*] "Southwark's Knight" was General Sir Robert Thomas Wilson
(1777-1849), who was returned for Southwark in 1818, and again in 1820;
"County Byng" was George Byng, M.P. for Middlesex; and "Bobby" was Sir
Robert Waithman (1764-1833), who represented the City of London in 1818,
but lost his seat to Sir William Curtis in 1820. All these were advanced
Liberals, and, as such, Parliamentary friends of Hobhouse.

                   4.

    How do you recreate yourselves,
      My boy, HOBBY O? (_bis_)
    We spout with tavern Radicals,
      And drink with them hob-nobby O!

                   5.

    What purpose can such folly work,
      My boy, HOBBY O? (_bis_)
    It gives our partisans a chance
      Watches to twitch from fob-by O!

                   6.

    Have they no higher game in view,
      My boy, HOBBY O? (_bis_)
    Oh yes; to stir the people up,
      And then to head the mob-by O.

                   7.

    But sure they'll at their ruin pause,
      My boy, HOBBY O? (_bis_)
    No! they'd see King and Parliament
      Both d--d without a sob-by O!

                   8.

    But, if they fail, they'll be hanged up,
      My boy, HOBBY O? (_bis_)
    Why, then, they'll swing, like better men,
      And that will end the job-by O!

                                      PHILO-RADICLE.
                                      April 15, 1820."



                                LINES

               ADDRESSED BY LORD BYRON TO MR. HOBHOUSE
                ON HIS ELECTION FOR WESTMINSTER.[114]

    WOULD you go to the house by the true gate,
      Much faster than ever Whig Charley went;
    Let Parliament send you to Newgate,
      And Newgate will send you to Parliament.

                                                          _April 9, 1820_.
                      [First published, _Miscellaneous Poems_, printed for
                                                         J. Bumpus, 1824.]

FOOTNOTES:

[114] ["I send you 'a Song of Triumph,' by W. Botherby, Esq^re^ price
sixpence, on the election of J.C.H., Esqre., for Westminster (_not_ for
publication)."--Letter to Murray, April 9, 1820, _Letters_, 1901, v. 6.]



                        A VOLUME OF NONSENSE.

      DEAR MURRAY,--
              You ask for a "_Volume of Nonsense_,"
      Have all of your authors exhausted their store?
    I thought you had published a good deal not long since.
      And doubtless the Squadron are ready with more.
    But on looking again, I perceive that the Species
    Of "Nonsense" you want must be purely "_facetious_;"
    And, as that is the case, you had best put to press
      Mr. Sotheby's tragedies now in M.S.,
                Some Syrian Sally
                From common-place Gally,
    Or, if you prefer the bookmaking of women,
    Take a spick and span "Sketch" of your feminine _He-Man_.[115]

                                                         _Sept. 28, 1820._
                                [First published, _Letters_, 1900, v. 83.]

FOOTNOTES:

[115] [For Felicia Dorothea Browne (1793-1835), married in 1812 to
Captain Hemans, see _Letters_, iii. 368, _note_ 2. In the letter which
contains these verses he writes, "I do not despise Mrs. Heman; but if
she knit blue stockings instead of wearing them it would be better."
Elsewhere he does despise her: "No more _modern_ poesy, I pray, neither
Mrs. Hewoman's nor any female or male Tadpole of poet
Wordsworth's."--_Ibid._, v. 64.]



                            STANZAS.[116]

    WHEN a man hath no freedom to fight for at home,
      Let him combat for that of his neighbours;
    Let him think of the glories of Greece and of Rome,
      And get knocked on the head for his labours.

    To do good to Mankind is the chivalrous plan,
      And is always as nobly requited;
    Then battle for Freedom wherever you can,
      And, if not shot or hanged, you'll get knighted.

                                                       _November 5, 1820_.
                 [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 377.]

FOOTNOTES:

[116] [The lines were sent in a letter to Moore (November 5, 1820) by
way of _Autoepitaphium_, "if 'honour should come unlooked for' to any of
your acquaintance;" i.e. if Byron should fall in the cause of Italian
revolution, and Moore should not think him worthy of commemoration, here
was a threnody "ready at hand."]



                          TO PENELOPE.[117]
                           JANUARY 2, 1821.

    THIS day, of all our days, has done
      The worst for me and you:--
    'T is just _six_ years since we were _one_,
      And _five_ since we were _two_.

                                                       _November 5, 1820._
                [First published, Medwin's _Conversations_, 1824, p. 106.]

FOOTNOTES:

[117] ["For the anniversary of January 2, 1821, I have a small grateful
anticipation, which, in case of accident, I add."--Letter to Moore,
November 5, 1820, _Letters_, 1891, v. 112.]



                        THE CHARITY BALL.[118]

    WHAT matter the pangs of a husband and father,
      If his sorrows in exile be great or be small,
    So the Pharisee's glories around her she gather,
      And the saint patronises her "Charity Ball!"

    What matters--a heart which, though faulty, was feeling,
      Be driven to excesses which once could appal--
    That the Sinner should suffer is only fair dealing,
      As the Saint keeps her charity back for "the Ball!"

                                                      _December 10, 1820._
                 [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 540.]

FOOTNOTES:

[118] [Written on seeing the following paragraph in a newspaper: "Lady
Byron is this year the lady patroness at the annual Charity Ball, given
at the Town Hall, at Hinckley, Leicestershire...."--_Life_, p. 535.
Moore adds that "these verses [of which he only prints two stanzas] are
full of strong and indignant feeling,--every stanza concluding pointedly
with the words 'Charity Ball.'"]



                               EPIGRAM

               ON THE BRAZIERS' ADDRESS TO BE PRESENTED
          IN _ARMOUR_ BY THE COMPANY TO QUEEN CAROLINE.[119]

    IT seems that the Braziers propose soon to pass
    An Address and to bear it themselves all in brass;
    A superfluous pageant, for by the Lord Harry!
    They'll _find_, where they're going, much more than they carry.

Or--

    THE Braziers, it seems, are determined to pass
    An Address, and present it themselves all in brass:--
    A superfluous {pageant/trouble} for, by the Lord Harry!
    They'll find, where they're going, much more than they carry.

                                                        _January 6, 1821._
                 [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 442.]

FOOTNOTES:

[119] [The allusion is explained in Rivington's _Annual Register_,
October 30, 1820 (vol. lxii. pp. 114, 115)--

"ADDRESSES TO THE QUEEN.

" ... The most splendid exhibition of the day was that of the
brass-founders and braziers. The procession was headed by a man dressed
in a suit of burnished plate armour of brass, and mounted on a handsome
black horse, the reins being held by pages ... wearing brass helmets....
A man in a complete suite of brass armour ... was followed by two
persons, bearing on a cushion a most magnificent imitation of the
imperial Crown of England. A small number of the deputation of
brass-founders were admitted to the presence of her Majesty, and one of
the persons in armour advanced to the throne, and bending on one knee,
presented the address, which was enclosed in a brass case of excellent
workmanship."--See _Letters_, 1901, v. 219, 220, _note_ 2.

In a postscript to a letter to Murray, dated January 19, 1821, he
writes, "I sent you a line or two on the Braziers' Company last week,
_not_ for publication. The lines were even worthy

    'Of ----dsworth the great metaquizzical poet,
    A man of great merit amongst those who know it,
    Of whose works, as I told Moore last autumn at _Mestri_
    I owe all I know to my passion for _Pastry_.'"

He adds, in a footnote, "_Mestri_ and _Fusina_ are the ferry trajects to
Venice: I believe, however, that it was at Fusina that Moore and I
embarked in 1819, when Thomas came to Venice, like Coleridge's Spring,
'slowly up this way.'"

Again, in a letter to Moore, dated January 22, 1821, he encloses
slightly different versions of both epigrams, and it is worth noting
that the first line of the pendant epigram has been bowdlerized, and
runs thus--

    "Of Wordsworth the grand metaquizzical poet."

--_Letters_, 1901, v. 226, 230.]



                     ON MY THIRTY-THIRD BIRTHDAY.

                        JANUARY 22, 1821.[120]

    THROUGH Life's dull road, so dim and dirty,
    I have dragged to three-and-thirty.
    What have these years left to me?
    Nothing--except thirty-three.

                 [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 414.]

FOOTNOTES:

[120] ["To-morrow is my birthday--that is to say, at twelve o' the
clock, midnight; _i.e._ in twelve minutes I shall have completed thirty
and three years of age!!! and I go to my bed with a heaviness of heart
at having lived so long, and to so little purpose. * * * It is three
minutes past twelve--''Tis the middle of night by the castle clock,' and
I am now thirty-three!--

    'Eheu, fugaces, Posthume, Posthume,
    Labuntur anni;'--

but I don't regret them so much for what I have done, as for what I
might have done."--Extracts from a Diary, January 21, 1821, _Letters_,
1901, v. 182.

In a letter to Moore, dated January 22, 1821, he gives another version--

    "Through Life's road, so dim and dirty,
    I have dragged to three-and-thirty.
    What _have_ these years left to me?
    Nothing--except thirty-three."

_Ibid._, p. 229.]



                      MARTIAL, LIB. I. EPIG. I.

    "Hic est, quem legis, ille, quem requiris,
    Toto notus in orbe Martialis," etc.

    HE, unto whom thou art so partial,
    Oh, reader! is the well-known Martial,
    The Epigrammatist: while living,
    Give him the fame thou would'st be giving;
    So shall he hear, and feel, and know it--
      Post-obits rarely reach a poet.

                                                             [N.D. ?1821.]
                  [First published, _Lord Byron's Works_, 1833, xvii. 245]



                         BOWLES AND CAMPBELL.

 çTo the air of "How now, Madam Flirt," in the _Beggar's Opera_.[121]

                               BOWLES.

    "WHY, how now, saucy Tom?
      If you thus must ramble,
    I will publish some
      Remarks on Mister Campbell.
                Saucy Tom!"

                              CAMPBELL.

    "WHY, how now, Billy Bowles?
      Sure the priest is maudlin!
    (_To the public_) How can you, d--n your souls!
      Listen to his twaddling?
                _Billy Bowles_!"

                                                      _February 22, 1821._
                   [First published, _The Liberal_, 1823, No. II. p. 398.]

FOOTNOTES:

[121] [Compare the Beggar's Opera, act ii. sc. 2--

      Air, "Good morrow, Gossip Joan."
    "Polly. _Why, how now, Madam Flirt?
          If you thus must chatter,
    And are for flinging dirt,
          Let's try who best can spatter,
                   Madam Flirt_!
    "Lucy. _Why, how now, saucy jade?
          Sure the wench is tipsy!
    How can you see me made
          The scoff of such a gipsy_? [To him.]
                     _Saucy jade_!" [To her.]

Bowles replied to Campbell's Introductory Essay to his _Specimens of the
English Poets_, 7 vols., 1819, by _The Invariable Principles of Poetry_,
in a letter addressed to Thomas Campbell. For Byron's two essays, the
"Letter to.... [John Murray]" and "Observations upon Observations," see
_Letters_, 1901, v. Appendix III. pp. 536-592.]



                                ELEGY.

    BEHOLD the blessings of a lucky lot!
    My play is _damned_, and Lady Noel _not_.

                                                           _May 25, 1821._
                [First published, Medwin's _Conversations_, 1824, p. 121.]



                           JOHN KEATS.[122]

    WHO killed John Keats?
      "I," says the Quarterly,
    So savage and Tartarly;
      "'T was one of my feats."

    Who shot the arrow?
      "The poet-priest Milman
    (So ready to kill man)
      "Or Southey, or Barrow."

                                                          _July 30, 1821._
                 [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 506.]

FOOTNOTES:

[122] [For Croker's "article" on Keats's _Endymion_ (_Quarterly Review_,
April, 1818, vol. xix. pp. 204-208), see _Don Juan_, Canto XI. stanza
lx. line 1, _Poetical Works_, 1902, vi. 445, _note_ 4.]



                           FROM THE FRENCH.

    ÆGLE, beauty and poet, has two little crimes;
    She makes her own face, and does not make her rhymes.

                                                           _Aug. 2, 1821._
                   [First published, _The Liberal_, 1823, No. II. p. 396.]



                            TO MR. MURRAY.

                                  1.

    FOR Orford[123] and for Waldegrave[124]
    You give much more than me you _gave_;
    Which is not fairly to behave,
                My Murray!

                                  2.

    Because if a live dog, 't is said,
    Be worth a lion fairly sped,
    A live lord must be worth _two_ dead,
                My Murray!

                                  3.

    And if, as the opinion goes,
    Verse hath a better sale than prose,--
    Certes, I should have more than those,
                My Murray!

                                  4.

    But now this sheet is nearly crammed,
    So, if _you will_, _I_ shan't be shammed,
    And if you _won't_,--_you_ may be damned,
                My Murray![125]

                                                        _August 23, 1821._
                 [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 517.]

FOOTNOTES:

[123] [Horace Walpole's _Memoirs of the Last Nine Years of the Reign of
George II._ ]

[124] [_Memoirs_ by James Earl Waldegrave, Governor of George III. when
Prince of Wales.]

[125] ["Can't accept your courteous offer [_i.e._ £2000 for three cantos
of _Don Juan, Sardanapalus_, and _The Two Foscari_.] These matters must
be arranged with Mr. Douglas Kinnaird. He is my trustee, and a man of
honour. To him you can state all your mercantile reasons, which you
might not like to state to me personally, such as 'heavy season'--'flat
public'--'don't go off'--'lordship writes too much'--'won't take
advice'--'declining popularity'--'deductions for the trade'--'make very
little'--'generally lose by him'--'pirated edition'--'foreign
edition'--'severe criticisms,' etc., with other hints and howls for an
oration, which I leave Douglas, who is an orator, to answer."--Letter to
Murray, August 23, 1821, _Letters_, 1901, v. 348.]



                     [NAPOLEON'S SNUFF-BOX.][126]

    LADY, accept the box a hero wore,
      In spite of all this elegiac stuff:
    Let not seven stanzas written by a bore,
      Prevent your Ladyship from taking snuff!

                                                                     1821.
           [First published, _Conversations of Lord Byron_, 1824, p. 235.]

FOOTNOTES:

[126] [Napoleon bequeathed to Lady Holland a snuff-box which had been
given to him by the Pope for his clemency in sparing Rome. Lord Carlisle
wrote eight (not seven) stanzas, urging her, as Byron told Medwin, to
decline the gift, "for fear that horror and murder should jump out of
the lid every time it is opened."--_Conversations_, 1824, p. 362. The
first stanza of Lord Carlyle's verses, which _teste_ Medwin, Byron
parodied, runs thus--

    "Lady, reject the gift! 'tis tinged with gore!
    Those crimson spots a dreadful tale relate;
    It has been grasp'd by an infernal Power;
    And by that hand which seal'd young Enghien's fate."

The snuff-box is now in the jewel-room in the British Museum.]



                        THE NEW VICAR OF BRAY.

                                  1.

          DO you know Doctor Nott?[127]
          With "a crook in his lot,"
    Who seven years since tried to dish up
          A neat Codi_cil_
          To the Princess's Will,[128]
    Which made Dr. Nott _not_ a bishop.

                                  2.

          So the Doctor being found
          A little unsound
    In his doctrine, at least as a teacher,
          And kicked from one stool
          As a knave or a fool,
    He mounted another as preacher.

                                  3.

          In that Gown (like the Skin
          With no Lion within)
    He still for the Bench would be driving;
          And roareth away,
          A new Vicar of _Bray_,
    Except that _his bray_ lost his living.

                                  4.

          "Gainst Freethinkers," he roars,
          "You should all block your doors
    Or be named in the Devil's indentures:"
          And here I agree,
          For who e'er would be
    A Guest where old Simony enters?

                                  5.

          Let the Priest, who beguiled
          His own Sovereign's child
    To his own dirty views of promotion,
          Wear his Sheep's cloathing still
          Among flocks to his will,
    And dishonour the Cause of devotion.

                                  6.

          The Altar and Throne
          Are in danger alone
    From such as himself, who would render
          The Altar itself
          But a step up to Pelf,
    And pray God to pay his defender.

                                  7.

          But, Doctor, one word
          Which perhaps you have heard
    "He should never throw stones who has windows
          Of Glass to be broken,
          And by this same token
    As a sinner, you can't care what Sin does.

                                  8.

          But perhaps you do well:
          Your own windows, they tell,
    Have long ago sufferéd censure;
          Not a fragment remains
          Of your character's panes,
    Since the Regent refused you a glazier.

                                  9.

          Though your visions of lawn
          Have all been withdrawn,
    And you missed your bold stroke for a mitre;
          In a very snug way
          You may still preach and pray,
    And from bishop sink into backbiter!"

                     [First published, _Works_ (Galignani), 1831, p. 116.]

FOOTNOTES:

[127] [George Frederick Nott (1767-1841), critic and divine, was Rector
of Harrietsham and Woodchurch, a Prebendary of Winchester and of
Salisbury. He was Bampton Lecturer in 1802, and, soon afterwards, was
appointed sub-preceptor to the Princess Charlotte of Wales. He was a
connoisseur of architecture and painting, and passed much of his time in
Italy and at Rome. When he was at Pisa he preached in a private room in
the basement story of the house in Pisa where Shelley was living, and
fell under Byron's displeasure for attacking the Satanic school, and
denouncing _Cain_ as a blasphemous production. "The parsons," he told
Moore (letter, February 20, 1820), "preached at it [_Cain_] from Kentish
Town to Pisa." Hence the apostrophe to Dr. Nott. (See _Records of
Shelley, Byron, and the Author_, by E.T. Trelawny, 1887, pp. 302, 303.)]

[128] [According to Lady Anne Hamilton (_Secret History of the Court of
England_, 1832, i. 198-207), the Princess Charlotte incurred the
suspicion and displeasure of her uncles and her grandmother, the Queen,
by displaying an ardent and undue interest in her sub-preceptor. On
being reproved by the Queen for "condescending to favour persons in low
life with confidence or particular respect, persons likely to take
advantage of your simplicity and innocence," and having learnt that
"persons" meant Mr. Nott, she replied by threatening to sign a will in
favour of her sub-preceptor, and by actually making over to him by a
deed her library, jewels, and all other private property. Lady Anne
Hamilton is not an accurate or trustworthy authority, but her extremely
circumstantial narrative was, no doubt, an expansion of the contemporary
scandal to which Byron's lampoon gave currency.]


                       LUCIETTA. A FRAGMENT.

    LUCIETTA, my deary,
    That fairest of faces!
    Is made up of kisses;
    But, in love, oft the case is
    Even stranger than this is--
    There's another, that's slyer,
    Who touches me nigher,--
    A Witch, an intriguer,
    Whose manner and figure
    Now piques me, excites me,
    Torments and delights me--
                _Cætera desunt_.

                   [From an autograph MS. in the possession of Mr. Murray,
                                          now for the first time printed.]



                              EPIGRAMS.

    OH, Castlereagh! thou art a patriot now;
    Cato died for his country, so did'st thou:
    He perished rather than see Rome enslaved,
    Thou cut'st thy throat that Britain may be saved!

       *       *       *       *       *

    So Castlereagh has cut his throat!--The worst
    Of this is,--that his own was not the first.

       *       *       *       *       *

    So _He_ has cut his throat at last!--He! Who?
    The man who cut his country's long ago.

                                                          _?August, 1822._
        [First published, _The Liberal_, No. I. October 18, 1822, p. 164.]



                          THE CONQUEST.[129]

    THE Son of Love and Lord of War I sing;
      Him who bade England bow to Normandy,
    And left the name of Conqueror more than King
      To his unconquerable dynasty.
    Not fanned alone by Victory's fleeting wing,
      He reared his bold and brilliant throne on high;
    The Bastard kept, like lions, his prey fast,
    And Britain's bravest Victor was the last.

                                                        _March 8-9, 1823._
                 [First published, _Lord Byron's Works_, 1833, xvii. 246.]

FOOTNOTES:

[129] [This fragment was found amongst Lord Byron's papers, after his
departure from Genoa for Greece.]



                           IMPROMPTU.[130]

        BENEATH Blessington's eyes
        The reclaimed Paradise
    Should be free as the former from evil;
        But if the new Eve
        For an Apple should grieve,
    What mortal would not play the Devil?

                                                            _April, 1823._
                 [First published, _Letters and Journals_, 1830, ii. 635.]

FOOTNOTES:

[130] [With the view of inducing these friends [Lord and Lady
Blessington] to prolong their stay at Genoa, he suggested their taking a
pretty villa, called "Il Paradiso," in the neighbourhood of his own, and
accompanied them to look at it. Upon that occasion it was that, on the
lady expressing some intention of residing there, he produced the
following impromptu.--_Life_, 577.]



                        JOURNAL IN CEPHALONIA.

    THE dead have been awakened--shall I sleep?
      The World's at war with tyrants--shall I crouch?
    The harvest's ripe--and shall I pause to reap?
      I slumber not; the thorn is in my Couch;
    Each day a trumpet soundeth in mine ear,
      Its echo in my heart----

                                                          _June 19, 1823._
                              [First published, _Letters_, 1901, vi. 238.]



                        SONG TO THE SULIOTES.

                                  1.

    UP to battle! Sons of Suli
    Up, and do your duty duly!
    There the wall--and there the Moat is:
    Bouwah![131] Bouwah! Suliotes!
    There is booty--there is Beauty,
    Up my boys and do your duty.

                                  2.

    By the sally and the rally
    Which defied the arms of Ali;
    By your own dear native Highlands,
    By your children in the islands,
    Up and charge, my Stratiotes,
    Bouwah!--Bouwah!--Suliotes!


                                  3.

    As our ploughshare is the Sabre:
    Here's the harvest of our labour;
    For behind those battered breaches
    Are our foes with all their riches:
    There is Glory--there is plunder--
    Then away despite of thunder!

                   [From an autograph MS. in the possession of Mr. Murray,
                                          now for the first time printed.]

FOOTNOTES:

[131] "Bouwah!" is their war-cry.



                          [LOVE AND DEATH.]

                                  1.

    I WATCHED thee when the foe was at our side,
      Ready to strike at him--or thee and me.
    Were safety hopeless--rather than divide
      Aught with one loved save love and liberty.

                                  2.

    I watched thee on the breakers, when the rock
      Received our prow and all was storm and fear,
    And bade thee cling to me through every shock;
      This arm would be thy bark, or breast thy bier.

                                  3.

    I watched thee when the fever glazed thine eyes,
      Yielding my couch and stretched me on the ground,
    When overworn with watching, ne'er to rise
      From thence if thou an early grave hadst found.

                                  4.

    The earthquake came, and rocked the quivering wall,
      And men and nature reeled as if with wine.
    Whom did I seek around the tottering hall?
      For thee. Whose safety first provide for? Thine.

                                  5.

    And when convulsive throes denied my breath
      The faintest utterance to my fading thought,
    To thee--to thee--e'en in the gasp of death
      My spirit turned, oh! oftener than it ought.

                                  6.

    Thus much and more; and yet thou lov'st me not,
      And never wilt! Love dwells not in our will.
    Nor can I blame thee, though it be my lot
      To strongly, wrongly, vainly love thee still.[132]

                    [First published, _Murray's Magazine_, February, 1887,
                                                    vol. i. pp. 145, 146.]

FOOTNOTES:

[132] ["The last he ever wrote. From a rough copy found amongst his
papers at the back of the 'Song of Suli.' Copied November, 1824.--John
C. Hobhouse."

"A note, attached to the verses by Lord Byron, states they were
addressed to no one in particular, and were a mere poetical Scherzo.
--J.C.H."]



                        LAST WORDS ON GREECE.

    WHAT are to me those honours or renown
      Past or to come, a new-born people's cry?
    Albeit for such I could despise a crown
      Of aught save laurel, or for such could die.
    I am a fool of passion, and a frown
      Of thine to me is as an adder's eye.
    To the poor bird whose pinion fluttering down
      Wafts unto death the breast it bore so high;
    Such is this maddening fascination grown,
      So strong thy magic or so weak am I.

                          [First published, _Murray's Magazine_, February,
                                                    1887, vol. i. p. 146.]



          ON THIS DAY I COMPLETE MY THIRTY-SIXTH YEAR.[133]

                                  1.

    'T IS time this heart should be unmoved,
      Since others it hath ceased to move:
    Yet, though I cannot be beloved,
                Still let me love!

                                  2.

    My days are in the yellow leaf;
      The flowers and fruits of Love are gone;
    The worm, the canker, and the grief
      Are mine alone!


                                  3.

    The fire that on my bosom preys
      Is lone[iii] as some Volcanic isle;
    No torch is kindled at its blaze--
      A funeral pile.

                                  4.

    The hope, the fear, the jealous care,
      The exalted portion of the pain
    And power of love, I cannot share,
      But wear the chain.

                                  5.

    But 't is not _thus_--and 't is not _here_--[iv]
      Such thoughts should shake my soul, nor now
    Where Glory decks the hero's bier,[v]
      Or binds his brow.

                                  6.

    The Sword, the Banner, and the Field,[vi]
      Glory and Greece, around me see!
    The Spartan, borne upon his shield,[134]
      Was not more free.

                                  7.

    Awake! (not Greece--she _is_ awake!)
      Awake, my spirit! Think through _whom_
    Thy life-blood tracks its parent lake,[vii]
      And then strike home!

                                  8.

    Tread those reviving passions down,[viii]
      Unworthy manhood!--unto thee
    Indifferent should the smile or frown
      Of Beauty be.

                                  9.

    If thou regret'st thy youth, _why live_?
      The land of honourable death
    Is here:--up to the Field, and give
      Away thy breath!

                                 10.

    Seek out--less often sought than found--
      A soldier's grave, for thee the best;
    Then look around, and choose thy ground,
      And take thy Rest.

                                             Missolonghi, _Jan_. 22, 1824.
                 [First published, _Morning Chronicle_, October 29, 1824.]

FOOTNOTES:

[133] ["This morning Lord Byron came from his bedroom into the apartment
where Colonel Stanhope and some friends were assembled, and said with a
smile--'You were complaining, the other day, that I never write any
poetry now:--this is my birthday, and I have just finished something,
which, I think, is better than what I usually write.' He then produced
these noble and affecting verses, which were afterwards found written in
his journals, with only the following introduction: 'Jan. 22; on this
day I complete my 36^th^ year.'"--_A Narrative of Lord Byron's Last
Journey to Greece_, 1825, p. 125, by Count Gamba. In the _Morning
Chronicle_, October 29, 1824, the lines are headed, "Lord Byron's Latest
Verses," and are prefaced by the following note: "We have been indebted
to a friend for the following immortal verses, the last he ever
composed. Four of the lines have already appeared in an article in the
_Westminster Review_" ("Lord Byron in Greece," July, 1824, vol. ii. p.
227).]

[iii] _Is like to_----.--[M.C.]

[iv] ----_it is not here_.--[M.C.]

[v] ----_seals the hero's bier_.--[M.C.]

[vi] _The steed--the Banner--and the Field.--_[MS. B.M.]

[134] I. [The slain were borne on their shields. Witness the Spartan
mother's speech to her son, delivered with his buckler: "either _with_
this _or on_ this" (B.M. Addit. MS. 31,038).]

[vii] _My life-blood tastes_----.--[M.C.]

[viii] _I tread reviving_----.--[M.C.]




                            A BIBLIOGRAPHY
                                OF THE
                   SUCCESSIVE EDITIONS AND TRANSLATIONS
                                  OF
                    LORD BYRON'S _POETICAL WORKS_.


COLLECTED EDITIONS.

I.

The/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ In Two Volumes./ Vol. I./
[Vol. II.] From the last London Edition./ Philadelphia:/ Published by
Moses Thomas,/ No. 52, Chesnut Street./ William Fry, Printer./ 1813./
[16º.

[A bound copy: smooth blue calf, lettered "LORD BYRON."]

_Collation_--

Vol. I.--Title, one leaf; Cont.; Half-title; Dedication; and Text, pp.
_1_-203.

Vol. II--Title, one leaf; Cont.; Half-title; Preface, etc, pp. i.-xii.;
Text, pp. _1_-261.

_Contents_--

Vol. I.:--Poems, Original and Translated                            p. 1
English Bards, etc.                                               p. 137
Vol. II.:--Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, Canto I.                    p. 13
(xciii. stanzas)
Canto II. (lxxxviii. stanzas)                                       p. 9
Notes                                                              p. 99
Poems (xx.)                                                       p. 156
The Giaour (1215 lines)                                           p. 205
Note                                                              p. 261



_Note_ (Vol. I.).--On fly-leaf: "To the Rt. Honourable Lord Byron from
his obt. servant Geo Ticknor, June 20. 1815."

"This book was given to me by Lord Byron, April 20, 1816, on his leaving
England. Scrope Davies."

                      ΑΠΟ: ΙΩ:    [Greek: APO: IÔ:]

                       Κεφ. θ.    [Greek: Keph. Th.]


    Καὶ ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις ἐκείναις ζητήσουσιν οἱ
    ἄνθρωποι τὸν θάνατον
    καὶ οὐχ εὑρήσουσιν αὐτὸν' καὶ ἐπιθυμήσουσιν
    ἀποθανεῖν, καὶ φεύξεται
    ὁ θάνατος ἀπ' αὐτῶν.

    [Greek: Kai\ e)n tai~s ê(me/rais e)kei/nais zêtê/sousin oi(
    a)/nthrôpoi to\n tha/naton
    kai\ ou)ch eu(rê/sousin au)to\n' kai\ e)pithymê/sousin
    a)pothanei~n, kai\ pheu/xetai
    o( tha/natos a)p' au)tô~n.]

On second fly-leaf: "Semper ego tui memoriam colam; semper tua imago
ante oculos observabitur; semper idem mihi eras; qui idem semper eras
bonis omnibus."

These volumes which were presented by George Ticknor to Lord Byron,[A]
and, in turn, presented by him to Scrope Davies, passed into the hands
of Sir Francis Burdett (1770-1844), and are now in the possession of his
grandson, Mr. F.B. Money-Coutts.

FOOTNOTES:

[A] "He [Byron] spoke to me of a copy of the American edition of his
poems, which I had sent him, and expressed his satisfaction at seeing it
in a small form, because in that way, he said, nobody would be prevented
from purchasing it" ("Journal," June 21, 1815).--_Life, Letters, and
Journals_ of George Ticknor, Boston, 1876, i. 62.

II.

The/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ From the last London Edition./ In
Two Volumes./ Volume I./ [Vol. II.] Boston:/ Published by Cummings &
Hilliard,/ No. I, Cornhill./ Joseph T. Buckingham, Printer,/ 1814./
[12º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. xi. + 308--Title, one leaf, pp. i., ii.; Cont., pp. iii.,
iv.; _Lord Byron_ [excerpt from the _Analectic Magazine_], pp. v.-xi.;
Text, pp. 1-308.

Vol. II.: pp. iv. + 251--Title, one leaf, pp. i, ii; Cont., pp. iii, iv;
Text, pp. 1-251.

_Contents_--

Vol. I.:--Poems, Original and Translated                            p. 1

English Bards, etc. (Third Edition) (1050 lines), with            p. 123
Postscript

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, Cantos I., II. (First Edition),       p. 179
with Notes, etc.

Vol. II.:--Poems [Twenty-six, _i.e._ poems issued with              p. 1
Sec. Ed. of _Childe Harold_, and six (not tabulated)
issued with the _Corsair_]

The Giaour (Fifth Edition)                                         p. 47

The Bride of Abydos (Seventh Edition)                             p. 103

The Corsair (Sixth Edition)                                       p. 159

Prize Prologue (Oct. 1812) (Second Edition)                       p. 241

Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte (Second Edition: sixteen stanzas)      p. 245

III.

The/ Works/ of/ The Right Honorable/ Lord Byron./ In Four Volumes./ Vol.
I./ [Vol. II., etc.] Childe Harold./ London:/ Printed for John Murray,
Albemarle Street./ 1815./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. xviii. + 218--Gen. Half-title, one leaf, pp. i., ii.; Title
(_R.T. Davison, Lombard-Street,/ White-Friars, London_.), pp. iii., iv.;
General Contents to the Four Volumes, pp. v.-x.*; Half-title (R.
Motto--_Le Cosmopolite_), _n.p._; Prefaces, pp. xi.-xviii.; Cont. to
Vol. I., one leaf, _n.p._; Text, pp. 1-218. The Imprint is at the foot
of p. 218.

_Note_.--In the earlier copies of Vol. I. of this edition, the misplaced
"Advertisement" to _The Giaour_ is on pp. i., ii., and pp. ix.*, x.*,
giving Cont. of _Hebrew Melodies_, are not inserted.

Vol. II.: pp. 1-202--Gen. Half-title, one leaf; Title (R. Imprint);
Cont. to Vol. II.; Half-title; Dedication; Text, pp. 1-202. The Imprint
is in the centre of the last page, p. [204].

Vol. III.: pp. viii. + 9-228--Gen. Half-title, one leaf; Title (R.
Imprint); Cont. to Vol. III.; Half-title, pp. i., ii.; Dedication to
Thomas Moore, Esq., pp. iii.-viii.; Text, pp. 9-228. The Imprint is at
the foot of p. 228.

Vol. IV.: pp. viii. [ix.*, x.*] + 203--Gen. Half-title, one leaf; Title
(R. Imprint), pp. i.-iv.; Cont. to Vol. IV., pp. v.-x.*; Text, pp.
1-203.

_Contents_--

Vol. I.:--To Ianthe, Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, Cantos I., II.,    p. 3
(N. App.)

Romaic Books and Authors, etc.                                    p. 188

Vol. II.:--The Giaour (N.)                                          p. 1

The Bride of Abydos, Cantos I., II. (N.)                          p. 103

Vol. III.:--The Corsair, Cantos I.-III. (N.)                       p. i.

Lara, Cantos I., II. (N.)                                         p. 133

Vol. IV.:--Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte (N.)                          p. 1

Poems (N.) [xxxvi., consisting of xxix. pub. in the Seventh Ed.    p. 17
of _Childe Harold_, vi. pub. in the Second Ed. of the
_Corsair_, and Verses on Sir P. Parker.]

Hebrew Melodies (24)                                              p. 143

_Note_.--In later issues of Vol. III., 1815, the note on the "Pirates of
Barrataria" is inserted and paginated 133*-137*.

IV.

The/ Works/ of The/ Right Hon. Lord Byron./ In Two Volumes./ Vol. I./
[Vol. II.] London:/ Printed for John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1815/
[8º.

_Contents_--

Vol. I.: The Title, as above, is prefixed to _Childe Harold's
Pilgrimage_, Cantos I., II. (Fourth Ed.), 1812, and _Hebrew Melodies_
(First Ed.), 1815, pp. 1-53.

Vol. II.: The Title, as above, is prefixed to _Childe Harold's
Pilgrimage_, Canto III.; _Childe Harold_, etc., Canto the Fourth;
_Romance Muy Doloroso_, Translation, etc., pp. xiv. + 257; _The Lament
of Tasso_ (Sixth Ed.), 1818, pp. 1-18; _Poems_ (N.) (Second Ed.), 1816;
_Monody_, etc. (New Ed.), 1810; _Ode to Napoleon_ (Second Ed.), 1814, pp
1-14.

_Note_.--These general titles were advertised, in July, 1815, for the
purpose of binding, in two volumes, poems which were uniformly printed
but had been separately issued. It is evident that they were still to be
procured after the collected editions of 1815, 1817, 1818 had been
published. In other copies the Contents are arranged in a different
order.

V.

_The Poetical Works_, etc. From the last London Edition. In Three
Volumes. New York: Published by David Huntington. 1815.

[E. Kölbing, _Prisoner of Chillon_, 1896.]

VI.

_The Works_, etc. Including several poems now first collected. Together
with an Original Biography. Embellished with a portrait, title-page, and
six other engravings. In Three Vols. Philadelphia: Published by Moses
Thomas, J. Maxwell, Printer. 1816. [12º.

[Kölbing.]

VII.

The/ Works/ of/ The Right Honourable/ Lord Byron./ In Five Volumes./
Vol. I./ [Vol. II., etc.] Childe Harold./ London:/ John Murray,
Albemarle-Street./ 1817. [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.:--Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Half-title (R. Motto), pp. v.,
vi.; Pref., pp. vii.-xiv.; Cont., _n.p._; Text, pp. 1-218. The Imprint
(_T. Davison, Lombard Street,/ Whitefriars, London_/), is in the centre
of the last page.

Vol. II.: pp. 1-202--Title, one leaf; Cont. to Vol. II.; Half-title;
Dedication; Advertisement; Text, pp. 1-202. The Imprint is in the centre
of the last page, p. [204].

Vol. III.: pp. viii. + 9-222: Title, one leaf; Cont. to Vol. III.;
Half-title, pp. i. ii.; Dedication to Thomas Moore, Esq., pp.
iii.-viii.; Text, pp. 9-222. The Imprint is in the centre of the last
page, p. [224].

Vol. IV.: Title, one leaf; pp. iii., iv.; Cont. to Vol. IV., v.-viii.;
Text. The Imprint is in the centre of the last page.

Vol. V.: pp. vi. + 184--Title, one leaf; Dedication, pp. i., ii.;
Advertisement, pp. iii., iv.; Cont. to Vol. V., pp. v., vi.; Half-title;
Text, pp. 1-184. The Imprint is at the foot of p. 184.

_Note_.--The Cont. of Vols. I.-IV., 1817, are identical with the Cont.
of Vols. I.-IV., 1815.

_Contents_--

Vol. V.:-Siege of Corinth (N.)                                      p. 1
Parisina (N.)                                                      p. 79
Poems (eleven, as pub. in _Poems_, 1816)                          p. 127
Monody, etc. (N.)                                                 p. 171

VIII.

Poems./ By Lord Byron./ New-York:/ Published by Thomas Kirk and Thomas
R. Mercein,/ Moses Thomas, M. Carey and Son, Philadelphia;/ Wells and
Lilly, Boston;/ and Coale and Maxwell, Baltimore./ T. and W. Mercein,
Printers, 93, Gold Street./ 1817./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 1-64 (title-page unnumbered).

IX.

The/ Works/ of/ The Right Honourable/ Lord Byron./ Vol. I./ [Vol. II.,
etc.] Childe Harold./ London:/ John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1818.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. xiv. + 218--Half-title (_R.T. Davison, Lombard Street,/
Whitefriars, London_./), etc. (_Vide supra_, Vol. I., 1817).

Vol. II.: pp. 1-202--Half-title (R. Imprint), etc. (_Vide supra_, Vol.
II., 1817).

Vol. III.: pp. viii. + 9-222 (_Vide supra_, Vol. III., 1817).

Vol. IV.: pp. viii. + 203--Half-title (R. Imprint) (_Vide supra_, Vol.
IV., 1817).

Vol. V.:/ pp. 1-184--Half-title, _The Siege_, etc., one leaf; Title
[The/ Works/ etc./ The Siege of Corinth--Parisina--Poems./ London:/John
Murray, Albemarle-Street,/ 1818./]; Cont. of Vol. V.; Advertisement;
Dedication, "To John Hobhouse, Esq.;" Text, pp. 1-104; The Imprint, _T.
Davison, Lombard-street_,/ Whitefriars, London,/ is at the foot of p.
184.

Vol. VI.: pp. 1-187--Gen. Half-title (R. _T. Davison, Lombard Street,
Whitefriars, London_); Title, one leaf [The Works,/ etc. _In Six Volumes_
(in some copies "In six," etc., does not appear)]; Cont. to Vol. VI.;
Half-title; Text, pp. 1-187, + Publisher's List, pp. 189-192. The
Imprint is at the foot of p. 192.

Vol. VII.: pp. 1-273--Title [The/ Works, etc./ 1819.] (R. _London:/
Printed by T. Davison, Whitefriars_/); Cont. to Vol. VII.; Text, pp.
1-273 + Publisher's Advertisement of Historical Illustrations (R.
_London:/ Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars_/).

Vol. VIII.: pp. 1-165--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint); Title [The/ Works,
etc./ 1820]; Cont. to Vol. VIII.; Text, pp. 1-165 + Publisher's List
(ten pages, with Imprint at the foot of p. [10]).

_Note_.--For Contents for Vols. I.-V., _vide supra_, Ed. 1817.

_Contents_--

Vol. VI.:--Sonnet                                                   p. 1
The Prisoner of Chillon (N.) (and six poems, N.)                    p. 3
To Manfred (N.)                                                    p. 67
Lament of Tasso                                                   p. 169
Vol. VII.:--Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, Canto III. (N.)             p. 1
Canto IV. (N.)                                                     p. 81
Vol. VIII.:--Beppo (N.)                                             p. 1
Mazeppa                                                            p. 57
Ode                                                               p. 113
A Fragment                                                        p. 127
Romance Muy Doloroso (Transl.)                                    p. 145
Sonetto di Vittorelli (Transl.)                                   p. 162

_Note_.--Vols. I.-IV. of the Edition of 1818 are illustrated by "Twelve
Plates engraved by Charles Heath, and other Artists, from the original
Designs of [Tho.] Stothard." The "original Designs," water-colour
drawings, were presented by Lord Byron to the third Lord Holland, and
are now in the possession of the Earl of Ilchester.

X.

_The Works of the right honourable Lord Byron_. Comprehending all his
suppressed poems. Embellished with a portrait, and a Sketch of his
Lordship's life. Vols. I.-VI. Paris: Published by Galignani, at the
French, English, Italian, German and Spanish library, Nº 18, Rue
Vivienne, 1818, in 12º.

[_Bibliographie de la France_, June 13, 1818.]

XI.

_The Works of Lord Byron_. In Thirteen Volumes. Published by Gerard
Fleischer. Leipzic. 1818-1822. [8º.

[Kayser, _Index Verborum_. 1834. See, too, _Jahrbücher der Literatur_.
Vienna, 1821. Vol. xv. pp. 105-145.]

XII.

The/ Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ Vol. I./ [Vol. II., etc.] London:/ John
Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1819./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. xv. + 479--Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Cont. to Vol.
I., pp. v., vi.; Half-title, with Motto, pp. vii., viii.; Preface, etc.,
pp. ix.-xv.; Text, pp. 1-479. The Imprint (_London:/ Printed by Thomas
Davison, Whitefriars_./) is in the centre of the last page, p. [480].

Vol. II.: pp. 1-491--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint); Title, one leaf;
Cont. to Vol. II.; Text, pp. 1-491; Notes to _Beppo_, p. [493], one leaf.

Vol. III.: pp. viii. + 330--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint), pp. i., ii.;
Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Cont. to Vol. III., pp. v.-viii.; Text,
pp. 1-330. The Imprint is at the foot of the last page, p. 330.

_Note_.--In Vol. I. the text and notes of Cantos I., II. of _Childe
Harold_ are identical with the Eleventh Edition of 1819, the text with
the Tenth Edition of 1815. The text of Cantos III. and IV. is all but
identical with the text of the editions of 1816, 1818, but the notes
have been reset.

_Contents_--

Vol. I.: Childe Harold's, etc. Cantos I., II. (N.)                   p.1
Canto III. (N.).                                                  p. 195
Canto IV. (N.).                                                   p. 273
Vol. II.:--The Giaour (N.)                                          p. 1
The Bride of Abydos (N.)                                           p. 79
The Corsair (N.)                                                  p. 149
Lara (N.)                                                         p. 251
The Siege of Corinth (N.)                                         p. 317
Parisina (N.)                                                     p. 373
The Prisoner of Chillon (N.)                                      p. 411
Beppo (N.)                                                        p. 439
Vol. III.:--Manfred (N.)                                            p. 1
Hebrew Melodies (23)                                               p. 81
Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte (N.)                                   p. 121
Monody, etc. (N.)                                                 p. 137
Lament of Tasso                                                   p. 147
Poems (N.)                                                        p. 163

_Note_.--The _Poems_ include thirty pub. with _Childe Harold_, Ed. 10,
1815; six pub. with the _Corsair_, Ed. 2, 1814; eleven pub. in _Poems_,
1816; _A Sketch_, etc. (now first included); six pub. with _The Prisoner
of Chillon_, 1816, and the translation from the Spanish Ballad
(_Romance_, etc.) and the Italian Sonnet pub. with _Childe Harold_,
Canto IV., 1818-fifty-six pieces in all.

XIII.

The/ Works/ of/ The Right Honourable/ Lord Byron./ Comprehending all his
Suppressed Poems,/ Embellished with a Portrait and a Sketch of His/
Lordship's Life./ Vol. I./ [Vol. II., etc.] Childe Harold's Pilgrimage,/
Cantos I. and II.--The Giaour./ Second Edition./ Paris./ Published by
Galignani,/ At the French, English, Italian, German and Spanish/
Library, No. 18, Rue Vivienne./ 1819 [12º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. viii. + viii. + 276--Title, one leaf; Advertisement, one
leaf; Memoir of the R.H. Lord Byron, pp. i.-viii.; Text, pp. i.-viii.,
9-284. Frontispiece: Portrait of Lord Byron by G. Harlow, Lith. de G.
Engelmann.

Vol. II.: pp. 1-244--Gen. Half-title (R. _Printed by A. Belin_); Title,
one leaf; Text, pp. 1-244.

Vol. III.: pp. 1-230--Gen. Half-title, etc., as above; Text, pp. 1-230.

Vol. IV.: pp. 1-211--Gen. Half-title, etc., as above; Text, pp. 1-211.

Vol. V.: pp. 1-225--Gen. Half-title, as above; Dedication, pp. iii.-x.;
Text, pp. 11-235.

Vol. VI.: pp. 1-130--Gen. Half-title, etc., as above; Text, pp. 1-130 +
six pages of General Index.

_Contents_--

Vol. I.:--Childe Harold's, etc., Cantos I., II. (N.)                p. 9
The Giaour (N.)                                                   p. 207
Vol. II.:--The Bride, etc. (N.)                                     p. 1
The Corsair (N.)                                                   p. 71
Lara (N.)                                                         p. 179
Vol. III.:--Ode to N.B. (N.)                                        p. 1
Poems (xxxvi.) (N.)                                                p. 13
Hebrew Melodies                                                    p. 79
The Siege, etc. (N.)                                              p. 107
Parisina (N.)                                                     p. 163
Poems, 1816                                                       p. 195
Monody, etc. (N.)                                                 p. 222
Vol. IV.:--The Prisoner of Chillon, etc. (N.)                       p. 1
Manfred (N.)                                                       p. 51
The Lament of Tasso                                               p. 125
Childe Harold's, etc., Canto IV. (N.)                             p. 139
Vol. V.:--Childe Harold's, etc., Canto IV. (N.)                     p. 1
Publisher's Advt.                                               p. [220]
Romance Muy Doloroso (Transl.)                                    p. 221
Sonetto di Vittorelli (Transl.)                                   p. 234
Vol. VI.:--Beppo                                                    p. 1
Suppressed Poems: English Bards, etc.                              p. 47
Ode ("Oh, shame to thee," etc.)                                   p. 121
Windsor Poetics                                                   p. 125
A Sketch                                                          p. 126
Mazeppa                                                             p. 5
Ode (To Venice)                                                    p. 47
A Fragment                                                         p. 57

_Note_.--Bound up with, and, possibly, an integral part of Vol. VI., is
_Mazeppa_. _Collation_: pp. 1-69. 12º. Half-title (R. _Printed by A.
Belin_); pp 1, 2; Title, one leaf (Mazeppa,/ A Poem.: By Lord Byron./
Second Edition./ Paris:/ Published by Galignani,/ At the French,
English, Italian, German and Spanish/ Library, Nº 18, Rue Vivienne./
1819./), pp. 3, 4; Second half-title; Advertisement, pp. 7, 8; and Text,
pp. 9-69. (For Contents, _vide supra_.)

XIV.

_The Works of the R.H. Lord Byron_. In Six Volumes. Zwickau. Printed for
Brothers Schumann, 1819.

[_Jahrbücher der Lit_.]

XV.

_The Works_, etc. In Seven Volumes. Brussels: published at the English
Repository of Arts, 1819.

[Kölbing.]

XVI.

_Works of Lord Byron_. New York. 1820. Four Volumes. [18º.

[Cat. of Library of _Boston Athenæum_.]

_Contents_--

Vol. I.:--Childe Harold's, etc.

Vol. II.:--Bride, etc.--Corsair--Lara--The Giaour.

Vol. III.:--Siege, etc.--Prisoner of Chillon--Parisina--Beppo--English
Bards, etc.--Mazeppa--Ode--Fragment--Don Juan.

Vol. IV.:--Hebrew Melodies--Ode to N.B.--Monody, etc.--Lament of
Tasso--Manfred--Poems.

XVII.

The/ Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ Vol. I./ [Vol. II., etc.] London:/ John
Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 18217 [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. xvi. + 216--Gen. Half-title (R. (_a_) _Thomas Davison,
Whitefriars_.) pp. i., ii.; Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Cont. to
Vol. I., pp. v., vi.; Preface, etc., pp. vii.-xi.; Text, pp. 1-216. The
Imprint (_b_) (_London:/ Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars_.) is at
the foot of p. 216.

Vol. II.: pp. 1-272--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint (_a_)); Title, one
leaf; Cont. to Vol. II.; Text, pp. 1-237. The Imprint (_b_) is at the
foot of p. 272.

Vol. III.: pp. 1-237--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint (_a_)); Title, one
leaf; Cont. to Vol. III.; Text, pp. 1-237. The Imprint (_b_) is in the
centre of p. [240].

Vol. IV.: pp. 1-274--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint (_a_)); Title, one
leaf; Cont. to Vol. IV.; Text, pp. 1-274. The Imprint (_b_) is in the
centre of p. [276].

Vol. V.: pp. viii. + 284--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint (_a_)), pp. i.,
ii.; Title, one leaf; Cont. to Vol. V., pp.[v.]-viii.; Text, pp. 1-284.
The Imprint (_b_) is at the foot of p. 284.

_Contents_--

Vol. I.:--Childe Harold's, etc., Cantos I., II. (N. App.)          p. i.
Vol. II.:--Childe Harold's, etc., Canto III. (N.)                   p. 1
Canto IV. (N.)                                                     p. 77
Vol. III.:--The Giaour (N.)                                         p. 1
The Bride, etc. (N.)                                               p. 75
The Corsair (N.)                                                  p. 143
Vol. IV.:--Lara (N.)                                                p. 1
The Siege (N.)                                                     p. 63
Parisina                                                          p. 117
The Prisoner (N.)                                                 p. 153
Beppo (N.)                                                        p. 179
Mazeppa                                                           p. 235
Vol. V.:--Manfred (N.)                                              p. 1
Hebrew Melodies                                                    p. 73
Ode to N.B. (N.)                                                  p. 104
Monody, etc.                                                      p. 121
Lament of Tasso                                                   p. 127
Poems (N.)                                                        p. 141

_Note_.--The Poems (fifty-seven in all) include the _Ode to Venice_.

XVIII.

Lord Byron's/ Works./ Volume the First./ [Volume the Second, etc.]
Containing:/ The Bride of Abydos--The Corsair--Lara--/Parisina, etc./
Paris/ Sold by François Louis,/ At his French and English Library,/ Rue
Hautefeuille, Nº 10;/ And Baudry,/ At the Foreign Library,/ Rue du Coq
Saint Honoré, Nº 9./ 1821./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. xii. + 216--Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; "Memoir of Lord
Byron," pp. v.-xii.; Text, pp. 1-216.

Vol. II. pp. 1-240--Title, one leaf; Text, pp. 1-240.

Vol. III.: pp. 1-[224]--Title, one leaf; Text, pp. 1-224 + 4 _n.p._

Vol. IV.: pp. 1-[228]--Title, one leaf; Text, pp. 1-224 + 4 _n.p._

Vol. V.: pp. 1-244--Title, one leaf; Text, pp. 1-244.

_Contents_--

Vol. I.:--The Bride, etc., Cantos I., II. (N.)                      p. 1
The Corsair, Cantos I.-III. (N.)                                   p. 55
Lara, Cantos I., II. (N.)                                         p. 131
Parisina                                                          p. 179
Ode to N.B.                                                       p. 203
Ode to Venice                                                     p. 211
Vol. II.:--English Bards, etc.                                      p. 1
Don Juan, Cantos I., II. (N.)                                      p. 55
The Giaour (N.)                                                   p. 167
Vol. III.:--Childe Harold, Cantos I.-IV.(N.)                        p. 1
Beppo                                                             p. 187
Fare Thee Well                                                    p. 219
Darkness                                                          p. 221
Stanzas for Music ("There be none," etc.)                       p. [224]
Vol. IV.:--Siege, etc. (N.)                                         p. 1
Manfred (N.)                                                       p. 43
Mazeppa                                                           p. 107
Prisoner of Chillon, a Fable, Sonnet, etc. (N.)                   p. 139
Sonnet ("Rousseau," etc.)                                         p. 160
Lament of Tasso                                                   p. 161
Various Poems:[B] A Sketch, etc. (and 34 others)                  p. 173
Vol. V.:--Hours of Idleness (_i.e._ Poems Original and              p. 1
Translated), "The Second English Edition," On Leaving Newstead
Abbey, etc.
Critique, etc.                                                    p. 116
Fugitive Pieces (including _Windsor Poetics_, first pub. by       p. 163
Murray, and the spurious _Ode_, "Oh, shame to thee," etc.)
The Curse of Minerva (full text)                                  p. 177
Avis ("Le Vampire, faussement attribué à Lord Byron, est de       p. 191
_Polidori_, jeune médecin qui a vécu quelque temps à Genève
avec le poëte anglais," etc.)
The Vampyre, A Tale                                               p. 192
Extract of a Letter from Geneva                                   p. 194
Introduction                                                      p. 201
The Vampyre                                                       p. 207
A Fragment (June 17, 1816)                                        p. 237

FOOTNOTES:

[B] [Six "Hebrew Melodies" are included in Various Poems.]

XIX.

The/ Works/ of/ Lord Byron,/ comprehending the/ Suppressed Poems./
Embellished with a Portrait, And a Sketch of His Life./ Vol. I./ [Vol.
II., etc.] Paris:/ Published by A. and W. Galignani,/ At the French,
English, Italian, German and Spanish Library,/ Nº 18, Rue Vivienne./
1822.7 [8º.

_Collation_--Vol. I.: pp. 106 + 265--Gen. Half-title (R. _Printed by A.
Belin_); Title, one leaf, pp. 1, 2; Contents to Vol. I., pp. 3, 4; _The
Life of Lord Byron_ [By J.W. Lake], pp. 5-106; Text, pp. 1-264.

Vol. XVI: pp. 204--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint); Title, one leaf; Text,
pp. 1-204.

_Contents_--

Vol. I.:--Hours of Idleness                                         p. 1
Translations and Imitations                                        p. 63
Fugitive Pieces                                                    p. 97
Critique [E.R. Jan. 1808]                                         p. 153
English Bards, etc.                                               p. 161
Lines written by Mr. Fitzgerald in a copy of _English             p. 234
Bards_, etc., with his Lordship's Reply
The Curse of Minerva                                              p. 235
An Ode ("Oh, shame to thee," etc.)                                p. 255
Windsor Poetics                                                   p. 259
A Sketch, etc.                                                    p. 260
Vol. XVI.:--The Deformed Transformed                                p. 1
Transl. of Morgante Maggiore                                      p. 105
Lord Byron's Speeches                                             p. 157

_Note_.--The frontispiece of Vol. I. is an engraving of the Portrait by
G. Sanders.

_Don Juan_ was included in successive volumes in accordance with the
date of publication: Cantos I., II. in Vol. VII.; Cantos III., IV., V.
in Vol. VIII.; Cantos VI.-XI. in Vol. XIV; and Cantos XII.-XVI. in Vol.
XV.

Volumes XIII.-XV. of this Edition were issued in 1823, and Vol. XVI. in
1824.

XX.

The/ Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ In Four Volumes./ Vol. I./ [Vol. II., etc.]
London:/ John Murray, Albemarle Street./ 1823 [8º

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. xi. + 303--Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Gen. Cont., pp.
v., xi.; Cont. of Vol. I.; Text, pp. 1-303. The Imprint (_London:_/
_Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars_/) is in the centre of the last
page.

Vol. II.: pp. 1-359--Title, one leaf; Cont. of Vol. II.; Text, pp.
1-359. The Imprint is in the centre of the last page, p. [360].

Vol. III.: pp. 1-345--Title, one leaf; Cont. of Vol. III.; Text, pp.
1-345; Notes to _Beppo_, one leaf, p. [347]. The Imprint is in the
centre of the last page, p. [348].

Vol. IV.: pp. viii. + 372--Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Cont. of Vol.
IV., pp. v.-viii.; Text, pp. 1-372. The Imprint is at the foot of p.
372.

_Contents_--

Vol. I.:--Childe Harold's, etc., Cantos I., II. (N. App.)          p. 1
Canto III. (N.)                                                  p. 223
Vol. II.:--Childe Harold's, etc., Canto IV. (N.)                   p. 1
The Giaour (N.)                                                  p. 207
The Bride, etc., Cantos I., II. (N.)                             p. 287
Vol. III.:--The Corsair, Cantos I.-III. (N.)                       p. 1
Lara, Cantos I., II. (N.)                                        p. 105
The Siege, etc. (N.)                                             p. 169
Parisina (N.)                                                    p. 225
The Prisoner of Chillon, Sonnet (N.)                             p. 265
Beppo (N.)                                                       p. 293
Vol. IV.:--Mazeppa (N.)                                            p. 1
Manfred (N.)                                                      p. 43
Hebrew Melodics (N.)                                             p. 121
Ode to N.B. (N.)                                                 p. 159
Monody, etc. (N.)                                                p. 175
Lament of Tasso                                                  p. 185
Poems (57) (N.)                                                  p. 203

_Note_.--This edition of 1823, 4 vols. 8º, differs from the 3 vols. 8º
of 1819, by the addition of _Mazeppa_ and the _Ode to Venice_. The
Front, of Vol. I. is "Lord Byron," by T. Phillips, R.A., engr. by C.
Warren.

XXI.

_The Works of Lord Byron_. In Twelve Vols. Paris: Printed for Baudry,
etc. 1822-1824. [12º.

_Note_.--The _Life and Genius of Lord Byron_, by Sir Cosmo Gordon, is
affixed to the twelfth volume. See _La France Littéraire_, by J.M.
Quérard. 1827.

XXII.

_The Works of Lord Byron_, comprehending the suppressed Poems.
Embellished with a portrait, and a sketch of his life. In Twelve
Volumes. Printed by A. Belin. Published by Galignani. 1823. [12º.

[_B. de la F._, May 24, 1823.]

XXIII.

The/ Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ Vol. V./ Containing/ Hours of
Idleness--Fugitive Pieces--English/ Bards and Scotch
Reviewers--Waltz--/Miscellaneous Poems, etc./ London:/ Knight and Lacey,
Paternoster-Row./ 1824./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. V.: pp. xiii. + 154 + 9 + vi. + 57 + vii. + 61--Gen. Half-title;
Title (R. _T.C. Hansard, Paternoster-Row Press_); Preface; Cont., pp.
[i.]-xiii.; Second Half-title; Text, pp. 2-154, etc.

_Note_.--The Imprint (_T.C. Hansard/ Paternoster-Row_/) is at the foot
of the last page (p. 62). Four pages (_n.p._) of publishers' list of
Sherwood, Jones & Co., etc., dated London, June, 1824, are bound up with
Vol. V.

Vol. VI.: pp. vi. + 308 + 2 pages (_n.p._)--Gen. Half-title; Title [The/
etc. In Seven Volumes./ Vol. VI./ London:/ Printed for John and Henry L.
Hunt,/ Tavistock Street./ 1824./] (R. _London:/ Printed By C.H. Reynell,
Broad-Street, Golden-Square_/); Second Half-title; Dedication; Preface,
pp. i.-vi.; Dramatis Personæ, p. [viii.] (_B.A._); Text, pp. 9-308; Note
to the Translation of the _Morgante Maggiore_, one leaf, pp. [309, 310].

Vol. VII.: pp. 1-286--Gen. Half-title; Title [The, etc./
Tavistock-Street./ 1825./], (R. Imprint as above); Text, pp. 1-286.

_Contents_--

Vol. V.:--Hours of Idleness                                         p. 1
Review, etc.                                                        p. 1
English Bards, etc.                                                p. i.
Waltz [N]                                                          p. i.
Ode ("Oh, shame to thee," etc.)                                    p. 19
Adieu to Malta                                                     p. 23
Madame Lavalette                                                   p. 26
The Curse of Minerva (111 lines)                                   p. 28
Farewell to England                                                p. 35
To my Daughter, etc.                                               p. 46
Ode to ... St. Helena                                              p. 50
To the Lily of France                                              p. 53
To Jessy                                                           p. 56
To T. Moore, Esq. ("My Boat," etc.)                                p. 58
Lines to Mr. Hobhouse                                              p. 60
Enigma [H.]                                                        p. 61
Vol. VI.:--Werner                                                  p. i.
Heaven and Earth                                                  p. 197
Transl. of Morgante Maggiore (Advt.)                              p. 259
Vol. VII.:--The Age of Bronze                                       p. 1
The Island                                                         p. 37
Appendix (Extract from the Voyage of Capt. Bligh)                 p. 109
The Vision of Judgment                                            p. 125
Appendix (Court of King's Bench, Thursday, January 15, 1824.      p. 187
The King _v_. John Hunt)
The Deformed Transformed                                          p. 191

_Note_ (1).--In Vol. V. the pagination of the "Postscript" of _English
Bards, etc._, pp. 45-47, is incorrect.

_Note_ (2).--In Vol. VII. (pp. 125, _sq_.) in the edition of the _Vision
of Judgment_, issued after the verdict in the case of the King _v._ John
Hunt, January 15, 1824, stanzas viii., ix. (lines 1, 2), xliii. (lines
1-6), xliv., xlv. (lines 1-6), xlvii. (lines 4, 8), are omitted in the
text, but are quoted in the report of the trial.

_Note_ (3).--The following slip, headed "Notice to the Binder," is
inserted between a fly-leaf and the general half-title of Vols. VI.,
VII.: "_In order that each purchaser of the two concluding volumes of
Lord Byron's Works may be enabled with them to complete his particular
set,--whatever edition he possesses, an extra Title-page is given with
each--there being several editions in print, comprising the same marks
in different numbers of volumes. In binding these two last volumes,
therefore, the binder should be instructed which of the Title-pages to
retain._" Four pages (_n.p._) consisting of General Half-title (_B.R._)
and Title-page as above [In Eight volumes./ Vol. VII., Vol. VIII./] with
Imprint as above, at foot of Reverse, are bound up with Vols. VI., VII.
Volume VIII. was not issued.

XXIV.

_The Works_, etc. In Eight Volumes. London: John Murray, etc., 1825.
[Small] 8º.

XXV.

The/ Works /of/ Lord Byron./ In Six Volumes./ Vol. V./ London:/ John
Murray, Albemarle Street./ 1825./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. V.: pp. 1-404--Title, one leaf; Cont. of Vol. V.; Text, pp. 1-404.
The Imprint (_London:/ Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars_/) is at
the foot of p. 404.

Vol. VI.: pp. viii. + 319--Title, one leaf; Cont. of Vol. VI.; Text, pp
1-319. The Imprint is in the centre of the last page, p. [320].

_Contents_--

Vol. V.:--Marino Faliero (N. App.)                                  p. 1
Prophecy of Dante, Cantos I.-IV. (N.)                             p. 243
Cain                                                              p. 291
Vol. VI.:--Sardanapalus (N)                                         p. 1
The Two Foscari (App.)                                            p. 171

XXVI.

The/ Complete Works/ of/ Lord Byron/ With/ A Biographical and Critical
notice/ By J.W. Lake, Esq./ Vol. I. [Vol. II., etc.] Childe Harold's
Pilgrimage./ [Monogram.] Paris/ From the Press of Jules Didot senior,/
vi, Rue Du Pont-de-Lodi./ Published by Baudry, Rue du
Coq-Saint-Honoré,/ And Amyot, Rue De La Paix./ 1825./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. c. + 353--Title, one leaf; Cont. of the First Vol.; A
Biographical, etc., pp. i.-c.; Text, pp. 1-353.

Vol. II.: pp. 1-432--Title, one leaf; Cont. of the Second Vol.; Text,
pp. 1-432.

Vol. III.: pp. 1-466--Title, one leaf; Cont. of the Third Vol.; Text,
pp. 1-466.

Vol. IV.: pp. 1-426--Title, one leaf; Cont. of the Fourth Vol.; Text,
pp. 1-426.

Vol. V.: pp. 1-435--Title, one leaf; Cont. of the Fifth Vol.; Text, pp.
1-435; Note to Cain, one leaf, p. [437].

Vol. VI.: pp. vii. + 529--Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Cont. of the
Sixth Vol., pp. v.-viii.; Text, pp. 1-529.

Vol. VII.: pp. viii. + 528--Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Cont. of the
Seventh Vol., pp. v.-viii.; Text, pp. 1-528.

_Note_.--The Frontispiece of Vol. I. is an engraving of the Portrait of
Lord Byron by G. Sanders.

_Contents_--

Vol. I.:--A Biographical, etc.                               p. i
Childe Harold's, etc., Cantos I.-III (N.)                    p. 1
Dedication                                                 p. 205
Canto IV. (N.)                                             p. 213
Vol. II.:--Don Juan, Cantos I.-V. (N.)                       p. 1
Preface to Cantos VI., VII., VIII.                         p. 301
Cantos VI.-VIII. (N.)                                      p. 307
Vol. III.:--Don Juan, etc., etc.
Canto IX. (N.)                                               p. 1
Canto XVI. (N.)                                            p. 247
Beppo (N.)                                                 p. 295
The Vision of Judgment (N.)                                p. 333
The Giaour (N.)                                            p. 373
Parisina                                                   p. 435
Vol. IV.:--Manfred (N.)                                      p. 1
Marino Faliero (N.), Preface, etc.                         p. 267
Vol. V.:--The Two Foscari (N.)                               p. 1
Appendix                                                   p. 123
Werner (N.)                                                p. 143
Cain (N.)                                                  p. 331
Vol. VI.:--Heaven and Earth (N.)                             p. i
The Deformed, etc. (N.)                                     p. 53
The Bride, etc. (N.)                                       p. 133
The Corsair (N.)                                           p. 193
Lara (N.)                                                  p. 279
The Siege, etc. (N.)                                       p. 331
The Prisoner of Chillon (N.), Sonnet, etc.                 p. 377
Mazeppa (N.), Advt., etc.                                  p. 399
The Island (N.), Advt., etc.                               p. 435
The Lament of Tasso, Advt.                                 p. 517
Vol. VII.:--The Prophecy of Dante (N.), Dedication, etc.     p. 1
The Age of Bronze (N.)                                      p. 45
The Curse of Minerva (N.)                                   p. 77
Hours of Idleness                                           p. 95
Critique, etc.                                             p. 211
English Bards, etc., Preface                               p. 221
Hebrew Melodies                                            p. 277
Miscellaneous Poems, and The Dream, etc.                   p. 301
Morgante Maggiore (N.), Advt.                              p. 439
Letter to * * *                                            p. 475
Parliamentary Speeches, Debate on the Framework Bill       p. 505

_Note_.--The Miscellaneous Poems (67) include the following forgeries:
Ode ("Oh, shame to thee," etc.), p. 345; Madame Lavalette, p. 349;
Farewell to England, p. 356; To my Daughter, P. 366.

XXVII.

_Works of Lord Byron. Philadelphia_. 1825. Eight Vols. [8º.

_Contents_--

Vol. I.:--Childe Harold's Pilgrimage.

Vol. II.:--Giaour--Two Foscari--Werner.

Vol. III.:--Bride, etc.--Corsair--Cain, a Mystery--Sardanapalus.

Vol. IV.:--Lara--English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers--Marino
Faliero-Siege, etc.--Prisoner of Chillon--Song.

Vol. V.:--Manfred--Parisina--Deformed Transformed--Vision of
Judgment--Beppo--Age of Bronze--Heaven and Earth--Curse of Minerva, etc.

Vol. VI.:--Mazeppa--The Dream--The Island--Prophecy of Dante--Lament of
Tasso--Ode to Buonaparte--Monody, etc.--Hebrew Melodies--Miscellaneous
Poems.

Vols. VII., VIII.:--Don Juan.

[Catalogue of the Boston Athenæum Library, 1874.]

XXVIII.

_The Works of the R.H. Lord Byron_. In Eight Vols. New York: published
by Wm. Borrodaile, at his wholesale Book Store, 114, Fulton Street.
1825.

[Kölbing.]

XXIX.

_The Works of Lord Byron_. Complete in Thirty-two Volumes. Published by
the Brothers Schumann, Zwickau. 1825-1827. [16º.

_Note_.--Vol. XXXIII. was issued in 1838. [Kayser, 1841.]

XXX.

_The Works of Lord Byron_, comprising the suppressed poems. In Thirteen
Volumes. Paris. Printed by Didot aîné. Published by A. and W.
Galignani, No. 18, Rue Vivienne. 1826. [32º.

[_B. de la F._, June 3, 1826.]

XXXI.

The/ Works/ of/ Lord Byron/ Including/ The Suppressed Poems./ Complete
in one volume/. Paris:/ Published by A. and W. Galignani,/ No. 18, Rue
Vivienne./ 1826./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xliii. + 716--Gen. Half-title (R. _Printed by Jules Didot, Senior,/
Printer to his Majesty, Rue du Pont de Lodi, Nº 6_/); Title-page, one
leaf, pp. i., ii.; Cont., pp. iii., iv.; The Life of Lord Byron [by J.W.
Lake], pp. v.-xliii.; Text, pp. 1-716.

The Front. is a Portrait of Lord Byron by F. Sieurac, engr. by J.T.
Wedgwood. The Title-vignette is a harp, etc., resting on foliage (bays
and oak leaves).

The Facsimile of the Letter from Lord Byron to M. Galignani, dated
Venice, April 27, 1819, is inserted between the "Contents" and the
"Life," etc.

_Note_ (1).--Among MISCELLANEOUS POEMS are _The Irish Avatar_, p. 515;
_Ode_ ("Oh, shame to thee," etc.), p. 539; _Windsor Poetics_, p. 540;
and _Carmina Byronis in C. Elgin_, p. 541. The Volume concludes (pp.
711-716) with _Poems Attributed to Lord Byron_, viz.--

Childish Recollections (32 lines)                                p. 711
Lord Byron to his Lady ("How strangely," etc.)                      ib.
Ode to the Island of St. Helena                                     ib.
To the Lily of France                                            p. 712
Madame Lavalette                                                    ib.
Adieu to Malta                                                      ib.
Enigma ("'Twas whispered," etc.)                                 p. 713
The Triumph of the Whale                                            ib.
To Jessy                                                            ib.
To my Daughter                                                   p. 714
To Lady Caroline Lamb                                            p. 715
The Farewell ("When man compelled," etc.)                           ib.
Lines ("Would you get to the House," etc.)                          ib.
Verses ("All hail, Mont Blanc," etc.)                               ib.
To a Lady ("And wilt thou weep," etc.)                           p. 716
Stanzas ("I heard thy fate," etc.)[C]                               ib.
Lines found in the Travellers' Book at Chamouni                     ib.
Lines found in Lord Byron's Bible[D]                                ib.

_Note_ (2).--This edition was reissued, in 1827, on different paper. An
impression of the portrait by F. Sieurac, in an unfinished state,
precedes the Frontispiece.

FOOTNOTES:

[C] "Stanzas" were published _Poetical Works_, 1899, iii. 425, 426, with
the title, "On the Death of the Duke of Dorset." Note (I) on p. 425 is
incorrect.

[D] "Lines Found in Lord Byron's Bible" are by Sir Walter Scott (see
_Monastery_, chap. xii.).

XXXII.

_The Works_, etc. Complete. One Vol. Frankfort o. M. Printed by and for
H.L. Broenner. 1826. 4º, pp. xvi. + 776.

[Kölbing.]

_Note_.--A Second Edition, pp. xlvi. + 804, including _Morgante
Maggiore_ and _Parliamentary Speeches_, was issued in 1829, _vide post_,
No. xl.; and a third, pp. xxx. + 784, including _Francesca di Rimini,
Hints from Horace_, and _The Blues_, etc., in 1837. According to Kayser,
the First Edition appeared in 1827, a second in 1829, and a third,
"considerably augmented," in 1837.

XXXIII.

_The Works_, etc. In Six Volumes. London: John Murray, etc. 1827. [Small
8º.

[Kölbing.]

XXXIV.

The/ Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ In Four Volumes./ Vol. I./ [Vol. II., etc.]
London:/ John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1828./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. ix. + 362--Gen. Half-title, Works/ of/ Lord/ Byron./ (R.
_London: Printed by Thomas Davison Whitefriars_/), pp. i., ii.; Title,
one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Gen. Cont., pp. v.-ix.; Cont. of Vol. I.
(_n.p._); Text, pp. 1-362.

The Front., "Lord Byron," is engr. by E. Finden from a portrait by G.
(_sic_) Phillips, R.A.

Vol. II.: pp. 1-424--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint); Cont. of Vol. II.;
Text, pp. 1-424. The Imprint is at the foot of p. 424.

The Front., "Medora" (_Corsair_, i. 379), is engr. by E. Finden from a
drawing by H. Corbould.

Vol. III.: pp. vii. + 383--Half-title (R. Imprint), pp. i., ii.; Title,
one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Cont. of Vol. III., pp. v.-vii.; Text, pp.
1-383. The Imprint is in the centre of the last page, p. [384].

The Front., "Lord Byron" ("When late I saw thy ... child"), is engr. by
E. Finden from a drawing by H. Corbould.

Vol. IV.: pp. 1-429--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint); Title, one leaf;
Cont. of Vol. IV.; Text, pp. 1-429. The Imprint is in the centre of the
last page, p. [430].

The Front., "Sardanapalus" (act iv. sc. 1, line 1), is engr. by E.
Finden from a drawing by H. Corbould.

_Contents_--

Vol. I.:--Childe Harold's, etc., Cantos I.-IV. (N.)                 p. 1
Vol. II.:--The Giaour (N.)                                          p. 1
The Corsair, Cantos I.-III. (N.)                                   p. 61
Lara, Cantos I., II. (N.)                                         p. 143
The Bride, etc., Cantos I., II. (N.)                              p. 195
Siege, etc. (N.)                                                  p. 253
Parisina (N.)                                                     p. 299
The Prisoner of Chillon, Sonnet, etc. (N.)                        p. 331
Beppo (N.)                                                        p. 353
Mazeppa                                                           p. 391
Vol. III.:--Manfred (N.)                                            p. 1
Hebrew Melodies: "She walks in beauty" (and 22 others)             p. 61
Ode to N.B. (N.)                                                   p. 89
Monody, etc.                                                       p. 99
Lament of Tasso                                                   p. 105
Poems: Written in an Album (and 55 others)                        p. 119
Ode [to Venice]                                                   p. 249
Notes to the Poems                                                p. 255
Prophecy of Dante, Cantos I.-IV. (N.)                             p. 259
Cain                                                              p. 299
Vol. IV.:--Marino Faliero (App.)                                    p. 1
Sardanapalus (N.)                                                 p. 175
The Two Foscari (App.)                                            p. 303

XXXV.

The/ Works/ of/ Lord Byron/ Including/ The Suppressed Poems./ Complete
in One Volume./ Paris:/ Published by A. and W. Galignani,/ No. 18, Rue
Vivienne./ 1828./ 8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xl. + 718.

_Note_.--This edition closely corresponds with that issued by A. and W.
Galignani in 1826-7, _q.v. ante_, No. xxxi. The "Life of Lord Byron," by
J.W. Lake, is abbreviated and corrected. Among ATTRIBUTED POEMS are the
following additions: _A Drinking Song_ ("Fill the goblet," etc.), p.
716; _Remember Thee_, _ibid_.; _To Mary_ ("Remind me not," etc.), p.
717; Verses ("There was a time," etc.), _ibid_.; _On Leaving England_,
_ibid._; and the following omissions: Verses ("All hail, Mont Blanc,"
etc.), 1826, p. 715; and _Lines found in Lord Byron's Bible_, 1826, p.
716.

XXXVI.

_The Works of Lord Byron_. Complete in One Volume. Title-Vignette.
Published by Broenner, Frankfort. 1828, 8º.

_Note_.--A Second Edition was issued in 1829, and a third, "considerably
augmented," in 1837. [Kayser.]

XXXVII.

The/ Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ In Six Volumes./ Vol. I./ [Vol. II., etc.]
London:/ John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1829./ 8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.:--Gen. Half-title, "Byron" (R. _London: Printed by Thomas
Davison, Whitefriar's_), pp. i., ii; Title, one leaf, pp. iii, iv.;
General Cont., pp. v.-ix.; Cont. of Vol. I., _n.p._; Text, pp. 1-235.
The Imprint is in the centre of the last page, p. [236].

Vol. II.: Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint); Title, one leaf; Cont. of Vol.
II.; Text, pp. 1-297. The Imprint is in the centre of the last page, p.
[300].

Vol. III.: Gen. Half-title, etc., as in Vol. II.; Text pp. 1-282. The
Imprint is in the centre of the last page, p. [284].

Vol. IV.: pp. vii. + 275--Half-title (R. Imprint), pp. i., ii.; Title,
one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Cont. of Vol. IV., pp. v.-vii.; Text, pp.
1-275. The Imprint is in the centre of the last page, p. [276].

Vol. V.: Half-title, etc., as in Vol. II.; Text, pp. 1-26. The Imprint
is at the foot of p. 264.

Vol. VI.: pp. viii. + 266--Half-title (R. Imprint), pp. i., ii.; Title,
one leaf, pp. iii, iv.; Cont. of Vol. VI. (_B.R._), pp. v., vi.;
Preface, pp. vii., viii.; Text, pp. 1-266. The Imprint is in the centre
of the last page, p. [268].

_Contents_--

Vol. I.:--Childe Harold's, etc., Cantos I.-III. (Pref. N.)          p. 1
Vol. II.:--Childe Harold's, etc., Canto IV. (N.)                    p. 1
The Giaour (N.)                                                   p. 157
The Corsair, Cantos I.-III. (N.)                                  p. 217
Vol. III.:--Lara, Cantos I., II. (N.)                               p. 1
The Bride, etc., Cantos I., II. (N.)                               p. 53
Siege, etc. (N.)                                                  p. 111
Parisina (N.)                                                     p. 157
The Prisoner, etc. (Sonnet, N.)                                   p. 189
Beppo (N.)                                                        p. 211
Mazeppa                                                           p. 249
Vol. IV.:--Manfred (N.)                                             p. 1
Hebrew Melodies: "She walks," etc. (and 21 others)                 p. 61
Ode to N.B. (N.)                                                   p. 85
Monody, etc.                                                       p. 95
Lament of Tasso                                                   p. 101
Poems: Written in an Album (and 56 others) (N.)                   p. 115
Prophecy of Dante, Cantos I.-IV. (N.)                             p. 235
Vol. V.:--Marino Faliero (A)                                        p. 1
Cain                                                              p. 179
Vol. VI.:-Sardanapalus (N.)                                         p. 1
The Two Foscari (A)                                               p. 135
Notes to Captain Medwin's, etc.                                   p. 253

XXXVIII.

The/ Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ In Four Volumes./ Vol. I./ [Vol. II., etc.]
London:/ John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1829./ 12º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.:--Gen. Half-title, "Byron" (R. (_a_) _Printed by Thomas Davison,
Whitefriars_); Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Gen. Cont., pp. v.-x.;
Cont. of Vol. I., _n.p._; Text, pp. 1-357. The Imprint (_b_) (_London:/
Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars_/), is in the centre of the last
page, p. [360].

Vol. II.: pp. 1-424--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint (_a_)); Title, one
leaf; Cont. of Vol. II.; Text, pp. 1-424. The Imprint (_b_) is at the
foot of p. 424.

Vol. III.:--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint (_a_)); Title, one leaf, pp.
iii., iv.; Cont. of Vol. III., pp. v.-viii.; Text, pp. 1-383. The
Imprint (_b_) is at the foot of the last page, p. [384].

Vol. IV.: pp. 1-412--Half-title (R. Imprint (_a_)); Title, one leaf;
Cont. of Vol. IV.; Text, pp. 1-412. The Imprint (_b_) is at the foot of
p. 412.

_Contents_--

The Cont. of Vols. I., II., III. of the Edition of 1829 are identical
with the Cont. of Vols. I., II., III. of the Edition of 1828. The
pagination of the Text 1829 follows the pagination of the Text 1828, but
the type of 1829 is not the type of 1828.

Vol. IV. (1829):--Marino Faliero                                    p. 1
Appendix                                                          p. 147
Sardanapalus (N.)                                                 p. 161
The Two Foscari                                                   p. 289
Appendix                                                          p. 381
Notes on Captain Medwin's "Conversations of Lord Byron"           p. 401


_Note_.--The original Italian and French Versions of the _Cronica di
Sanuto_, and the extracts from the works of P. Daru and P.L. Ginguené,
which appeared in 1828, are omitted in 1829, and the notes (by John
Murray) on Captain Medwin's _Conversations, etc._ (1824), are inserted.

XXXIX.

_The Poetic Works_, etc., including his _Don Juan_--all his minor poems,
and the suppressed pieces of _Cain_, and the _V. of Judgment_, all
complete. In Two Vols. Second Edition. Philadelphia: Published by the
Washington Press. 1829. [4º and 6º.

XL.

The/ Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ Complete/ In One Volume./ [Title-vignette,
"Ship in Storm," engraved on steel by C. Tremonet.] The Second Edition,
considerably augmented./ Francfort O.M./ Printed by and for H.L.
Broenner./ 1829./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xlvi + Cont., one leaf + 804--Title, one leaf; _Life_, etc., by J.W.
Lake, pp. i.-xli. + A Character of Lord Byron, by Sir W. Scott, pp.
xlii., xliii. + "Goethe und Byron" (including the stanzas "Ein
freundlich Wort," etc.) + "Lord Byron's Last Lines," pp. xliv.-xlivi. +
Cont., one leaf, _n.p._ + Text, pp. 1-804.

_Note_.--The Miscellaneous Poems include Ode "Oh, shame to thee," etc.,
and On Sir John Moore's Burial, p. 650. The ATTRIBUTED POEMS are
identical with those published in Paris, 1826 (No. xxxi.), except that
they include To Miss Chaworth ("Remind me not," etc.), and exclude Lines
Found in Lord Byron's Bible. The Notes to _Childe Harold's, etc._, and
other poems are printed continuously, pp. 715-792. _The Waltz_, together
with the _Notes_, is on pp. 795-798.

XLI.

The/ Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ In Four Volumes./ Vol. I./ [Vol. II., etc.]
London:/ John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1830./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. ix. + 359--Title (R. (_a_) _Thomas Davison, London._), pp.
i., ii.; General Cont., pp. iii.-ix.; Cont. of Vol. I., p. x.; Text, pp.
1-359. The Imprint (_b_) (_London:/ Printed by Thomas Davison,
Whitefriars_/) is in the centre of the last page, p. [360].

The Frontispiece, "Lord Byron," is engraved by E. Finden from a portrait
by T. Phillips, R.A.

Vol. II.: pp. iv. + 424--Title (R. Imprint), pp. i., ii.; Cont. of Vol.
II., pp. iii., iv.; Text, pp. 1-383. The Imprint (_b_) is at the foot of
p. 424.

Vol. III.: pp. vi. + 383--Title (R. Imprint), pp. i., ii.; Cont. of Vol.
III., pp. iii.-vi.; Text, pp. 1-383. The Imprint (_b_) is in the centre
of the last page, p. [384].

Vol. IV.: pp. 1-415--Title (R. Imprint); Cont. of Vol. IV., one leaf;
Text, pp. 1-415. The Imprint (_b_) is in the centre of the last page, p.
[384].

The Front, of Vol. II. is that of Vol. II., ed. 1828; the Front. of Vol.
III. that of Vol. IV., 1828; and the Front. of Vol. IV. that of Vol.
III., 1828.

_Note_.--The Cont. of Vols. I.-IV., 1830, are identical with the Cont.
of Vols. I.-IV., 1829. The Notes have been partly re-set.

XLII.

_The Complete Works_, etc., including his lordship's suppressed poems
with others never before published. (With portrait and _fac-simile_.)
Paris, Galignani, 1830. [12º.

[Quérard, 1846.]

XLIII.

The/ Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ In Six Volumes./ Vol. I./ [Vol. II., etc.]
London:/ John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1831./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Vols. I.-IV. of Ed. 1831 are identical with Vols. I.-IV. of Ed. 1830.
The Frontispieces of Vols. III., IV., which were transposed in Ed. 1830,
are restored to their original position, as in Ed. 1828.

Vol. V.: pp. xii. + 475--Gen. Half-title (R. (_a_) _Thomas Davison,
London_), pp. i., ii.; Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Editor's Advt. to
_Hours of Idleness_, pp. v.-vii.; Cont. of Vol. V., pp. ix.-xii.; Text,
pp. 1-475; Publisher's Advt. of the Life of Lord Byron (2 Vols. 4to)....
by Thomas Moore, Esq., p. [477]. The Imprint (_b_) (_London:/ Printed by
Thomas Davison, Whitefriars_:/) is in the centre of p. 476.

The Frontispiece, "Heaven and Earth," is engr. by E. Finden from a
drawing by H. Richter.

Vol. VI.: pp. viii. + 459--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint), pp. i., ii.;
Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Cont. to Vol. VI., pp. v.-viii.; Text,
pp. 1-459. The Imprint (_b_) is in the centre of the last page, p.
[460].

The Frontispiece, "The Island," is engr. by E. Finden from a drawing by
H. Richter.

_Contents_--

Vol. V.:--Hours of Idleness: Preface, etc.                          p. 1
On leaving Newstead Abbey (and 64 others)                          p. 11
Critique from _Edinb. Rev._                                       p. 203
English Bards, etc.                                               p. 209
Hints from Horace                                                 p. 273
The Curse of Minerva                                              p. 329
The Waltz                                                         p. 345
Age of Bronze                                                     p. 365
The Vision of Judgment                                            p. 397
Morgante Maggiore                                                 p. 441
Vol. VI.:--Werner                                                   p. 1
The Deformed Transformed                                          p. 157
Heaven and Earth                                                  p. 227
The Island: Cantos I.-IV. App.                                    p. 277
Poems:
The Blues                                                         p. 351
Fragment ("Hills of Annesly")                                     p. 368
The Prayer of Nature                                                 ib.
Fragment ("Young Oak," etc., 10 lines)                            p. 371
On Revisiting Harrow                                              p. 372
L'amitie, etc.                                                    p. 373
To my Son                                                         p. 377
Epitaph on John Adams                                             p. 379
Fragment ("Forget this World," etc.) (20 lines)                   p. 380
To Mrs. ---- ("When man expell'd," etc.)                          p. 381
A Love-song ("Remind," etc.)                                      p. 382
Stanzas to ---- ("There was a time," etc.)                        p. 383
To the Same ("And wilt thou weep," etc.)                          p. 384
Song ("Fill the goblet," etc.)                                    p. 386
Stanzas to ---- on leaving England                                p. 387
Lines to Mr. Hodgson                                              p. 390
Epistle to ("Oh, banish," etc.)                                   p. 393
The Devil's Drive                                                 p. 396
Additional stanzas to the Ode to Napoleon                         p. 400
Stanzas for Music ("I speak not," etc.)                           p. 401
Address--at the Caledonian Meeting                                p. 402
Lines--for the opening of "The Siege of Corinth"                  p. 404
Extract, "Could I remount," etc.                                  p. 406
To Augusta                                                        p. 407
On the bust of Helen by Canova                                    p. 413
To Thomas Moore ("My boat," etc.)                                    ib.
To Mr. Murray ("Strahan," etc.)                                   p. 414
Stanzas to the River Po                                           p. 416
The Irish Avatar                                                  p. 419
On the Prince Regent's returning the picture, etc.                p. 425
To Belshazzar                                                     p. 427
Sonnet to George the Fourth                                       p. 428
Francesca of Rimini                                               p. 429
Stanzas ("Oh, talk not to me," etc.)                              p. 431
To the Countess of B---                                           p. 432
Lines from a letter to T. Moore ("So we'll," etc.)                p. 434
Epistle to Dr. [Polidori]                                            ib.
Ep. ("My dear Mr. Murray")                                        p. 437
To Mr. J. Murray ("For Oxford," etc.)                             p. 439
On this Day, etc.                                                 p. 440
From the Portuguese                                               p. 442
Paraphrase from ... the _Medea_                                   p. 443
Epitaph ("Youth, Nature," etc.)                                      ib.
On Moore's Last ... Farce                                         p. 444
On Lord T.'s poems                                                   ib.
To Lord T.                                                        p. 445
To Thomas Moore ("Oh, you," etc.)                                 p. 446
Fragment of an Ep. to T. Moore ("What say I," etc.)               p. 447
On Napoleon's Escape from Elba                                    p. 449
Fragment ... On hearing that Lady Byron was ill (6 lines)            ib.
To Thomas Moore ("What are you," etc.)                               ib.
Song for the Luddites                                             p. 450
Versicles                                                         p. 451
To Mr. Murray ("To hook," etc.)                                      ib.
On the birth of J.W.R. Hoppner                                    p. 452
Epigram (from Rulhieres) (_sic_)                                  p. 453
Epigr. ("To-day it is," etc.)                                        ib.
Epigr. ("Here's a Happy," etc.)                                      ib.
Epigr. ("This day of all," etc.)                                  p. 454
Endorsement to the deed, etc.                                        ib.
Epitaph for William Pitt                                             ib.
Epigr. ("In digging," etc.)                                       p. 455
Stanzas ("When a man," etc.)                                         ib.
On his Thirty-third Birthday                                         ib.
Epigr. ("The Brasiers," etc.)                                     p. 456
Epigr. ("The world," etc.)                                           ib.
The Charity Ball                                                  p. 457
Impromptu                                                            ib.
Windsor Poetics                                                   p. 458
Lines in the Travellers' Book at Orchomenus                          ib.

_Note_.--List of publications by John Murray, January 4, 1831--"A fifth
and sixth vol. of Lord Byron's Works: containing _E.B., etc., Heaven &
E., The Def. Trans., The Island_, etc., etc., forming the portion of the
Works recently purchased by Mr. Murray, and rendering them the first and
only complete edition (_Don Juan_ being alone excepted). 2 vols. 12º.
Printed for the first time, to match with the Edition of Lord Byron's
Works in 4 vols. 18º."

XLIV.

The/ Complete works/ of/ Lord Byron,/ Including/ his Lordship's
Suppressed Poems,/ With others never before published./ In one Volume./
Paris./ Published by A. and W. Galignani,/ No. 18, Rue Vivienne./ 1831./
[8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxiv. + 730--Half-title (R. _Printed by J. Smith, Rue Montmorency,
Paris_./); Title, one leaf; Cont., pp. i.-iv.; The Life of Lord Byron
[abridged from the _Life_ by J.W. Lake] pp. v.-xxiv.; Text, pp. 1-730.

The Frontispiece, a portrait of Lord Byron, engr. by J.T. Wedgwood from
a painting by W.E. West, in arabesque frame, rests on miniatures of
Newstead Abbey and Missolunghi (_sic_) designed by F. Sieurac. The
Title-vignette is tomb, harp, willows, etc. A lithograph of letter,
April 27, 1819, to the Editor of _Galignani's Messenger_, is inserted
between the _Life_ and the Text.

_Contents_--

This edition includes Hours of Idleness (Sec. Ed.), _English Bards_,
etc., _The Curse of Minerva_, _The Waltz_, all poems published by John
Murray before 1831, a selection of poems included in Moore's _Notices of
the Life_, etc., poems published by John Hunt, Letter to ... on Bowles'
Strictures on Pope, Fragment, Parliamentary Speeches, and the following
spurious and additional poems:--

Madame Lavalette                                                  p. 699
Ode ("Oh, shame to thee," etc.)                                   p. 705
_Carmina Byronis in C. Elgin_                                     p. 707
Ode to the Island of St. Helena                                      ib.
Enigma on the letter H                                            p. 708
To Jessy                                                             ib.
To my Daughter                                                    p. 709
Lines to Mr. Hobhouse                                             p. 710
Lines found in the Travellers' book at Chamouni                      ib.
Stanzas to her who can best understand them                       p. 712
In the Valley of Waters                                           p. 713
Francesca                                                            ib.
Faith, Wisdom, Love and Power                                        ib.
Thermopylæ                                                        p. 714
Song, "Do you know Dr. Nott?"                                     p. 716
To Mr. Hobhouse, "What made you," etc. (20 lines)                 p. 717
Enigma on the letter I                                            p. 720
To Memory ("Oh, memory," etc.)                                    p. 721
To my dear Mary Anne                                                 ib.
On an Old Lady ("In Nottingham," etc.)                            p. 722

_Note_.--Among the ATTRIBUTED POEMS are To the Lily of France, p. 729;
The Triumph of the Whale, _ib._; To Lady C. Lamb, _ib._; Stanzas ("I
heard thy fate," etc.), p. 730.

XLV.

_The Works_, etc., including the suppressed poems. Also a Sketch of his
Life. By J.W. Lake. Complete in one Vol. Philadelphia. Published by
Henry Adams and sold by John Griggs. 1831. [4º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxxix. + 176.

XLVI.

The/ Works/ of/ Lord Byron:/ With/ His Letters and Journals,/ And His
Life,/ By Thomas Moore, Esq./ In Fourteen Volumes./ Vol. I. [Vol. II.,
etc.] London:/ John Murray, Albemarle Street./ 183./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. xv. + 359--Title (R. Imprint, _London:/ Printed by A.
Spottiswoode,/ New-Street-Square_./), pp. i., ii.; Cont. of Vol. I., pp.
iii., iv.; Half-title, pp. v., vi.; Dedication to Sir W. Scott, pp.
vii., viii.; Preface to the First Vol. of First Ed., pp. ix., x.;
Preface to the Sec. Vol., pp. xi.-xv.; Text (_Notices of the Life of
Lord Byron_), pp. 1-359.

The Frontispiece, "Lord Byron at the Age of 19," is engr. by W. Finden
from the portrait by G. Sanders: the Title-vignette, "Cadiz," is engr.
by E. Finden from a drawing by C. Stansfield.

Vol. II.: pp. 1-341--The Frontispiece "Tepaleen," is engr. by F. Finden
from a drawing by W. Purser; the Title-vignette, "Constantinople," is
engr. by E. Finden from a drawing by C. Stansfield.

Vol. III.: pp. 1-376--The Front., "Marathon," and the Title-vignette, "A
Street in Athens," are engr. by E. Finden from drawings by C.
Stansfield.

Vol. IV.: pp. 1-359--The Front., "The Wengen Alps," and the
Title-vignette, "The Coliseum from the Orto Farnese," are engr. by E.
Finden from drawings by J.D. Harding.

Vol. V.: pp. 1-376--The Front., "S^ta^ Maria Dalla Spina," is engr. by
E. Finden from a drawing by J.M.W. Turner, R.A.; the Title-vignette, the
"Hellespont," is engr. by E. Finden from a drawing by J.D. Harding.

Vol. VI.: pp. 1-416--The Front., "Newstead Abbey" [from the Monk's
Garden], and the Title-vignette, "The Fountain at Newstead Abbey," are
engr. by E. Finden from drawings by W. Westall, A.R.A.

Vol. VII.: pp. xv. + 319--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint), pp. i., ii.;
Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Advt. (editorial, June, 1832), pp.
v.-vii.; Cont. of Vol. VII., pp. ix.-xv.; Text, pp. 1-319. The Imprint
is in the centre of the last page, p. [320].

The Front., "The Gate of Theseus," and the Title-vignette, "The Plains
of Troy," are engr. by E. Finden from drawings by J.M.W. Turner, R.A. A
facsimile of the two first stanzas of To D---- faces p. 12.

Vol. VIII.: pp. x. + 328--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint), pp. i., ii.;
Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Advt. (editorial, July 20, 1832), pp.
v.-x.; Cont. of Vol. VIII., _n.p._; Text, pp. 1-328. The Imprint is at
the foot of p. 328.

The Front., "Bacharach," and the Title-vignette, "The Castle of St.
Angelo," are engr. by E. Finden from drawings by J.M.W. Turner, R.A. A
facsimile of _Childe Harold's, etc._, Canto III. stanza xci. faces p.
174. In earlier copies the facsimile faced p. [viii.] of Vol. IX. See
Note on reverse of p. vii. of that volume.

Vol. IX.: pp. vii. + 360--Title (R. Imprint), pp. i., ii.; Advt.
(editorial, July 20, 1832), pp. iii., iv.; Cont. of Vol. IX., pp.
v.-vii.; Text, pp. 1-360. The Imprint is at the foot of p. 360.

The Front., "Petrarch's Tomb," is engr. by E. Finden from a drawing by
J.M.W. Turner, R.A.; the Title-vignette, "Seville," is engr. by E.
Finden.

Vol. X.: pp. xix. + 316--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint), pp. i., ii.;
Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Advt. (editorial, September 16, 1832),
pp. v.-xiii.; Cont. of Vol. X., pp. xv.-xix.; Text, pp. 1-316. The
Imprint is at the foot of p. 316.

The Front., "Corinth," is engr. by E. Finden from drawings by J.M.W.
Turner, R.A., and W. Page; the Title-vignette, "Athens and the Island of
Egina," is engr. by E. Finden from drawings by C. Stansfield and W.
Page.

Vol. XI.: pp. viii. + 326--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint), pp. i., ii.;
Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Advt. (editorial, October 10, 1832), pp.
v., vi.; Cont. of Vol. XI., pp. vii., viii.; Text, pp. 1-326. The
Imprint is at the foot of p. 326.

The Front., "The Bridge of Sighs," and the Title-vignette, "The Bernese
Alps," are engr. by E. Finden, from drawings by J.M.W. Turner, R.A.

Vol. XII.: pp. vi. + 324--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint), pp. i., ii.;
Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Advt. (editorial, November 10, 1832),
pp. v., vi.; Cont. of Vol. XII., _n.p._; Text, pp. 1-324. The Imprint is
at the foot of p. 324.

The Front., "Florence," is engr. by E. Finden from drawings by J.D.
Harding and G. Moran, junr.; the Title-vignette, "San Georgio Maggiore,"
is engr. by E. Finden from a drawing by C. Stansfield, A.R.A.

Vol. XIII.: pp. vi. + 369--Half-title (R. Imprint), pp. i., ii.; Title,
one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Advt. (editorial, December 12, 1832), pp. v.,
vi.; Cont. of Vol. XIII., _n.p._; Text, pp. 1-369. The Imprint is in the
centre of the last page, p. [370].

The Front., "The Arch of Titus," is engr. by E. Finden, from drawings by
C. Stansfield and W. Page; the Title-vignette, "The Walls of Rome," is
engr. by E. Finden from a drawing by J.M.W. Turner, R.A.

Vol. XIV.: pp. 1-360--Gen. Half-title (R. Imprint), pp. [i., ii.];
Title, one leaf, pp. [iii., iv.]; Advt. (editorial, January 10, 1833),
pp. [v., vi.]; Text, pp. 1-360. The Imprint is at the foot of p. 360.

The Front., "Parnassus," and the Title-vignette, "The Field of
Waterloo," are engr. by E. Finden from drawings by J.M.W. Turner, R.A.

Vol. XV.: pp. vi. + 334--Half-title (R. Imprint), pp. i. ii.; Title, one
leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Advt. (editorial, February 15, 1833), pp. v., vi.;
Cont. of Vol. XV., _n.p._; Text, pp. 1-334. The Imprint is at the foot
of p. 334.

The Front., "Scio," and the Title-vignette, "Genoa," are engr. by E.
Finden from drawings by J.M.W. Turner, R.A.

Vol. XVI.: pp. vi. + 335--Half-title (R. Imprint), pp. i., ii.; Title,
one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Advt. (editorial, March 15, 1833), pp. v., vi.;
Cont. of Vol. XVI., _n.p._; Text, pp. 1-335. The Imprint is in the
centre of the last page, p. [336].

The Front., "Cologne," and the Title-vignette, "St. Sophia," are engr.
by E. Finden from drawings by J.M.W. Turner, R.A.

Vol. XVII.: pp. viii. + 304--Half-title (R. Imprint), pp. i., ii; Title,
one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Advt. (editorial, May 15, 1833), pp. v., vi.;
Cont. of Vol. XVII., pp. vii., viii.; Text, pp. 1-248; Index, pp.
249-304. The Imprint is at the foot of p. 304.

The Front., "The School of Homer," and the Title-vignette, "The
Castellated Rhine," are engr. by E. Finden from drawings by J.M.W.
Turner, R.A.

_Contents_--

      Vols. I.-V.:--Notices of the Life of Lord Byron.
Vol. VI.:--The Life, etc., from February, 1823-April, 1824           p.1
App.: cont. two epistles from the Armenian, etc.                  p. 269
      Miscellaneous Pieces in Prose:
Review of Wordsworth's Poems, 1807                                p. 293
Review of Gell's Geography of Ithaca, etc., 1811                  p. 296
Parliamentary Speeches, etc.                                      p. 314
A Fragment. [The Vampyre.] 1816                                   p. 339
Letter to John Murray, Esq., etc.                                 p. 346
Observations upon "Observations," etc. [_Now first                p. 382
published._]
      Vol. VII.:--Hours of Idleness: a Series of Poems,
      Original and Translated:
Dedication.                                                         p. 1
Preface                                                             p. 5
On the Death of a Young Lady (and 69 others)                        p. 9
Article from the _Edin. Rev._                                     p. 188
      Occasional Pieces: written in 1807-8:
The Adieu (and 15 others)                                         p. 195
English Bards and Scotch Reviewers                                p. 219
      Occasional Pieces: written in 1808-1810:
Well, thou art happy (and 15 others)                              p. 291
Vol. VIII.:--Childe Harold's Pilgrimage: Preface to the             p. 3
First and Second Cantos
To Ianthe                                                           p. 9
Canto the First [Canto the Second, etc.]                           p. 11
Dedication of Canto the Fourth                                    p. 189
Historical Notes to Canto the Fourth                              p. 271
      Vol. IX.:--Occasional Pieces: written in 1811-1813:
Lines written beneath a Picture (and 31 others)                     p. 3
Hints from Horace                                                  p. 47
The Curse of Minerva                                              p. 107
The Waltz                                                         p. 123
The Giaour                                                        p. 141
The Bride, etc.                                                   p. 203
The Corsair (Dedication, etc.)                                    p. 257
Appendix: Remarks on the Romaic, etc.                             p. 339
Vol. X.:--Ode to N.B.                                               p. 1
Lara (Cantos I., II. (N.))                                         p. 17
Hebrew Melodies: She walks in Beauty (and 22 others)               p. 75
The Siege, etc.                                                    p. 99
Parisina                                                          p. 149
     Domestic Pieces:
Fare Thee Well (and five others)                                  p. 185
Monody, etc.                                                      p. 211
The Prisoner of Chillon                                           p. 221
The Dream                                                         p. 243
     Occasional Pieces: 1814-1816:
The Devil's Drive (and 28 others)                                 p. 257
Vol. XI.:--Manfred                                                  p. 1
The Lament of Tasso                                                p. 77
Beppo                                                              p. 95
Mazeppa                                                           p. 143
Ode on Venice                                                     p. 179
The Morgante Maggiore (Canto I.)                                  p. 187
The Prophecy of Dante (Cantos I.-IV.)                             p. 259
     Occasional Pieces:
Versicles (and 14 others)                                         p. 307
Vol. XII.:--Francesca of Rimini                                     p. 1
Stanzas to the Po                                                  p. 13
Stanzas (Written on the Road, etc.)                                p. 19
The Blues                                                          p. 21
Marino Faliero (App.)                                              p. 43
The Vision of Judgment (App.)                                     p. 231
     Occasional Pieces:
Stanzas ["Could Love for ever"] (and 5 others)                    p. 317
Vol. XIII.:--Heaven and Earth                                       p. 1
Sardanapalus                                                       p. 55
The Two Foscari                                                   p. 197
The Deformed Transformed                                          p. 301
Vol. XIV.:--Cain (App.)                                             p. 1
Werner                                                            p. 113
The Age of Bronze                                                 p. 263
The Island                                                        p. 299
Stanzas: To a Hindoo Air                                          p. 357
Lines ("On this day," etc.)                                       p. 358
Vol. XV.:--Preface to Don Juan                                      p. 3
Testimonies of Authors                                              p. 5
Letter to the Editor of "My Grandmother's Review"                  p. 41
Some Observations upon an article in _Blackwood's                  p. 55
Magazine_ (August, 1819. [Now first pub.])
Fragment ("I would to heaven," etc.)                              p. 100
Dedication to Robert Southey, Esq.                                p. 101
Don Juan (Cantos I.-III.)                                         p. 109
Vol. XVI.:--Don Juan (Cantos IV., V., App.)                         p. 1
Preface to Cantos VI., VII., VIII.                                p. 127
Cantos VI.-X.                                                     p. 133
Vol. XVII.:--Don Juan (Cantos XI.-XVI.)                             p. 1
Appendix: Farewell to Malta (and nine additional                  p. 239
occasional pieces
Concluding Page of Lord Byron's "Observations upon an             p. 247
Article," etc.
Index                                                             p. 249

_Note_ (1).--The Title-pages of Vols. XIII., XIV., XV., XVI., issued in
1833, do not specify the total number of volumes. The Title-pages of
Vol. I. issued in 1835, Vol. II. in 1833, and Vol. IX. in 1834, print
the words, "In Seventeen Volumes." There were probably other variations.
There is an illustrated Title-page ornamented with a Title-vignette
(_vide supra et ante_) to each volume.

_Note_ (2).--The editor of these volumes was John Wright (1770?-1844),
the editor of Cobbett's _Parliamentary History_, and the ninth and tenth
volumes of Boswell's _Life of Johnson_ (1836), and of Sir Henry
Cavendish's _Debates of the House of Commons during the Thirteenth
Parliament of Great Britain, etc._, two vols. 1841-3.

XLVII.

_The Complete Works_, etc., including his suppressed poems and others
never before published. In Four Volumes. Paris, Baudry. 1832. [8º.

[_Katalog der Bucher_, von Eduard Grisebach, 1894, p. 127.]

_Note_.--The Front. is "Lord Byron," from a portrait by Hopwood.
Quérard, 1846, gives the names of the publishers of this edition as
Baudry, Barrois, Amyot.

XLVIII.

_The Works_, etc., In Verse and Prose. Including his Letters, Journals,
etc. With a sketch of his Life. New York: George Dearborn, Publisher.
1833. 4º. pp. xxviii., 203, 619. ["... The first complete edition of
the Poetical and Prose Works of Lord Byron."--_Publisher's Advt._]

_Note_.--The Catalogue of the Library of Congress, 1880, describes this
or a Second Edition as consisting of two vols. in one, 8º.

XLIX.

The/ Complete Works/ of Lord Byron,/ Reprinted from the last London
Edition,/ with considerable additions, now first published;/ Containing/
Notes and Illustrations/ By/ Moore, Walter Scott, Campbell, Jeffrey,
Egerton Brydges, Wilson, Hobhouse,/ Dallas, Hunt, Milman, Lockhart,
Bowles, Heber, Medwin, Gamba, Croby, Ugo Foscolo, Ellis,/ Kennedy,
Parry, Stanhope, Gait, Nathan, Lady Blessington, Mrs. Shelley, etc./
And/ A Complete Index;/ To which is prefixed/ A Life,/ By Henry Lytton
Bulwer, Esq., M.P.,/ In one Volume./ Paris/ Published by A. and W.
Galignani and Co./ 1835./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxxiii. + 935--Half-title (R. _Printed by H. and A. Firmin Didot,
rue Jacob, No. 24._), pp. i., ii.; Title, pp. iii., iv.; (Publisher's)
Advt., pp. v., vi.; Cont. pp. vii.-x.; The Life of Lord Byron, pp.
xi.-xxxiii.; Text pp. 1-908; Index, pp. 909-935.

The Frontispiece is a portrait of Lord Byron, engr. by J.T. Wedgwood
from a painting by W.E. West. The portrait in arabesque frame rests on
picture of Newstead Abbey and Missolunghi (_sic_), designed by F.
Sieurac. There is a lithographed vignette of tomb, harp, wreath, etc.,
on the title-page, and a lithograph of the memorial tablet in the
chancel of Hucknall Torkard. A facsimile of the letter dated Venice,
April 27, 1819, precedes the text, and facsimiles of original MS. of "To
D----," and of _Childe Harold_, Canto IV. stanza xcii., face pp. 3, 122.

_Miscellaneous Poems_--

On an Old Lady ("In Nottingham," etc.)                            p. 842
On Lord Elgin ("Noseless himself," etc.)                          p. 864
Stanzas to her who can best understand them                       p. 887
Epigram from Martial ("The Laureate's House," etc.)               p. 888
To Mr. Hobhouse ("Would you get," etc.)                              ib.
To Mr. Hobhouse ("What made you," etc.)                              ib.
On Queen Caroline                                                 p. 901
Elegy on the Recovery of Lady ----                                p. 903
Song, "Do you know Doctor Nott?"                                     ib.
To ---- ("But once I dared," etc.)                                p. 904
On Sam Rogers ("Nose and Chin," etc.)                                ib.
On Lady Milbank's Dog Trim                                        p. 905
Lines to Lady Holland ("Lady, accept," etc.)                         ib.
Attributed Poems:
To Jessy ("There is a mystic," etc.)                              p. 906
Lines found in the Travellers' Book at Chamouni                      ib.
To Lady Caroline Lamb                                             p. 907
To the Prince of W_h_ales                                            ib.
On the letter I                                                   p. 908
To my dear Mary Anne                                                 ib.
Stanzas ("I heard thy fate," etc.)                                   ib.

_Note_.--This edition includes the contents of "the last [edition]
published in London in seventeen volumes," together with the poems
published in the Appendix to the _Works of Lord Byron_ (1832-1833, xvii.
238-248), and the following pieces not recognized or collected by John
Murray.

L.

_The Complete Works_, etc. In Four Volumes. Paris, Baudry, Amyot,
Truchy. 1835. [8º.

[Quérard, 1846.]

_Note_.--This edition was reissued in 1840.

LI.

The/ Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ Complete In One Volume./ With Notes By/

Thomas Moore, Esq.,
Lord Jeffrey,
Sir Walter Scott,
Bishop Heber,
Samuel Rogers, Esq.,
Professor Wilson,
J.G. Lockhart, Esq.,
George Ellis, Esq.,
Thomas Campbell, Esq.,
Rev. H.H. Milmand,

etc. etc. etc.

London:/ John Murray, Albemarle Street./ 1837./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 827--Title (R. _London:/ Printed by A. Spottiswoode,/
New-Street-Square./_), pp. i., ii.; Contents, pp. iii.-vi.; Chronology
of Lord Byron's Life and Works, pp. vii., viii.; Text, pp. 1-812; Index,
pp. 813-827. The Imprint, as above, is at the foot of p. 827.

The Frontispiece, "Lord Byron at the age of 19," is engr. by E. Finden
from the portrait by G. Sanders. The illustrated Title is embellished
with a vignette of "Newstead Abbey," engr. by E. Finden from a painting
by T. Creswick.

The Dedication is enclosed in an arabesque of oak branches issuing from
a shield bearing the arms and motto. (_Industria_) of Sir Robert Peel.
It runs as follows: To/ The Right Honorable/ Sir Robert Peel, Bart./
etc. etc. etc./ This/ Collective Edition/ of The Works of His/ "School
and Form Fellow,"/ Is/ Respectfully Inscribed/ By His/ Faithful and
Obedient Servant/ John Murray,/ February Fifth./ MDCCCXXXVII./

Facsimiles of Lord Byron's Handwriting at Various Periods of His Life,
viz.: I. _At Harrow in_ 1803. II. _From the Giaour_, 1813. _First
draft_. III. _Marriage Signatures of Lord and Lady Byron_, January 2,
1815. IV. _From Lord Byron's Diary_, 1821. V. _From Lord Byron's last
letter to Mr. Murray, dated Missalonghi, February 2_, 1824 (four pages,
_n.p._) are inserted between the "Chronology," etc., and the Text.

The first edition was bound in brown cloth. Lord Byron's Coat of Arms,
with Coronet, Supporters and Motto, is stamped in gold on the cover.

_Note_.--This Edition, which is printed in double columns enclosed by a
double line, has been reissued at brief intervals from 1838 to 1902.

The contents of this volume includes the contents of Vols. VII.-XVII.
of the Ed. 1832, 1833, together with the following additions already
printed (except No. 4) in Vols. I.-VI.:--

_Contents_--

1. Translation of ... Nurse's Dole ("Oh, how I wish," etc.)       p. 546

2. My Epitaph ("Youth, Nature," etc.)                                ib.

3. Remember thee! Remember thee!                                  p. 554

4. John Keats                                                     p. 574

5. Impromptu ("Beneath Blessington's eyes")                       p. 577

6. To the Countess of Blessington                                    ib.

Appendix: Conversations of Lord Byron as related by Thomas        p. 809
Medwin, Esq., compared with a Portion of His Lordship's
Correspondence. Published, Ed. 1828, iv. 419-429.

LII.

The/ Complete Works/ of/ Lord Byron/ From the last London Edition,/ Now
first collected and arranged, and Illustrated/ With all the notes/ By
Sir Walter Scott [and 24 others--five lines] To which is prefixed the
Life of the Author/ By John Galt, Esq./ In one Volume./ Paris:/ Baudry's
European Library,/ Rue Du Coq, near the Louvre./ A. and W. Galignani and
Co., 18, Rue Vivienne./ Sold also by Amyot, Rue de la Paix; Truchy,
Boulevard des Italiens; Theophile Barrois, Jun.,/ Rue Richelieu; at the
Librairie des Etrangers, 55, Rue Neuve-Saint-Augustin;/ And by all the
Principal Booksellers on the Continent./ 1837./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. II + cxxii + 954--Half-title (R. _Printed by Casimir, 12, Rue de la
Vieille-Monnaie_); Title, one leaf; Publisher's Advt., pp. 1-6;
Contents, pp. 7-11; _The Life of Lord Byron_. By John Galt, Esq., pp.
i.-cxxii.; Text, pp. 1-941; Index, pp. 943-954. The Imprint, as above,
is at the foot of p. 954.

The Frontispiece, "Lord Byron at the age of 17" (_sic_), is engr. by
Blanchard from the painting by G. Sanders. The Title-page is embellished
with a vignette of a shipwreck.

Facsimiles of Lord Byron's Handwriting, etc. (as in No. li.), four pages
(_n.p._), are inserted between the "Life," and the Text.

_Note_.--This volume "contains all the works of Lord Byron carefully
reprinted from the [last eleven volumes of the] London edition published
by Mr. Murray in 1833." The prose pieces published in Vol. VI. of the
same edition are included. The additional poems printed in the Appendix
of Vol. XVII., 1833, "occupy respectively their proper places."

Galt's _Life of Lord Byron_ was first published in 1830 as No. 1 of G.A.
Gleig's "National Library."

LIII.

_The Works_, etc., Complete in one Vol. With Notes by Th. Moore, Lord
Jeffrey, etc. Authorized Foreign Edition. London and Leipzig: Black and
Armstrong. 1837.

_Note_.--Kayser (1841) records the issue of _The Works_ in seventeen
volumes, and _The Complete Works_ in ten volumes (pocket edition), by
the same publisher. (See, too, _The Prisoner of Chillon_, by E. Kölbing,
1896)

LIV.

_Lord Byron's Complete Works_. In Seven Vols. Mannheim. Henry Hoff.
1837. [16º.

[Kayser, 1841.]

LV.

_The Complete Works_, etc. Including the Suppressed Poems and
Supplementary pieces selected from his papers after his Death. In one
Vol. Paris. Published by Gamier, Palais-Royal. 1839. [4º.

[Kölbing.]

_Collation_--

Pp. xlv. + 724.

LVI.

The/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ In Eight Volumes./ Vol. I.--Part
I./ London:/ John Murray, Albemarle Street. 1839.-[4º.

_Note_.--This edition (printed by A. Spottiswoode, New-Street-Square),
together with _Letters and Journals of Lord Byron, etc., by T. Moore_. 2
v. 1830. 4º. ("to which have been added the Letter to [John Murray] on
the Rev. W.L. Bowles' Strictures on the life and writings of Pope....
Second Edition, and a few other printed papers, also numerous views,
portraits, autograph letters," etc.) bound in 44 vols. with the gen.
Title (The/ Poetical Works,/ Letters and Journals,/ of/ Lord Byron:/
with/ Notices of His Life./ By/ Thomas Moore, Esq./ Vol. I. [Vol. II.]
London: 1844./), printed expressly for the purpose and prefixed to each
volume, which is known as the "Watts" Collection (B.M.C. 44, e-h), was
arranged by the late William Watts, Esq., Member of the Philharmonic
Society, who died at Jersey, December 28, 1859, aged 81. (See Kölbing's
_P. of Chillon_, 1896, pp. 90-92.)

LVII.

_The Works_, etc. Complete in Five Vols. Leipzig: Bernhard Tauchnitz.
1842. [8º.

[Kölbing.]

_Note_.--A Second Edition was issued in 1886.

LVIII.

_The Works_, etc. A New Edition. Edited by Thomas Moore, Esq. Complete
in four volumes. With Engravings. Philadelphia. Carey and Hart. 1843.

[Kölbing.]

LIX.

_The Complete Works_, etc.... A Life by Thomas Moore, Esq. In One
Volume. With a Portrait. Second Edition. Frankfort o. M. Published by
Joseph Baer.; 1846. [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xlviii. + 1004.

_Note_.--Another edition appeared in 1852 (_vide post_, No. lxv.).

[Kölbing.]

LX.

The/ Works of Lord Byron;/ In Verse and Prose./ Including/ His Letters,
Journals, etc./ With/ A Sketch of His Life./ Hartford:/ Published by
Silas Andrus and Son./ 1847./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxviii. + 319 + 627--Illustrated Title as above (_n.d._), pp. iii.,
iv.; Title (R. Publishers' Advt, New York, Jan. 1834), pp. v., vi.;
Cont. pp. vii.--xiv.; _The Life of Lord Byron_ [By Fitz Green Halleck],
pp. xv.-xxviii.; Text (i.) _Letters_ (635), Extracts from a Journal,
and Prose Pieces, pp. 1-319; Text (ii.) _Poems_, etc., pp. 1-627.

The Front., "Lady Noel Byron," is engr. by A. Dick from a painting by
W.J. Newton. The vignette or illust. title is Lord Byron, engr. by A.
Dick from a painting by W.E. West. To face p. 1 of the _Poems_ is
"Diodati," engr. by M. Osborne from a sketch by W. Purser; to face p.
156, "_Mazeppa_," engr. by Illman and Pilbrow from a painting by H.
Verner; facsimiles of Lord Byron's handwriting face pp. 25, 384.

The volume was issued in roan binding, with portrait of Byron stamped in
gold on the covers.

Among "Poems not included in any Collection of Lord Byron's Works until
after his Death," pp. 467-488, are the following pieces not included in
the London editions of 1831, 1832, and of 1833.

To my dear Mary Anne                                              p. 472
To Miss Chaworth ("Oh, memory," etc.)                                ib.
To Lady Caroline Lamb                                             p. 480
"In the Valley of Waters," etc.                                   p. 482
Stanzas to her who can best understand them                       p. 486

LXI.

The/ Works/ of/ Lord Byron:/ With a/ Life and Illustrative Notes,/ By/
William Anderson, Esq.,/ Author of Landscape Lyrics, Scottish Popular
Biography, etc./ In Two Volumes./ Vol. I./ [Vol. II.] A Fullarton &
Co.:/ Stead's Place, Leith Walk, Edinburgh;/ and 106, Newgate Street,
London./ _n.d._ [1850.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. ccxxiv. + 270--Title (R. Edinburgh:/ _Fullarton and Macnab,
Printers, Leith Walk_), pp. i., ii.; Preface, pp. iii., iv.; Cont. of
Vol. I. pp. v., vi.; Life of Lord Byron, pp. vii.-ccxxiv.; Text, pp.
1-270. The Imprint, as above, is at the foot of p. 270.

The Front. ["Lord Byron at the age of 19"] is engr. by E. Finden from
the painting by G. Sanders. The illustrated Title-page [The/ Works/ of/
Lord Byron/ With Notes and Illustrations./ Vol. I./ Edinburgh:/ A
Fullarton & Co./ Stead's Place, Leith Walk./] is embellished with a
vignette of "Lausanne," engr. by W. Finden from a drawing by C.
Stansfield, A.R.A.

Vol. II.: pp. 1-465--Title (R. Imprint as above); Cont. of Vol. II.;
Text, pp. 1-465. The Imprint, as above, is at the foot of p. 465.

The Front., "Newstead Abbey," is engr. by E. Finden from a drawing by W.
Westall, A.R.A. The illustrated Title-page is embellished with a
vignette, "Villeneuve," engr. by E. Finden from a drawing by C.
Stansfield, A.R.A.

_Note_.--These volumes contain all that "the existing laws of copyright
[1850] allows to be free;" _e.g._ all the dramas except _Manfred_ and
_Cain_, _The Island_, _The Age of Bronze_, etc., are omitted. In Vol. i.
the Life and Text are illust. by 56 Plates; in Vol. II. the Text is
illust. by 41 Plates. Two pages (B.R.) headed, "Directions for placing
the Plates," and "Directions for placing Plates in Supplement," are
bound up with Vol. II.

LXII.

The/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ Complete in One Volume./ Collected
and Arranged, with Illustrative Notes,/ By/ Thomas Moore/ [and 9
others]. With a Portrait, and View of Newstead Abbey./ Philadelphia./
1850./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 829.

_Note_.--Reissued by the same firm with different addresses in 1854,
1869, 1878, etc. This edition is a reproduction of Murray's one-volume
edition of 1837.

LXIII.

The/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ Containing/ The Giaour,/ [and 17
others]. Also/ Several Attributed and Suppressed Poems not/ Included in
Other Editions./ With a Memoir,/ By/ Henry Lytton Bulwer, Esq./ London:/
Henry G. Bohn, York Street, Covent Garden./ 1851./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xlviii. + 641.

_Attributed Poems_--

Ode ("Oh, shame to thee")                                         p. 624
Madame Lavalette                                                  p. 626
Farewell to England                                               p. 627
To my Daughter, Etc.                                              p. 627
Ode to the Island of St. Helena                                   p. 636
To the Lily of France                                             p. 638
To Jessy                                                          p. 640
Lines addressed to Mr. Hobhouse                                   p. 641
Enigma (H.)                                                          ib.

_Note_.--The Front. is "Lord Byron," by Harlow, Sanders, and Phillips
(three vignettes), with arabesque border surmounted by arms and coronet.
The Title-vignette (on illustrated Title-page, dated 1847) is "Newstead
Abbey."

LXIV.

_The Poetical Works_, etc. Complete in One Volume. Philadelphia:
Lippincott, Grambo and Co., successors to Grigg, Elliot and Co., Nº 14,
North Fourth Street. 1851. [6º.

_Note_.--A reissue, entitled _The Globe Edition_, Philadelphia, Claxton,
Remsen, and Haffelfinger, appeared in 1870.

LXV.

The/ Complete Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ Reprinted from the Last London
Edition;/ Containing Besides the/ Notes and Illustrations/ By/ Moore,
(and 24 others = 4 lines). Considerable Additions and Original Notes;/
To which is Prefixed/ a Life/ By Thomas Moore, Esq./ [Abbreviated.] In
One Volume, with a Portrait./ Second Edition./ Frankfort o.M./ Published
by Joseph Baer, Bookseller./ 1852./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xlviii. + 1004.

The Front., "Lord Byron at the age of 19," is engr. by C. Deucker from
the painting by G. Sander (_sic_).

The "Miscellaneous Poems" are identical with the Miscellaneous Poems of
No. xlviii., save for the omission of the lines, "In Nottingham County,"
etc., and twelve lines from the ballad "On Mr. Hobhouse."

LXVI.

The/ Illustrated/ Byron/ with upwards of/ Two Hundred Engravings/ From
Original Drawings/ By/ Kenny Meadows/ Birket Foster/ Hablot K. Browne/
Gustave Janet/ and/ Edward Morin./ Henry Vizetelly London. Gough Sq.,
Fleet St./ [1854, 1855.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 632.

LXVII.

_Poetical Works_, with a memoir of his life. (2 vols.) Philadelphia.
1853. [8º.

[Detroit Public Library.]

LXVIII.

_Poetical Works_, etc. With life and notes by Allan Cunningham. Family
ed. London, Charles Daly, 17 Greville Street, Hatton Gardens. [1854.]
[12º.

[Cat. of Lib. of Congress, 1880.]

_Collation_--

Pp. xxii. + 544. 10 pl.

LXIX.

_The Works_, etc., embracing his suppressed poems, and a sketch of his
life. Illustrated. New edition, complete in one volume. Boston:
Phillips, Sampson, and Company, 110 Washington Street. 1854. [4º.

[Kölbing.]

_Collation_--

Pp. vi. + 1071.

LXX.

The/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ In Six Volumes--Vol. I./ [Vol.
II., etc.] A New Edition./ With Portrait./ London:/ John Murray,
Albemarle Street./ 1855./ [8º.

_Note_.--Front., Portrait of Lord Byron, by T. Phillips, R.A., engr. by
E. Finden. [Murray's "Library Edition," reissued in 1857 and in 1867.]

LXXI.

(In this Edition Objectionable Pieces have been excluded.)/ The/
Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ With Life./ Eight engravings on Steel./
Edinburgh:/ Gall and Inglis, 6 George Street;/ London: Houlston and
Wright./ [1857.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xix. + 524.

_Note_.--The Ed. omits Canto IV. of _Childe Harold_, all the dramas
except _Manfred_, and gives "extracts" from _Don Juan_, "a poem unfit to
be printed in this collection entire." Another edition, including the
Fourth Canto of _Childe Harold's, etc., Mazeppa_, and the _Ode on
Venice_, enclosed in coloured vignette borders, was issued in 1881.

LXXII.

_The Poetical Works_, etc. Complete in One Vol. Illustrated. New York.
Leavitt and Allen. 1857. [4º.

[Kölbing.]

_Collation_--

Pp. xxxiii. + 935.

LXXIII.

The/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ Complete./ New Edition, The Text
Carefully Revised./ With Portrait./ London: John Murray, Albemarle
Street./ 1857./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 685. The Front., "Statue of Byron by Thorwaldsen," is engr.
by W. Holl.

_Note_.--The arrangement of the poems differs from the edition of 1837.
[_Hours of Idleness_; Occasional Pieces; _Hebrew Melodies_; Domestic
Pieces; Later "Occasional Pieces;" The Satires; _Childe Harold_; The
Tales; The Dramas; _Beppo_; _Don Juan_; Notes; Index.] This edition is
known as the "Pearl" Edition. There was a reissue in 1867, with a new
Title-page and without the line-border.

LXXIV.

_The Poetical Works_, etc. Collected and arranged with notes by Sir
Walter Scott, Lord Jeffrey, Professor Wilson, Thomas Moore, etc. New and
Complete Edition. With Portrait and Illustrated Engravings. London: John
Murray, etc. 1859. [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. x. + 827.

_Note_.--This edition was reissued in 1866, 1873, 1876, and 1883.

LXXV.

_The Poetical Works_, etc. With copious illustrative notes, and a memoir
of his life. Complete in One Vol. Illust. with elegant steel engravings.
Philadelphia: James B. Smith & Co., No. 27, South Seventh Street. 1859.
[8º.

[Kölbing.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 715.

LXXVI.

_The Poetical Works_, etc. Collected and arranged with notes by Sir
Walter Scott, Lord Jeffrey, etc. New and Complete Edition. With
Portrait. London: 1860. Leipzig. B. Tauchnitz. [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. x. + 828.

_Note_.--An edition of _The Works, etc._, forming part of the
"Collection of British Authors" (16º), was issued by B. Tauchnitz, at
Leipzig, 1865-1870. [Kayser, 1865, 1871.]

LXXVII.

_The Poetical Works_, etc. In Three Vols. F.A. Brockhaus. Leipzig. 1860.
[8º.

_Note_.--Part of the "Library of British Poets." A Second Edition was
issued in 1867. [Kayser, 1866.]

LXXVIII.

The/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ With Illustrations/ By Keeley
Halswelle./ Edinburgh: William P. Nimmo, 2 St. David Street./ London:
Simpkin, Marshall & Co./ 1861. [8º

_Collation_--

Pp. xxii + 673.

_Note_.--_The Life of Lord Byron_, pp. v.-xv., is by Alexander Leighton.
The dramas are represented by _Manfred_, _Heaven and Earth_, and _Cain_;
the Satires by _English Bards_, etc., _The Waltz_, and _Vision of
Judgment_, ... _Don Juan_ by numerous extracts. Red line-borders.

LXXIX.

The/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ In Ten Volumes./ Vol. I. [Vol.
II., etc.] Boston:/ Little, Brown and Company./ New York: Phinney,
Blakeman and Mason./ Cincinnati: Rickey, Mallory and Co./ 1861./ [8º.

_Note_ (1).--Vol. I. contains _Life of Lord Byron_ [Excerpt from the
_Encycl. Brit._, by J.H. Lister], pp. xi.-xxxv.; _Hours of Idleness_
(71), and all the "Occasional Pieces," 1807-1824. Vol. II., The Satires;
Ode to N.B.; _Heb. Melodies_; "Domestic Pieces;" _Ode on Venice_;
_Monody, etc_.; _Lament of Tasso, etc_. Vol. III., _Beppo_; _Proph. of
Dante_; _Francesca, etc_.; the Poems published in _The Liberal_; _The
Age of Bronze_. Vol. IV., _Childe Harold's, etc._ Vol. V., "The Tales."
Vols. VI., VII., VIII., The Dramas. Vols. IX., X., _Don Juan_. The
Front. of Vol. I. is "Byron," by T. Phillips, R.A.

_Note_ (2).--This edition professes to be an amended reprint of the
London Edition of 1856 in Six Volumes. Doubtful and "attributed" poems
are not included.

LXXX.

_The Poetical Works_, etc. With Life of the Author, and Copious Notes.
Beautifully illustrated. Family Edition. Halifax: Milner and Sowerby.
1863. [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xv. + 702.

_Note_.--Two other editions of the same work were issued in 1865 by the
firm, imprinted _London; Milner and Sowerby, Paternoster Row_.
[Kölbing.]

LXXXI.

The Poetical Works/ of Lord Byron./ With Illustrations./ [Life by A.
Leighton.] New Edition Carefully Revised./ Edinburgh:/ William P.
Nimmo./ [1868.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 437.

_Note_.--This edition includes three dramas, _Manfred_, _Cain_, _Heaven
and Earth_; _Childe Harold_, and _Don Juan_, but omits _Hints from
Horace_, _The Age of Bronze_, _The Island_, _The Blues_, etc., and
occasional Pieces first included in the ed. of 1831.

LXXXII.

The Poetical Works/ of Lord Byron./ Reprinted from the Original
Editions./ With explanatory notes, etc./ London:/ Frederick Warne and
Company./ Bedford Street, Covent Garden./ New York: Scribner, Welford
and Co./ [1868.] [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. vii. + 638.

_Note_.--Part of the "Chandos Classics."

Kölbing notes another edition, pp. viii. + 668.

A Third Edition: London and New York.

A Fourth Edition: Portrait and Original Illustrations. Part of "The
Lansdowne Poets."

LXXXIII.

The/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron:/ With/ Life and Portrait,/ and/
Sixteen Illustrations./ By F. Gilbert./ London:/ John Dicks, 313,
Strand./ [1869.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xv. + 457. Double columns.

LXXXIV.

_The Poetical Works_, etc. New Edition. In Eight Volumes. London: John
Murray, Albemarle Street. 1870. [8º.

[Kölbing.]

LXXXV.

The/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ Edited, with a Critical Memoir,/
By/ William Michael Rossetti./ Illustrated by/ Ford Madox Brown./
London:/ E. Moxon, Son, & Co., Dover Street./ 1870./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xx. + 604.

_Note_.--_Hints from Horace_, Translation of _Francesca of Rimini_, and
Occasional Pieces, first included in the edition of 1831, are omitted.
This edition was reissued in 1872.

LXXXVI.

The Complete/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron/ with an Introductory
Memoir/ by/ William B. Scott/ With Illustrations/ London/ George
Routledge and Sons/ The Broadway, Ludgate/ New York: 416, Broome Street/
[1874] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 750.

_Note_.--Double columns bordered with red lines.

LXXXVII.

The Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron/ Illustrated Edition/ London/ Virtue
and Co., City Road and Ivy Lane/ [1874] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. cliv. + 614.

The Front., "Byron," is engr. by W.J. Edwards from the portrait by T.
Phillips, R.A. The Title-vignette is "The Corsairs' Isle," and there are
fifty other line engravings.

_Note_.--This edition includes six "_Attributed Poems_," but omits
_Hints from Horace_, Transl. of _Francesca of Rimini_, and the
Occasional Pieces first collected in the editions of 1831 and 1832-1833.
This edition was reissued in 1879.

LXXXVIII.

_Poetical Works_, etc., embracing his suppressed poems, and a sketch of
his life. New Edition.... (Portrait ... 8 plates.) Boston: Lee &
Shepard. 1874. [8º.

[_Cat. of Lib. of Congress_, 1880.]

LXXXIX.

The/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ London:/ Ward, Lock, and Co.,
Warwick House,/ Dorset Buildings, Salisbury Square, E.C./ [1878.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. vii. + 604. [Double column.]

XC.

_The Poetical Works_, etc., complete in one Vol. Collected and arranged,
with illustrative notes by Thomas Moore, etc., ... Boston: Lee and
Shepard, 1878. [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 829.

_Note_.--A reproduction of Murray's Edition of 1855. [Kölbing.]

XCI.

The/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ Edited, With a Critical Memoir,/
By/ William Michael Rossetti./ Illustrated by/ Thomas Seccombe./
London:/ Ward, Lock, & Co., Warwick House,/ Dorset Buildings, Salisbury
Square, E.C./ [1880.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xx. + 604.

_Note_.--Part of "Moxon's Popular Poets." This edition does not contain
_Hints from Horace_, _Francesca of Rimini_, or the Occasional Pieces
first collected in the editions of 1831, 1832-1833. The Prefatory Note
is by W.M. Rossetti. Double columns bordered with red lines. The same
edition, bordered with different red lines and printed on large paper,
was issued in 1881.

XCII.

The Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ Reprinted from the Original
Editions,/ With Life, Explanatory Notes, etc./ London:/ Frederick Warne
and Co.,/ Bedford Street, Strand./ [1881.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xvi. + 720.

_Note_.--"This edition (known as 'The Albion Edition') contains the
whole of Byron's Poems and Dramas, with his Original
Notes."--_Publisher's Preface_. The Albion Edition was reissued by Warne
and Co. in 1897.

XCIII.

The Complete/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron/ With an Introductory
Memoir/ By/ William B. Scott/ London/ George Routledge and Sons/
Broadway, Ludgate Hill/ New York: 9, Lafayette Place/ 1883/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 750.

The Front. is the portrait of Lord Byron by G. Sanders; the vignette on
Title-page is "Newstead Abbey."

_Note_.--This edition (double column), which includes all poems
published in the one-volume edition of 1837 (No. li.), was reissued in
three volumes, 1883, 1886, 1887. Each volume concludes with an Index of
First Lines.

XCIV.

The/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ With Life./ Engravings on Steel./
Gall & Inglis./ Edinburgh:/ Bernard Terrace./ London:/ 25 Paternoster
Sq^r. / [1881.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xviii. + 576.

_Note_.--This edition, which repeats the order and contents of that
issued by Gall and Inglis in 1857 (No. lxxi.), adds the Fourth Canto of
_Childe Harold's, etc._, _Mazeppa_, and the _Ode on Venice_. Coloured
vignette-borders.

XCV.

The/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ With Original and Additional
Notes./ In Twelve Volumes./ Vol. I./ [Vol. II., etc.] Hours of
Idleness./ English Bards and Scotch Reviewers./ London:/ Suttaby and
Co., Amen Corner./ New York:/ Scribner and Welford./ 1885./ [8º.

_Note_.--This edition includes all poems contained in the edition of
1837, but omits the prose pieces.

XCVI.

_The Poetical Works_, etc. Complete in one vol. Collected and arranged
with illustrative notes by Thomas Moore, etc. New York: P.F. Collier.
[1886?]

[Folio.

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 820. [Kölbing.]

XCVII.

The Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ Edited by/ Mathilde Blind./
Miscellaneous Poems./ London:/ Walter Scott, 24, Warwick Lane, E.G./ and
Newcastle-on-Tyne./ 1886./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxviii. + 280.

_Note_.--Part of the "Canterbury Poets." This volume contains
_Introductory Notice_ by Mathilde Blind, pp. vii.-xxviii.;
"Miscellaneous Poems" (including _Vision of Judgment_, _Manfred_,
_Cain_, etc.), pp. 1-280.

XCVIII.

The Poetical Works/ etc. Edited by/ Mathilde Blind./ Childe Harold./ Don
Juan./ London, etc./ 1886./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 1-369.

_Note_.--These volumes (Nos. xcvii., xcviii.) were issued separately.
Red line-borders.

XCIX.

_The Life and Works of_, etc., With Notes and Illustrations. ["Centenary
Edition."] In Two Volumes. Thomas C. Jack, London, Edinb. and Glasgow.
1888.

[Kölbing.]

C.

The Complete/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron/ With an Introductory
Memoir/ By/ William B. Scott/ London/ George Routledge and Sons,
Limited/ Broadway, Ludgate Hill/ Glasgow, Manchester, and New York/
1890/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 750. Double columns.

_Note_.--Part of "Routledge's Popular Library." The Front. is an illust.
of _Childe Harold_, Canto III. stanza xxi., and the Title-vignette,
"Newstead Abbey."

CI.

_The Poetical Works_, etc. New York: John W. Lovell, Company, 50, Worth
Street, Corner Mission Place. 1890? [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. ii. + 544. [Kölbing.]

CII.

The/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ With Original and Additional
Notes./ In Twelve Volumes./ Vol. I. [Vol. II., etc.] Hours of Idleness./
English Bards and Scotch Reviewers./ Griffith Farran Okeden & Welsh/
Newbery House, Charing Cross Road/ London, and Sydney./ [1891.] [8º.

_Note_.--This edition (The "Bijou Byron") is a reissue of _The Poetical
Works_, etc., published by Suttaby and Co. (No. xcv.) in 1885.

CIII.

_The Poetical Works_, etc., Complete Edition. In Three Vols. William W.
Gibbings. London. 1892.

_Note_.--A reprint of the Leipzig edition of 1880, published by F.A.
Brockhaus.

CIV.

_Works_. "Bijou Ed." 12 Vols. Philadelphia, J.B. Lippincott Co. 1892.
[Pocket size.

[_Amer. Cat._, 1892.]

CV.

_Dramatic and Poetical Works_. "Newstead Ed." Philadelphia, D. McKay.
1895. [8º.

[_Amer. Cat._, 1895.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 720.

CVI.

Oxford Miniature Byron/ The/ Poetical Works/ of/ Lord Byron/ In Four
Volumes--Vol. I./ London/ Henry Frowde/ Oxford University Press
Warehouse/ Amen Corner, E.C./ New York: 91 and 93, Fifth Avenue/ 1896/
[16º.

_Note_.--"We are indebted to the courtesy of Mr. John Murray, publisher
of the edition of 1867, for permission to use any copyright matter
contained in that issue."--_Publisher's Advt._

CVII.

The Poetical/ Works of/ Lord/ Byron/ London/ Bliss/ Sands & Co/ XII.
Burl-/ Eigh St./ Strand/ W.C./ [1897] [4º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xvi + 727.

_Note_.--This edition forms part of "The Apollo Poets." The Front.,
"Lord Byron," is a _Lamerciergravure_, printed in Paris, of the portrait
by T. Phillips, R.A.

CVIII.

_Poetical Works_, etc. New Edition, carefully revised. With
illustrations. W.P. Nimmo. 1897. [8º.

[_English Catalogue_, 1898.]

_Note_.--Part of the "Edinburgh Library of Standard Authors."

CIX.

_Poetical Works_. (Ed. by T. Moore.) In four volumes. Philadelphia, J.B.
Lippincott Co. 1897. [12º.

[_Amer. Cat._, 1898.]

CX.

_The Poetical Works_, etc. With Notes, and a memoir of the author.
Pictorial Edition. London: George Henny & Co., Bartholomew Close.
[_n.d._]

[Kölbing.]

_Collation_--

Pp. cliv. + 344.

CXI.

_The Poetical Works_, etc. With explanatory notes and a life of the
author, by Thomas Moore. Illustrated with numerous fine steel
engravings, embracing the principal female characters, landscape and
historical subjects. First quarto edition complete in [? one] volume.
New York: Johnson, Fry and Company, 27 Beekman Street. _n.d._ [4º.

[Kölbing.]

_Collation_--

Pp. ii. + 740 + xxviii.

CXII.

_The Poetical Works_, etc. Complete in one volume. Collected and
arranged with illustrative notes by Thomas Moore, etc. New York: P.F.
Collier. [1889?] [Fol.

[Kölbing.]

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 820.

CXIII.

_The Poetical Works_, etc. New York: Hurst & Co., Publishers, 122 Nassau
Street. [_n.d._]

[Kölbing.]

_Collation_--

Pp. vi. + 608.




TRANSLATIONS OF COLLECTED EDITIONS.


_French_.

I.

Oeuvres/ Complètes/ de Lord Byron,/ Traduites de l'Anglais/ Par
MM.A.--P. et E.--D.S.; [Amédée Pichot et Eusèbe de Salle]/ Troisième
édition,/ Entièrement revue et corrigée./ Tome premier./ Paris,/
Ladvocat, Libraire, Palais-Royal,/ Galerie de Bois, No. 195./ 1821./
[12º.

_Note_.--Vols. I.-VIII. were issued in 1821; Vols. IX. and X. (in two
parts) in 1822. Vol. I. (pp. i.-xlv.) is preceded by _Notice sur Lord
Byron, et ses Ecrits_, par Amédée Pichot. Vols. XI.-XV. (Oeuvres, etc./
Traduites de l'Anglais/ Par A.P. ... T./) with Gen. half-title,
Oeuvres/ de/ Lord Byron./ Inédites,/ were issued in 1824.

In the Museum copy of this edition an unnumbered volume entitled Essai/
Sur le Génie et le Caractère/ de Lord Byron,/ Par A.P.... T.,/ Précédé/
d'une Notice Préliminaire/ Par M. Charles Nodier./ Extracts de la
Quatrième Edition des Oeuvres/ Complètes de Lord Byron,/ (six volumes
in-8 ornés de vignettes.) Paris./ Ladvocat, etc./ 1824,/ which includes
an essay _Sur la Mort de Byron_, and a transl. of _Heaven and Earth_,
pp. 195-252, is bound up with Vol. XV.

_Note_ (1).--"Oeuvres de lord Byron. Quatrième édition, entièrement
revue et corrigée par A.P.... T.; précédée d'une notice sur lord Byron,
par M. Charles Nodier; ornée de vignettes ... _A Paris, chez Ladvocat,
libraire, Palais-Royal, galerie de bois_, No. 195 (Impr. Firmin Didot),
MDCCCXXII.-MDCCCXXV. (1822-1825), 8 vols. in-8, conv. impr. _Tome I_:
[Tome II., etc. (in 8 vols.)], 2 ff. (faux-titre et titre); xvi. pp.
(notice préliminaire de Ch. Nodier); clii. pp. (Essai sur lord Byron); 4
pp. (Table générale des matières pour les tomes I. à VI.); 249 pp.; et 1
f.n. ch. (annonce d'ouvrages).

"Frontispiece gravé par Godefroy; portrait de lord Byron, gravé par
Dequevauvilliers; et 5 figures gravées d'après Richard Westall, par
Godefroy, Mougeot, Dequevauvilliers, etc.

"_Tome II._, etc., etc.

"Les tomes II., III., IV., V., portent la date de 1822; les tomes I. et
VI., celle de 1823; le tome VII., celle de 1824; et le tome VIII., la
date de 1825." [_Manuel de l'Amateur de Livres du XIX^e siècle_. Par
Georges Vicaire. Paris, 1894. Fascic. 3 (1^re^ Partie), pp. 989, 990.]

_Note_ (2).--"La prem. édit, de cette trad, parut de 1819 à 1820, et
formait 10 vol. in-12; la seconde Ã[dit. fut. publ. de 1820 Ã 1822, et
formait 5 vol. in-8." [Quérard, La France Littéraire, 1827, i. 581.]

"Oeuvres complètes, VI. édit.... Paris, Ladvocat, Delangle, 1829 et ann.
suiv., 20 vol. gr. in-18, fig.--Autre édit. Paris, Furne, 1830-35, 6
vol. in-8, et avec 6 vignettes ajoutées. XI. édit., avec une notice
historique sur lord Byron, des notes et des pièces inédites. Paris,
Furne, Ch. Gosselin, 1842, grand in-8 à deux colonnes, avec 15
vignettes." [Quérard, _La Littérature Française Contemporaine_.
1827-1844. 1846, ii. 486.]

II.

Oeuvres complètes/ de/ Lord Byron,/ avec notes et commentaires,/
Comprenant/ Ses Mémoires publiés par Thomas Moore,/ et ornées d'un beau
portrait de l'auteur./ Traduction nouvelle/ Par M. Paulin Paris,/ de la
Bibliothèque du roi./ Tome premier./ Paris./ Dondey-Dupré Père et Fils,
impr.--libr., éditeurs,/ Rue Saint-Louis, Nº 46,/ et rue Richelieu, Nº
47 _bis._/ 1830./ [8º.

_Note_ (1).--The Front. of Vol. I., "Noel Byron," is engr. by Adele
Ethiou, after the portrait by T. Phillips, R.A. The engraver has added a
wreath of bay leaves.

Vols. I.-X. were issued in 1830; Vols. XI., XII., XIII., in 1831.

_Note_ (2).-"Il y a une seconde édition, Paris, etc., Dondey-Dupré,
1836, in-8, 13 vol." [Quérard, 1846, ii. 486.]

III.

Oeuvres complètes/ de/ Lord Byron,/ Traduction nouvelle,/ d'après la
dernière édition de Londres,/ Par/ Benjamin Laroche,/ Traducteur des
Oeuvres de J. Bentham, Cooper, etc.;/ avec les notes et commentaires de
Sir Walter Scott, etc. [Three Lines]. Précédées de/ l'histoire de la vie
et des ouvrages de Lord Byron,/ Par John Galt./ Tome premier./ Paris./
Charpentier, Libraire-éditeur,/ Rue de Seine, No. 31./ 1836./ [8º.

_Note_.--The Front. of Vol. I. is "Byron," after the portrait by T.
Phillips, R.A. Vol. I. was issued in 1836, Vols. II.-IV. in 1837. The
translator (_Post-Scriptum_, Vol. IV. p. [827]) claims to have
accomplished his work from beginning to end without collaboration or
assistance: "cette traduction a été commencée, poursuivie et achevée par
MOI SEUL."

"II^e édit.... précédée de l'histoire de la vie ... de lord Byron par
_H. Romand_, Paris ... 1837, grand in 8, avec une gravure.

"III^e édit., précédée d'une Notice sur la vie de lord Byron, par M.
Émile Souvestre, Paris, 1838, in-8, avec portrait et _fac-simile_.

"IV^e édit. Paris, 1840, 1841. 4 vol. in 12.

"V^e édit, ornée d'un _fac-simile_, et précédée d'une Notice sur lord
Byron ... par M. Villemain. Paris, 1843. Grand in-8." [Quérard, 1846,
ii. 487.]

"La I^re^ édition de cette traduction a été publiée en 1836, 4 vol....
Depuis elle a été réimprimée environ 10 fois, d'abord par M. Charpentier
et puis par M. Lecou, et en dernier lieu par MM. Hachette et Cie."
[Lorenz. _Cat. Gén._ 1867, i. 407.]

IV.

_Oeuvres, traduites en vers français_ par Orby Hunter, 2 vols. (Paris,
Chapelle. 1841-1842.) [8º.

[Lorenz, _Cat. Gén._, 1867, i. 407.]

V.

Oeuvres/ de/ Lord Byron/ Traduites en vers français/ Par/ Orby Hunter &
Pascal Ramé/ Tome. fred,--Beppo,--Le Corsair,--Lara/ et Poésies
diverses/ Paris/ Daussin,/ Libraire/ Place et rue Favart,/ 8 bis/ 1845/
[8º.

Vols. I.-III. were issued in 1845.

_Note_.--Vol. II. contains _Marino Faliero_; _La Fiancée_, etc.;
_Parisina_; "Inscription sur le Monument d'un chien," etc.; _A Venise_;
"Ode sur l'étoile," etc.; "Adieu!--Elégié." Vol. III. contains _Don
Juan_, Chants I.-VI.; _Notes_.

VI.

_Oeuvres complètes de lord Byron_. Traduction nouvelle de Louis Barré,
illustrée par Ch. Mettais, E. Bocourt, Ed. Frère, Edition Bry aîné
Paris, _en vente à la librairie centrale des publications à 20 centimes,
5, rue du Pont-de-Lodi_, 5 (Typ. Gaittet et Cie.), 1856, gr. in 4.

_Collation_--

2 ff. (faux-titre et litre); et 400 pp. Texte imprimé sur deux colonnes.

[_Manuel de l'Amateur_, etc., 1894. Fasc. 3 (I'e Partie), p. 990.]

VII.

Oeuvres/ de/ Lord Byron/ Traduction nouvelle/ Précédée d'un/ Essai sur
Lord Byron/ Par/ Daniel Le Sueur/ Heures d'oisiveté--Childe Harold/
Paris/ Alphonse Lemerre, éditeur/ 23-31, passage Choiseul, 23-31./
1891./ [12º.

_Note_.--The Front., "Lord Byron," is engr. by Fredéric Massé after the
portrait by G. Sanders. The Title-vignette bears a motto, _Fac et
Spera_, and the initials A.L. A second volume (unnumbered), containing
_Le Giaour_; _La Fiancée, etc._; _Le Corsair_; _Lara_, etc., was issued
in 1892. This translation, advertised as _Oeuvres Complètes_, and
described by Lorenz as "Traduction couronnée par l'Académie française,"
has not been continued.


_German_.

I.

_Lord Byron's Poesien_. In 31 volumes. Brothers Schumann, Zwickau.
1821-1828. [16º.

_Note_.--Among the several translators were Julius Körner, Wilhelm
Reinhold, Heinrich Doering, August Schumann, Christian Karl Meissner,
etc. Vols. I.-VI. appeared in 1821; Vols. VII.-XII. in 1822; Vols.
XIII., XIV. in 1824; Vols. XV.-XX. in 1825; Vol. XXI. in 1826; Vols.
XXII.-XXVIII. in 1827; and Vols. XXIX.-XXXI. in 1828.

[_Lord Byron in Deutschland_, von Dr. Cäsar Flaischlen, _Centralblatt
für Bibliothekswesen_, 1890, vii. 462-464.]

II.

Lord Byron's/ sämmtliche Werke./ Herausgegeben/ von/ Dr. Adrian,/
ordentlichem öffentlichem Professor der neueren Litteratur an der/
Universität zu Giessen./ Erster Theil./ Lord Byron's Leben./ Mit dem
Bildniss, einem Facsimile der Handschrift und der/ Abbildung des
Stammsitzes Lord Byron's./ Frankfurt am Main./ Gedruckt und verlegt von
Johann David Sauerländer./ 1830./ [12º.

_Note_.--Vols. X. and XII. were issued in 1831. The several translators
were G.H. Barmann, O.L.B. Wolff, K.L. Kannegiesser, A. Hungari, P. von
Haugwitz, Ph. A.G. von Meyer (the author of _Byron's Leben_, i. 3-326),
and The Editor. This edition was reissued in twelve vols. (12º) in 1837.
[Kayser, 1841.]

III.

_Dichtungen von Lord Byron_. Deutsch v. Gustav Pfizer. 4 Sammlungen.
Stuttgart, Liesching. 1836-1839. [8º.

_Note_.--There was a reissue of this work in 1851.

[_Centralblatt, etc._, 1890, vii. 468, 469.]

IV.

_Lord Byron's sämmtliche Werke_. Deutsch v. Adolf Böttger [1 vol., with
life and portrait.] Leipzig, Otto Wigand. 1839-40. [8º.

[Kayser, 1841.].

_Note_.--This edition was reissued at Leipzig by Otto Wigand in 1 vol.
8º in 1841, 1844, 1845; in 12 vols. 16º in 1841, 1842, and 1847; in
diamond edition, in 12 vols. 16º in 1850, 1852, 1856, 1860, 1861; and in
8 vols. 8º in 1854, 1863, 1864. For the latest edition, _vide post_, No.
xiii. [Kayser, 1848, 1853, 1860, 1865. See, too, _Centralblatt, etc._,
1890, vii. 457.]

V.

Lord Byron's/ sämmtliche Werke./ Nach den/ Anforderungen unserer Zeit/
neu übersetzt von/ Mehreren./ Zweite unveränderte Ausgabe./ Erster
Band./ Pforzheim./ Verlag von Dennig Finck & Co./ [Ten Vols.] 1842./
[16º. _Note_ (1).--The several translators were E. Ortlepp, Dr.
Kottenkamp, H. Kurtz, Professor Duttenhofer, Bardili, Bernd von Guseck.

_Note_ (2).--This edition was first issued in small octavo by Hoffmann
at Stutgard, in 1839, and reissued (16º) by Scheible, Rieger, and
Sattler, 1845, 1846; and in 12 vols. (16º) by Rieger at Stutgard, in
1856. [_Centralblatt, etc._, 1890, vii. 466.]

VI.

_Lord Byron's sämmtliche Werke_. [8 Bde.] Deutsch von A. Neidhardt.
Berlin, Hofmann. 1865. [8º.

[Kayser, 1871.]

VII.

Dichtungen/ von/ Lord Byron./ Deutsch/ von/ Wilhelm Schäffer./ Die
Belagerung von Korinth./ Der Gefangene von Chillon. Die Insel./
Hildburghausen./ Verlag des Bibliographischen Instituts. 1865. [8º.

_Note_.--This collected edition of translations forms part of the
_Bibliothek ausländischer Klassiker, etc._

_Don Juan_, Cantos I.-VI., transl. by W. Schäffer, was issued in two
vols. in 1867; _Childe Harold's, etc._, transl. by A.H. Janert, in 1868;
_Corsair_, _Mazeppa_, _Beppo_, by W. Schäffer, in 1870; _Manfred_,
_Cain_, _Heaven and Earth_, _Sardanapalus_, by W. Grüzmacher, in 1872;
Lyrical Pieces, by Heinrich Stadelmann, in 1872; _The Giaour_, _Bride of
Abydos_, _Lara_, _Parisina_, by Adolf Strodtmann, in 1872.

VIII.

_Lord Byron's ausgewählte Werke_, uebersetzt von Mehreren [4 bde.],
herausg. von A. Strodtmann. Leipzig, Bibl. Inst. 1865-1872. [8º.

[_Centralblatt, etc._, 1890, vii. 466.]

IX.

Lord Byron's/ sämmtliche Werke/ in drei Bänden./ Frei überzetzt/ von/
Adolf Seubert./ Erster Band./ Leipzig./ Druck und Verlag von Philipp
Reclam jun./ [1874.] [8º.

X.

_Lord Byron's Werke_. Deutsch v. Dr. Adalbert Schroeter. [6 Bde.]
Uebersetzt, mit Einleitung und Anmerkungen versehen. Stuttgart. In;
Coll. Spemann. 1885-1890. [8º.

[_Centralblatt, etc._, 1890, vii, 470.]

XI.

_Lord Byron's poetische Werke_. In älteren Uebertragungen; eingeleitet
durch e. Studie v. Henry T. Tuckermann. Stuttgart. Cotta'sche Bibl. der
Weltlitteratur, 1886. [In eight vols.] [8º.

[Kayser, 1887.]

XII.

Lord Byron's Werke./ Uebersetz/ von/ Otto Gildemeister./ In sechs
Bänden./ Erster Band./ Vierte Auflage./ Berlin./ Druck und Verlag von
Georg Reimer./ 1888./ [8º.

_Note_.--A First Edition appeared in 1864, a second in 1866, and a third
in 1877. [Kayser, 1865, 1871, 1883.]

XIII.

Byron's/ sämmtliche Werke./ Von/ Adolf Böttger./ Achte Auflage./ Erster
Band./ Leipzig,/ Verlag von Otto Wigand./ 1901./ [8 Bde.] [8º.


_Modern Greek_.

Τα Απαντα / του / Βυρωνος / Τομος Πρωτος / Εν Αθηναις /
Εκ του τυπογραφειου των καταστηματων / Ανεστη κωνστατινιδου
[Greek: Ta Apanta / tou / Byrônos / Tomos Prôtos / En Athênais /
Ek tou typographeiou tôn katastêmatôn / Anestê kônstatinidou]
1895/ [Three Vols.] [8º.

_Note_.--This translation includes _Mazeppa_, _Parisina_, _Childe
Harold_, _The Siege of Corinth_, _The Bride of Abydos_, _The Corsair_,
_The Curse of Minerva_, _Don Juan_, _The Giaour_.

The paper wrapper and the title-page are embellished with a lithograph
of the portrait by T. Phillips, R.A.


_Italian_.

I.

Opere complete/ di/ Lord Byron/ voltate dall' originale inglese in prosa
italiana/ Da/ Carlo Rusconi/ Con note ed illustrazioni del
volgarizzatore/ nonchè dei signori/ Moore (and 33 others = 6 lines)/ a
cui si aggiungono/ I dialoghi di Lord Byron compilati da M. Medwin/ Un
saggio sul di lui genio--una prefazione--E un' appendice/ parte desunti
da altri scritti, parte tradotti,/ parte originali./ Padova/ coi tipi
della Minerva/ 1842/ [8º.

_Note_.--This edition, which forms one volume, pp. xxxix. + 1561, was
issued in two parts. A dedication ("A Sua Eccellenza/ Lord Holland/
Ministro Plenipotenziario D'Inghilterra/ alla Corte di Toscana"/) is
prefixed to Part I., pp. [ix.]-[xi.].

II.

Opere/ di/ Giorgio Lord Byron/ Precedute/ da alcune avvertenze critiche/
Sulle stesse/ e da un discorso/ di/ Cesare Cantù/ prima edizione
napolitana adorna di figure incise/ Napoli/ Francesco Rossi-Romano
editore/ Trinità Maggiore, 6/ 1853/ [8º.

_Note_.--The Front. is a lithograph of "Lord Byron nell' età di 17
anni," after the portrait by G. Sanders.

The several translators were Giuseppe Gazzino, Giuseppe Nicolini, Pietro
Isola, Pellegrino Rossi, Andrea Maffei, Marcello Mazzoni, and P.G.B.
Cereseto.

The translation includes _Childe Harold_, eight tales, and four dramas.

III.

_Opere di Lord Byron_ tradotte ed annotate da Gabr. De Stefano. Napoli,
1857. [8º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 625.

IV.

Opere/ di/ Lord Giorgio Byron/ Precedute/ da un saggio intorno al genio
e al carattere/ Del medesimo/ Volume unico/ Napoli/ Presso Pasquale
Perrone libraio-/Editore/ via Costantinopoli, 107./ 1886/ [8º.

_Note_.--The translations include _Childe Harold_, _Don Juan_, eight
tales, and seven dramas. A reissue with a portrait, and, apparently,
wanting pp. 669-[711] of the appendix, appeared in 1891 (Ferdinando
Bideri, editore/ Via Costantinopoli, 89).


_Polish_.

I.

Poezye/ Lorda Byrona/ w tłumaczeniu Polskiém. Wydane staraniem/
Bolesława Maurycego Wolffa./ Tom. I./ W[e,]drówki Czajlda-Harolda./
Petersburg./ Nakadem i Drukiem B.M. Wolffa./ 1857./ [12º.

_Note_.--No more published.

II.

Poezye Lorda Byrona w przekładzie polskich poetów. Zbiorowe wydanie, pod
red. Piotra Chmielowskiego. ("Biblioteka Najcelnijszych Utworów.") [8º.
_Warszawa, 1885, etc._


_Russian_.

I.

Сочиненія Лорда Байрона Въ переводахъ русскихъ
Поэтовъ издаиных полъ редакціею Н.В. Гербеля
[Cyrillic: Sochinenaiya Lorda Bairona V" perevodakh" russkikh"
Poztov" izdainykhie pol" redaktsieyu N.V. Gerbelya]
5 TOM. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: S.-Peterburg"] 1864-66 [16º.

Second edition of Gerbel. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: S.-Peterburg"], 1874-77.
In 4 vols.

Third edition. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: S.-Peterburg"], 1883-84. In 3 vols.

II.

Байронъ. Европейскіе Классики Въ русскомъ переводѣ П. Вейнберга С.-Петербургъ
[Cyrillic: Bairon". Evropeĭeskīe Klassiki V" russkom" perevodie
P. Veĭnberga S.-Peterburg"] 1876.

_Note_.--The translations include _Hebrew Melodies_, _Sardanapalus_,
_Manfred_, _Childe Harold's, etc._, and _Don Juan_.


_Spanish_.

Biblioteca Universal./ Coleccion/ de los/ Mejores autores/ Antiguos y
modernos,/ Nationales y extranjeros./ Tomo LXIII./ Lord Byron/ Madrid./
Direccion y administracion/ calle de Leganitos, 18, 2.0/ 1880./ [16º.

This translation includes _The Corsair_, _Lara_, _Darkness_, and _Hebrew
Melodies_ (6), _The Lament of Tasso_. The _Prologo_ is by Rafael Ginard
de La Rosa.


_Swedish_.

Byron's Poetiska Berättelser. Öfversättning af Talis Qualis [C.W.A.
Strandberg]. 1. Maseppa.--2. Belägringen af Korinth.--3. Fången på
Chillon.--4. Parisina--5. Beppo.--6. Giaurn.--7. Bruden från Abydos.--8.
On Eller Christian OCH Hans Ställbröder. [8 vols.] Stockholm, J.L.
Brudins Förlag. 1854-1856. [12º.




SELECTIONS.

I.

_The Beauties of Byron_, with a sketch of his life and a dissertation on
his genius and writings. By Thomas Parry. London: J. Sudbury. 1823.

[Kölbing.]

II.

_The Beauties of Byron_. Extracts from the works of the Right Hon. Lord
Byron. Embellished with engravings on steel. London: J. Limbird. 1827.

[Kölbing.]

III.

Life/ and/ Select Poems/ of/ Lord Byron,/ Arranged, etc./ By C.
Hulbert,/ Author of Literary Beauties, Poetical Bouquet, Museum of the
World, etc./ London: Sold by all the Booksellers./ [1828.] [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 84.

IV.

_The Beauties of Lord Byron_, selected by B.F. French, 10th ed. [Pp. xi.
+ 204, 3 pl.] Philadelphia. 1828. [24º

[_Cat. of Library of Congress_, 1880.]

V.

The/ Beauties/ of/ Byron,/ Consisting of/ Selections From His Works./ By
J.W. Lake./ [L.B. in Gothic letters, enclosed in bay and oak leaves.]
Paris,/ Baudry, at the English, Italian,/ Spanish, German, and
Portuguese Library,/ Rue du Coq Saint-Honoré, No. 9./ Bobée and Hingray,
rue de Richelieu, No. 14./ 1829./ [16º

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 230.

VI.

_Lord Byron's Select Works_. Vols. I.-III. Frankfort a. M Brönner. 1831,
1832. [12º

[Kayser, 1834.]

VII.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_; The Giaour; The Siege, etc.; Parisina; The
Island; The Prisoner, etc.; Beppo; Mazeppa; The Prophecy, etc.; The
Waltz; The Lament, etc.; Hebrew Melodies; Misc. in Prose. By Lord Byron.
Paris. 1832. (1 vol.) [8º.

["Le Moniteur de la librairie." _Courrier de l'amateur de livres_.
Paris, Barrois. 4^e Annèe, 1845, p. 122. (Bibl. Nat. 9, 5610.)]

VIII.

_Lord Byron's Select Poetical Works_, containing the _Corsair_, _Lara_,
the _Giaour_, the _Siege_, etc., the _Bride_, etc., _Parisina_,
_Mazeppa_, the _Prisoner_, etc. Paris and Lyons. 1835. [12º.

[Kayser, 1841.]

IX.

_Lord Byron's Select Works_. Consisting of _Cain, a Mystery_; _Hours of
Idleness_; _English Bards_, etc., with Occ. Pieces and Life of the
Author. Asher, London and Berlin. 1837. [32º.

[Kayser, 1841.]

X.

The/ Beauties/ of/ Byron:/ Consisting of/ Selections from the Popular
Works of/ This most admired Writer./ By Alfred Howard, Esq./ A new
Edition./ London:/ Printed for Thomas Tegg and Son, 73, Cheapside;/ R.
Griffin and Co., Glasgow./ T.T. and H. Tegg, Dublin:/ also, J. and S.A.
Tegg, Sydney and Hobart Town./ 1837./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 192.

XI.

The/ Beauties/ of/ Byron,/ consisting of/ selections from his Works./ By
Alfred Howard, Esq./ London:/ Printed by T. Davison,/ For Thomas Tegg,
No. 73, Cheapside;/ R. Griffin and Co. Glasgow;/ and/ J. Cummings,
Dublin./ [_n.d._] [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 212.

_Note_.--The following advertisement is printed on the R. of the Gen.
Half-title: "To the few persons who have not read Lord Byron's poems,
but who, after perusing these specimens, will undoubtedly wish to read
the whole of them, we beg leave to say that the only correct editions
are published by Mr. Murray, of Albemarle Street, and Messrs. J. & H.L.
Hunt, of Tavistock Street. The first eight volumes are to be had from
the former publisher; the last two from the latter. All other editions
are piracies, and inflict even more injury on the sense and poetry of
the noble bard than they do on the property of the proprietors."

XII.

_Byron's Select Works_, containing the Corsair; Lara; Giaour; the Bride,
etc.; the Siege, etc.; the Prisoner, etc.; Select Poems, etc., etc.; to
which is prefixed a biographical notice of Lord B. by J.W. Lake. Paris,
Truchy. 1843. [12º.

[_Le Moniteur_, etc., 1845, p. 122. See, too, _Bibl. de la France_, Aug.
12, 1843, vol. xxxii. p. 413.]

XIII.

_A Selection from Lord Byron's Poetical Works_, containing, etc.
Intended for the use of young people, and provided with explanatory
German notes by Charles Graeser. Marienwerder, Edward Levysohn. 1846.

[Kölbing.]

XIV.

_Select Poetical Works of Lord Byron_. Containing, etc. With a memoir by
Henry Lytton Bulwer, Esq. London, Adam Scott. 1848.

[Kölbing.]

XV.

_Lord Byron's Select Works_, with an Appendix, containing songs and
ballads for the use of schools, edited by F. Breier. Oldenburg, Schulze.
1848. [8º.

[Kayser, 1853.]

XVI.

Selections/ From The/ Writings of Lord Byron./ Poetry./ By a Clergyman./
London:/ John Murray, Albemarle Street./ 1854./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 175.

_Note_.--The Selection (two vols.--Prose, Poetry) is one of a series
called "Murray's Railway Reading." The editor was the Rev. Whitwell
Elwin, sometime editor of the _Q.R_.

XVII.

Moxon's Miniature Poets./ A/ Selection From/ The Works/ of/ Lord Byron./
Edited and Prefaced by Algernon Chas. Swinburne./ London:/ Edward Moxon
& Co., Dover Street./ 1866./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxxii. + 244.

_Note_.--The Selection was reissued by Ward, Lock, and Co. in 1885.

XVIII.

Songs by/ Lord Byron/ [Crest, motto _Crede Byron_.]/ London/ Virtue &
Co., Publishers/ 26 Ivy Lane, Pater noster Row/ 1872/ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 270.

_Note_.--There is an index of "Songs set to Music," pp. 268-270.

XIX.

_Selections from the Writings of Lord Byron_. New Edition. With
Portrait. London, John Murray. 1874.

[Kölbing.]

XX.

_Beautés de Byron_: Childe Harold, le Corsaire, Lara, le Giaour, le
Siège, etc., Don Juan, Extraits (texte anglais) avec préface et notes en
français, par A. Biard. Paris, Delagrave. 1876. [12º

[Lorenz, 1886.]

XXI.

Favourite Poems./ By/ Lord Byron./ Illustrated./ Boston:/ James R.
Osgood and Company./ Late Ticknor & Fields, and Fields, Osgood & Co./
1877./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 127.

XXII.

_The Beauties of Byron_. An Original Selection. Stuttgart, Paul Neff.

[Kölbing.]

XXIII.

Poetry of Byron/ Chosen and Arranged by/ Matthew Arnold/ London/
Macmillan and Co./ 1881/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxxvi. + 276.

_Note_.--The title-page is illustrated by an engraving, by G.J. Stodart,
of Thorwaldsen's statue of Lord Byron. The preface (pp. vii.-xxxi.) is
by Matthew Arnold.

XXIV.

Routledge's World Library/ "Syllables govern the World." John Selden/
Gems from Byron/ With an Introduction/ By the/ Rev. Hugh Reginald
Haweis, M.A./ London/ George Routledge and Sons/ Broadway, Ludgate Hill/
New York: 9 Lafayette Place/ 1886/ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 158.

XXV.

Selections/ From The Poetry of/ Lord Byron/ Edited with/ An Introduction
and Notes/ By/ Frederic Ives Carpenter, Ph.D./ Instructor in English,
the University of Chicago/ Dir in klar und truben Tagen/ Lied und Mut
war schon und gross./ II. 'Faust,' iii. 1. 1426./ New York/ Henry Holt
and Company/ 1900/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. lviii. + 412.

XXVI.

Poems/ of/ Lord Byron/ Selected and arranged for use in Schools/ By/ C.
Linklater Thomson/ Head-Mistress of the Solihull School for Girls,
[etc., three lines]./ London/ Adam and Charles Black/ 1901/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. ix. + 67.




TRANSLATIONS OF SELECTIONS.


_Armenian_.

Lord Byron's/ Armenian Exercises/ and Poetry./ Venice/ In the Island of
S. Lazzaro./ 1886/ [8º

_Collation_--

Pp. 167 + Index, pp. [169]-[172].

_Note_.--The Title-page is dated 1886, the paper wrapper (yellow) 1870.
Among the exercises are _Pieces of Armenian History_, _The Epistle of
Paul to the Corinthians_, etc.; and among the translations are "The
Destruction of Sennacherib," "On Waterloo," "To the Duke of Dorset,"
etc.

_French_.

I.

_Choix de Poésies de Byron, de W. Scott et Th. Moore_; trad. libre de
l'angl. Genève et Paris, Paschoud. 1820. [Two Vols.] [8º.

[Quérard, 1827.]

II.

_Les Beautés de lord Byron_, galerie de quinze tableaux tirés de ses
oeuvres, accompagnée d'un texte traduit par Amédée Pichot. Paris,
Aubert, Giraldon. 1838. [4º.

[Quérard, 1846.]

III.

Écrin poétique/ de/ littérature anglaise./ Traduction en vers français,/
Avec notes historiques,/ De poèmes, épisodes et fragments choisis/ de
Lord Byron,/ Thomas Moore, Gray, Graham, etc./ Ornée du portrait de lord
Byron/ et de jolies vignettes de Thompson./ Par D. Bonnefin./ Chevalier
de la légion d'honneur,/ A Paris,/ Chez L. Hachette,/ Libraire de
l'Université Royale de France,/rue Pierre-Sarrazin, no. 12./ 1841./ [8º

_Collation_--

Pp. ix. + 473.

IV.

_Chefs-d'oeuvre de lord Byron_. (Le Pèlerinage, etc., Lara, la Fiancée,
etc., Parisina, Mazeppa, le Siége, etc., le Prisonnier, etc.) La
traduction françoise en regard par M. le comte d'Hautefeuille; précédés
d'un essai sur la vie et les oeuvres de lord Byron et de ses
contemporains, renfermant l'histoire de la poésie anglaise au xix^e
siècle, par D. O'Sullivan. 1847. _Place de la Madelaine_, 24. [8º

[Lorenz, 1866.]

V.

Rough Hewing/ of/ Lord Byron/ In French,/ With the English Text./ By
Francis D'Autrey./ ... Obscurus fio./ Horace, Ars Poetica./ London:/
J.W. Kolckmann,/ Foreign Library,/ 1, Princes Street, Cavendish Square,
W./ 1869./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 233.

VI.

_Chefs-d'oeuvre de lord Byron_. Traduits en vers français par A.
Regnault. (Two Vols.) 1874. [8º.

[Lorenz, 1876.]


_German_.

I.

_Lord Byron's_ ausgewählte Dichtungen. Aus d. Engl. übertragen. Leipzig,
Wienbrack. 1838. [8º.

[Kayser, 1841.]

II.

Byron-Anthologie./ Auserwähltes/ aus/ Lord Byron's Dichtungen,/
übertragen/ von/ Eduard Hobein./ Schwerin./ Stiller'sche
Hofbuchhandlung./ (G. Bolhoevener.) 1866. [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 187.

III.

_Auswahl aus Byron: Childe Harold_ (III. and IV.), _Prisoner, etc.,
Mazeppa_. Hrsg. v. J. Hengesbach. 1892. [12º.

[Kayser, 1895.]

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 116.

_Note_.--Part of _Textausgaben französischer u. englischer
Schriftsteller f. den Schulgebrauch_, hrsg. v. Osk. Schmager.


_Italian_.

I.

Poemi/ di/ Lord G. Byron/ Tradotti/ dall' originale inglese/ da/ Pietro
Isola/ Socio corrispondente della R. Accademia delle scienze ed arti/ di
Alessandria/ Torino/ Presso Giuseppe Pomba/ 1827/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 204.

II.

_Opere scelte_, tradotte da M. Mazzoni. Milano. 1852. [8º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

III.

A'Mici Amici./ [1873.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 27.

_Note_.--A translation of a few detached passages, by P. Isola, entitled
"In partendo dall' Inghilterra," etc. There is no Title-page.




MISCELLANEOUS POEMS.

I.

An Ode./ On/ The Star of the Legion of Honour./ Napoleon's Farewell./
Fare Thee Well./ And/ A Sketch, etc./ By Lord Byron./ New-York:/
Published by Van Winkle and Wiley,/ No. 3 Wall-Street./ 1816./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Text, pp. 5-24.

_Note_.--The Half-title is probably missing. The "Ode" is the _Ode from
the French_ ("We do not curse thee, Waterloo!"). The edition contains
the five pieces enumerated on the title.

II.

Three Poems,/ not Included in the Works of/ Lord Byron./ Lines to Lady
J----./ The Ænigma./ The Curse of Minerva./ [Motto from _Ter. Andria_,
five lines.] London:/ Printed for Effingham Wilson,/ Royal Exchange./
1818./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title (R. _John Hill, Printer, 32, Water Lane, Blackfriars_.), pp. 3, 4;
Note on the Lines to Lady Jersey, pp. 5, 6; Text and Notes, pp. 7-18.
The second poem is Miss Fanshaw's Enigma (Letter H); the third, _The
Curse of Minerva_ (112 lines).

III.

English Bards,/ and/ Scotch Reviewers;/ A Satire./ Ode to the Land of
the Gaul.--Sketch/ From Private Life.--Windsor/ Poetics, etc./ By/ The
Right Honorable/ Lord Byron./ Second Edition./ Paris:/ Published by
Galignani/ At the French, English, Italian, German and Spanish/ Library,
No. 18, Rue Vivienne,/ 1818./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 84, With half-title, "Suppressed/ Poems." _English Bards, etc._, a
reprint of the Fourth Edition of 1811, numbers 1052 lines.

IV.

The/ Works/ of/ The Right Honourable/ Lord Byron;/ Containing/ English
Bards, and/ Scotch Reviewers;/ The Curse of Minerva,/ And the Waltz,/
An/ Apostrophic Hymn./ Philadelphia:/ Published By M. Thomas./ 1820./
[8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 151.

_Note_.--_The English Bards, etc._, is a reprint of the Fourth Edition
of 1050 lines. The _Curse of Minerva_ is the complete edition of 312
lines. The "Fugitive Pieces" are: (1) To Jessy; (2) "My Boat is on the
Shore;" (3) Lines addressed to Mr. Hobhouse; (4) Adieu to Malta; (5)
Enigma [To the Letter H]. It will be observed that, with the exception
of No. 5, all these pieces are genuine.

V.

Poems/ By/ The Right Honourable/ Lord Byron;/ With/ His Memoirs./
London:/ Published by Jones and Company,/ No. 3, Warwick Square./ 1825./
[8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 292 + Cont., p. [293].

This edition contains _Hours of Idleness, English Bards, etc._ (3rd
ed.), "Poems on His Domestic Circumstances" (twenty-five, including
eight forgeries), and the whole of _Don Juan_.

VI.

The/ Miscellaneous Poems/ of/ Lord Byron./ London:/ Benbow, Printer and
Publisher, 252, High/ Holborn./ 1825./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 94.

_Note_.--The collection numbers fifty-three poems, including the
twenty-five published by R. Bumpus in 1824 (No. xi. of "Poems on His
Domestic Circumstances"), and twenty-eight others (all genuine),
including the _Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte_, and the _Monody on the Death
of Sheridan_.

VII.

Don Juan,/ Complete;/ English Bards and Scotch/ Reviewers;/ Hours of
Idleness;/ The Waltz;/ and all the other Minor Poems:/ By/ Lord Byron./
[Emblem (Dove and olive-branch):--motto (_Perseverantia et Amicis_).]
London:/ Printed and Published by J.F. Dove,/ St. John's Square./ 1827./
[12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. iv. + 574.

_Note_.--A second Title-page, with Title-vignette. _English Bards,
etc._, numbers 1050 lines. Among the "Minor Poems" are the seven
forgeries: (1) Farewell to England; (2) To my Daughter; (3) Ode--St.
Helena; (4) To the Lily of France; (5) Ode ("Oh, shame to thee," etc.);
(6) Madame Lavalette; (7) Enigma (Letter H); and _The Curse of Minerva_
(111 lines).

VIII.

Don Juan;/ Hours of Idleness;/ English Bards and Scotch Reviewers;/ The
Waltz;/ and other Poems./ By Lord Byron./ In Two Volumes./ Vol. I. [Vol.
II.] London: J.F. Dove, St. John's Square./ 1828./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. xiv. + 384.

Vol. II.: pp. iv. + 428.

_Note_.--These pirated volumes were occasionally bound up with Murray's
four-volume edition of 1828, and numbered Vols. V., VI.

IX.

The/ Miscellaneous Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ Containing/ Werner, a
Tragedy; Heaven and Earth;/ Morgante Maggiore; Age of Bronze; The
Island;/ Vision of Judgment;/ and The Deformed Transformed./ London:/
Printed for Hunt and Clarke,/ Tavistock Street;/ and sold by all
Booksellers./ 1830./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. vi. + 7-308 + 286--Title, one leaf; Half-title (Werner); pp. i.,
ii.; Dedication, pp. iii., iv.; Preface, pp. v., vi.; Dramatis Personæ,
p. [8]; Text (_Werner_, _Heaven and Earth_, Translation of _Morgante
Maggiore_), pp. 9-308; Text (_The Age of Bronze_, _The Island_ (App.),
_The Vision of Judgment_ (App.), _The Deformed Transformed_), pp. 1-286.
The Imprint (London:/ _Printed by C.H. Reynell, Broad Street, Golden
Square_./) is at the foot of p. 286.

X.

_The Corsair--Lara_. Tales by Lord Byron, with a notice and explanatory
arguments by Lake. Paris. 1830. [12º.

[_Le Moniteur_, etc., 1845.]

XI.

_The Bride of Abydos_--The Corsair--Lara--Curse of Minerva--Morg.
Magg.--Hours of Idleness--Engl. Bards, etc.--Miscell. Poems. [In one
vol.] By Lord Byron. Paris. 1832. [8º.

[_Le Moniteur_, etc., 1845.]

XII.

_Manfred_--Marino Faliero--Sardanapalus--The Two
Foscari--Cain--Werner--Heaven and Earth--The Deformed Transf. By Lord
Byron. [In one vol.] Paris. 1832. [8º.

[_Le Moniteur_, etc., 1845.]

XIII.

_Don Juan_--The Age of Bronze--The Vision of Judgment. By Lord Byron.
[In one vol.] Paris. 1832. [8º.

[_Le Moniteur_, etc., 1845.]

XIV.

Miscellanies./ By/ Lord Byron./ In Three Volumes./ Vol. I./ [Vol. II.,
etc.] London:/ John Murray, Albemarle Street./ 1837./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. vi. + 316.

Vol. II.: pp. iv. + 305.

Vol. III.: pp. viii. + 288.

_Note_.--Vol. I. contains _Hours of Idleness_; _English Bards, etc._;
_Hints from Horace_.

Vol. II. contains _The Curse of Minerva_; _The Waltz_; _Ode to N.B._;
_Hebrew Melodies_; _The Morgante Maggiore_; _The Prophecy of Dante_;
_The Blues_; _The Vision of Judgment_; _The Age of Bronze_.

Vol. III. contains "Occasional Pieces," 1807-1824; "Domestic Pieces,"
1816; _Monody, etc._; _The Dream_; _Darkness_; _The Lament of Tasso_;
_Ode on Venice_; _Francesco da Rimini_; and, interspersed with these,
pp. 171-261, other minor pieces and epigrams. The App. (pp. 265-288)
contains "Remarks on the Romaic," etc.

XV.

Tales./ By Lord Byron./ In Two Volumes./ Vol. I./ London:/ John Murray,/
Albemarle Street./ 1837./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. 263.

Vol. II.: pp. 260.

_Note_.--Vol. I. contains _The Giaour_; _The Bride, etc._; _The
Corsair_; _Lara_. Vol. II. contains _The Siege, etc._; _Parisina_; _The
Prisoner, etc._; _Beppo_; _Mazeppa_; _The Island_.

XVI.

Lord Byron's/ Tales:/ Consisting of/ The Giaour, The Bride of Abydos,/
The Corsair, Lara;/ With all the Notes:/ Hebrew Melodies,/ and other
Poems./ Halifax:/ Printed and Published by William Milner,/ Cheapside./
1845./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 9-256.

_Note_.--Among the "Poems" are twelve pieces, "The Illuminated City,"
"The Wreath," "A Child at Prayer," etc., which are, apparently,
attributed to Lord Byron, but are neither his compositions nor capable
of being described as forgeries or imitations. They precede six genuine
poems.

For an interesting account (by W. Roberts) of other editions (1838,
1865, etc.), published at Halifax, see _Notes and Queries_, 1886, iv. S.
v. 225, etc.; and _The Antiquarian Magazine_, vol. xii., July-November,
1887, pp. 101-106.

XVII.

The Giaour,/ and/ The Bride of Abydos./ By/ Lord Byron./ London:/ H.G.
Clarke & Co., 278, Strand./ 1848./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 154.

_Note_.--- Part of "Clarke's Cabinet Series."

XVIII.

Miscellanies./ By Lord Byron./ In Two Volumes.--Vol. I./ [Vol. II.]
London:/ John Murray, Albemarle Street./ 1853./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. vii. + 364.

Vol. II.: pp. viii. + 360.

_Note_.--Vol. I. contains _Hours of Idleness_; _English Bards, etc._;
_Hints from Horace_; _The Curse of Minerva_; _The Waltz_; _Ode to
Napoleon Buonaparte_; _Hebrew Melodies_; Domestic Pieces; _Monody,
etc._; _The Dream_.

Vol. II. contains _The Lament of Tasso_; _Ode on Venice_; _The Morgante
Maggiore_; _The Prophecy of Dante_; _Francesca of Rimini_; _The Blues_;
_The Vision of Judgment_; _The Age of Bronze_; Occasional Pieces,
1807-1824.

XIX.

Tales and Poems/ By Lord Byron./ Containing/ The Giaour./ Bride of
Abydos./ The Corsair./ Lara./ Siege of Corinth./ Parisina./ Prisoner of
Chillon./ Mazeppa./ The Island./ London: John Murray, Albemarle Street./
1853./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. vi. + 7-358.

XX.

Beppo and Don Juan./ By Lord Byron./ In Two Volumes.--Vol. I./ [Vol.
II.] London:/John Murray, Albemarle Street./ 1853./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. 353.

Vol. II.: pp. 367.

XXI.

Poems/ By/ The Right Honourable/ Lord Byron;/ With/ His Memoirs./
London:/ Thomas Nelson & Sons,/ Paternoster Row./ 1855./ [32º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xvi. + 174.

_Note_.--"Poems on Domestic Circumstances," etc. (pp. 133-174) are
identical with those published by J.F. Dove, 1827, pp. 536-574 (see No.
vii.); and the entire contents of the volume are identical with Poems/
By the/ Right Honourable Lord Byron./, which form part (Vol. II. pp.
1-46) of "The Cabinet Edition of the British Poets." In Four Volumes./
London:/ Henry G. Bohn, York Street, Covent Garden./ 1851./ [8º.

XXII.

_Lord Byron's Tales and Poems_. Leipzig, Brockhaus. 1857. [8º.

[Kayser, 1860.]

XXIII.

Poems./ By Lord Byron./ [Motto: "Like an archangel," etc., twelve lines,
_Anon._] With Eight Illustrations,/ By Birket Foster, John Gilbert,
etc./ London:/ Routledge, Warne, and Routledge,/ Farringdon Street;/ New
York: 56, Walker Street./ 1859./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxxii. + 539.

XXIV.

Eastern Tales:/ By/ Lord Byron./ Comprising/ The Corsair, Lara, The
Giaour,/ The Bride of Abydos, and The Siege of Corinth./ With the
Author's original Introductions and Notes./ Illustrated./ London:/ David
Bogue, 86, Fleet Street./ [1859.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 5-265.

XXV.

Byron's/ Siege of Corinth/ And/ Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte./ With Notes/
For students for the first examination in Arts,/ University of Madras./
1877./ Madras:/ Addison and Co., 18, Mount Road./ 18767 [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 56.

XXVI.

Poems/ By/ Lord Byron/ London/ George Routledge and Sons/ Broadway,
Ludgate Hill./ New York: 416 Broome Street/ [1880.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxxii. + 719.

_Note_.--Part of the "Excelsior Series."

XXVII.

Poems/ of/ Lord Byron./ Carefully Selected./ In Two Volumes./ Vol. I./
[Vol. II.] Cassell & Company, Limited:/ London, Paris, New York, &
Melbourne./ [1886.] [32º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. 3-316.

Vol. II.: pp. x. + 11-316.

_Note_.--Part of Cassell's "Miniature Library of the Poets."

XXVIII.

Byron's/ Prisoner of Chillon/ und/ Siege of Corinth./ Mit
bibliographischem Material,/ litterarischer Einleitung und sachlichen/
Anmerkungen für Studierende/ Herausgegeben/ von/ J.G.C. Schuler./
Halle./ Max Niemeyer./ 1886./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 92 + "Lesarten aus Byron's MSS.," pp. 93, 94.

_Note_.--No. 8 of "Materialen für das Neuenglische Seminar." Herausg. v.
Ernst Regel.

XXIX.

The Corsair. Lara. Illustrated by Gambard and Mittis. With Introduction
by M.F. Sweetser. Boston, Joseph Knight & Co. 1893. [32º.

[_Amer. Cat._, 1894.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 142.

_Note_.--Part of the "World's Classics."




TRANSLATIONS OF MISCELLANEOUS POEMS.


_Bohemian_.

Korsár. Lara/ Básnické Povídky/ Lorda Byrona/ Pṙeložil/ Cěněk Ibl./ V
Praze/ Tiskem A Nákladem Dra Ed. Grégra/ 1885/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 128.

_Note_.--Poesie Svetova, Pt. xxiii., 1871, etc.


_Danish_.

I.

Udvalgte/ Dramatiske Digte/ OG/ Fortoellinger/ Af/ Byron./ Oversatte af
Edv. Lembcke./ Første Bind./ (Dramatiske Dicte.)/ KjøBenHavn./ Forlagt
af J.H. Schubothes. Boghandel./ Græbes Bogtrykkeri./ 1873./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. 594.

Vol. II.: [1876] pp. 422.

_Note_.--Vol. I. contains _Sardanapalus_; _Manfred_; _Cain_; _Marino
Faliero_.

Vol. II. contains _The Siege, etc._; _Mazeppa_; _The Bride, etc._;
_Corsair_; _Giaour_; _Lara_; _The Prisoner, etc._; _The Island_.

II.

Byron:/ Manfred,/ Fangen paa Chillon og Mazeppa./ Oversat af/ Alfred
Ipsen./ København./ Forlagt af P. Hauberg & Comp. og Jul. Gjellerup./
Trykt hos Martius Truelsen. [1889?] [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 136.

III.

Beppo./ Dommedagssynet./ Af/ Lord Byron./ Oversatte/ Af/ Alfred Ipsen./
København,/ Forlagt Af I.H. Schubothes Boghandel./ Græbes Bogtrykkeri./
1891./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 88.


_Dutch_.

I.

Navolgingen/ van/ Lord Byron./ Door/ Nicolaas Beets./ De gevangene van
Chillon./ Mazeppa. Parisina. Fragmenten. Joodsche zangen./ Verscheiden
gedichten./ Nieuwe, Herziene Uitgave./ Vermeederd met een Woord over
Byrons Poëzy./ Te Haarlem, By/ De Erven F. Bonn./ 1848./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xl. + 170.

_Note_.--The vignette (a bunch of cornflowers) on the illustrated
title-page (Gedichten/ van/ Nicolaas Beets./) is engraved by J.W.
Kaiser.

II.

Gedichten/ van/ Lord Byron./ Door/ J.J.L. Ten Kate./ Eerste Volledige
Uitgave./ Te Leiden, Bij A.W. Sijthoff. [1870?] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 242.


_French_.

I.

_Le Corsaire_, _Mazeppa_, traduits en vers français suivis de poésies
diverses, par Lucien Méchin, 1848. Paris, Paulin. [12º.

[Lorenz, 1840-1865.]

II.

Le/ Prisonnier de Chillon/ Lara/ Parisina/ Poémes de Lord Byron,/
Traduits en vers/ et/ Poésies diverses/ Par H. Gomont/ Membre
correspondant de l'Académie de Stanislas/ Paris/ Amyot, Libraire/ Rue de
la Paix, 6/ [the second column] Nancy./ Mlle Gonet, libraire/ Rue des
Dominicains, 14/ 1862/ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 228.

III.

_Le Corsaire_, _Lara_, _le Siége de Corinthe_. Traduction nouvelle par
Paul Lorencin. (_Libraire de la Bibliothèque Nationiale_, tom. 117.)
1868. [32º.

[Lorenz, 1876.]

IV.

Chefs-D'oeuvre/ de/ Lord Byron/ Traduits en vers français/ par/ A.
Regnault/ Bibliothécaire et archiviste honoraire du Conseil D'État/
Membre de l'Académie de Lyon/ Auteur d'une histoire du Conseil D'État,/
D'un Voyage en Orient (Gréce, Turquie, Egypte)/ Et de notices
historiques sur Moscou et Saint-Pétersbourg/ Tome premier/ Paris/ Amyot,
Librairie-Editeur/ 8, rue de la Paix, 8/ Et à la librairie, Galignani/
224, rue de Rivoli, 224/ 1874/ Touts droits réservés/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. xxxii. + 518.

Vol. II.: pp. 511.

_Note_.--Vol. I. contains _Childe Harold's, etc._; _The Bride, etc_.;
_The Giaour_; _The Siege, etc._; _Manfred_ [Scènes Détachées].

Vol. II. contains _The Corsair_; _Lara_; _Mazeppa_; _The Prisoner,
etc._; _Parisina_; _Beppo_; Juan and Haidee; Poésies Diverses.

V.

Lord Byron/ Les/ Deux Foscari/ Tragédie historique/ Beppo/ Poème
humoristique/ Traduction en vers (ornée de 15 vignettes)/ Par/ Achille
Morisseau/ Paris/ Calmann Lévy, éditeur/ 3, rue Auber, 3/ 1881/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xiii. + 258.

VI.

_Le Corsaire_. _Lara_. Illustrations de Gambard et Mittis. Paris,
Dentre. 1892. [32º.

Fait partie de la "Petite Collection Guillaume," Lorenz, 1900.


_German_.

I.

_Gefangener von Chillon u. Parisina_, nebst e. Anh. seiner lyrischen
Gedichte, übers. durch Paul Graf v. Haugwitz. Breslau, W.G. Korn. Übers.
1821. [8º.

[Kayser, 1834.]

II.

_Manfred_.--_Die Finsterniss_.--_Der Traum_. Aus d. Engl. übersetzt von
Er. Köpke. Berlin, Schröder. 1835. [8º.

[Kayser, 1841.]

III.

_Der Giaur_. _Hebräische Gesänge_. Aus dem Engl. übers. von Friederike
Friedmann. Leipzig. 1854. Brockhaus. [16º.

[Kayser, 1860.]

IV.

Kain./ Ein Mysterium./ Mazeppa./ Von/ Lord Byron./ Aus dem Englischen
übersetzt/ von/ Friederike Friedmann./ Leipzig:/ F.A. Brockhaus./ 1855./
[16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 154.

V.

_Manfred_. Der Gefangene von Chillon, Hebräische Gesänge, u. Lyrische
Gedichte. Deutsch von A.R. Niele. Münster, Coppenrath. 1857. [16º.

[Kayser, 1859.]

VI.

Lord Byron's/ Mazeppa, Korsar und Beppo./ In das Deutsche übertragen/
von/ Wilhelm Schäffer./ _Stulta est elementia, quam tot ubique_/
_Vatibus occurras, perituræ parcere chartæ_./ Juvenal./ [Emblem--Griffin
with shield bearing motto "F.A.B. 1805."] Leipzig: F.A. Brockhaus./
1864./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 138.

VII.

Die Braut von Abydos./ Der Traum./ Zwei Gedichte./ von/ Lord Byron./ Im
Versmass des Originals übertragen/ von/ Dr. Otto Riedel./ Hamburg./
Hermann Grüning./ 1872./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 80.

VIII.

_Der Gefangene v. Chillon_. _Mazeppa_. Von Lord Byron.

[Kayser, 1877.]

_Note_.--No. 557 of the "Universal Bibliothek." Leipzig, 1871-1876.

IX.

_Der Gefangene v. Chillon_. _Parisina_. Zwei poet. Erzählungen, übers.
v. Otto Michaeli. Halle. 1887-1890. [8º.

_Note_.--Part of the "Bibl. der Gesamt-Litteratur des In-u. Auslandes."
[Kayser, 1891.]


_Hungarian_.

Byron Lord'/ Élete's Munkái./ Irta/ Petrichevich Horváth Lázár./
Harmadik Rész./ Pesten./ Nyomtatta Landerer és Heckenast./ 1842./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 154 + Sajtó-hibák, p. [155].

_Note_.--The translations include _Mazeppa_; _The Dream_; and sixteen
lyrical pieces.


_Icelandic_.

Bandinginn Í Chillon/ og/ Dramurinn,/ Eptir/ Byron Lávard./ Steingrímur
Thorsteinson,/ Íslenzkadi./ Kaupmannahöfn./ Utgefandi Páll Sveinsson./
Prentad Hjá Louis Klein./ 1866./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 70.


_Italian_.

I.

Poemi/ di/ Lord G. Byron/ Tradotti dall' originale inglese/ Da/ Pietro
Isola/ Socio corrispondente/ della R. Accademia delle scienze ed arti di
Alessandria./ Primo volume/ Lugano/ coi tipi di Francesco Veladini e
Comp./ 1832./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. 221 + Note, Indice, pp. [222]-[224]. N.B.--Pp. 1-19 are not
numbered.

Vol. II.: pp. 298 + Indice, p. [299], Pp. 1-13 are not numbered.

II.

Poemi/ di/ Giorgio Lord Byron/ Recati in italiano/ da/ Giuseppe
Nicolini/ con alcuni componimenti originali/ del traduttore./ Milano/
Per Giuseppe Crespi e C./ 1834./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 433 + Indice, p. [435].

_Note_.--The Title-vignette is a portrait of Lord Byron.

III.

Poemi/ di Giorgio Lord Byron/ Recati in italiano/ Da Giuseppe Nicolini/
Nuova edizione eseguita su quella del 1837/ Riveduta ed aumentata dal
traduttore/ Vol. I./ [Vol. II.] Milano/ Presso la ditta Angelo Bonfanti
1842/ [12º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. 283.

Vol. II.: pp. 255.

IV.

_Poemi e novelle_. Milano, Sonzogno. 1882. [16º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 107.

V.

Opere/ Edite e postume/ di Giacinto Casella/ Già Accademico della
Crusca/ Con prefazione del Prof. Alessandro d'Ancona,/ Uno scritto
critico sul Properzio del Prof. G. Rigutini/ E una notizia biografica
sull' autore/ Scritta da sua moglie./ Due Vol.--Vol. I./ Parte I.--Il
Pellegrinaggio d'Aroldo, la Parisina,/ il Beppo e la sposa d'Abido, di
Lord Byron.--Sopra M. Aurora., di S. Fenzi./ Un frammento dal _Lambros_,
di D. Solomos./ Parte II.--Liriche originali./ Firenze,/ Tipografia di
G. Barbéra./ 1884./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. lvi. + 438 + Errata Corrige, p. [439].

Vol. II.: pp. xviii. + 450 [Text = pp. 3-450] + _Indice_, etc., p.
[451].

_Note_.--The translations of _Childe Harold_, _Parisina_, _Beppo_, and
the _Bride, etc._, are on pp. 1-311 of the first part of the first
volume.

VI.

_Misteri e canti_; Caino; Parisina; Un sogno. Traduzione di Andrea
Maffei. Milano, Hoepli. 1886. [64º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 198.

VII.

_Misteri, novelle e liriche_. Traduzione di Andrea Maffei. Firenze, Le
Monnier. 1890. [64º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

_Collation_--

Pp. xxxviii. + 441.


_Polish_.

I.

_Poemata i powieści_ ... Przez B. hr. K. [Brunona hr. Kicińskiego]. Tom.
1. (Obłęźenie Koryntu, Korsarz.) _Warszawa_, 1820. [8º.

_Part of "Biblioteka Romansów," etc. Wyd. przez W. Malccką_.

II.

_Powieści_, przekład Wandy Maleckiéj. (Mazepa, przek. H. Dembińskiego,
Paryzyna, Giaur, Upiór.) pp. 196. _w druk, J. Wróblewskiego: Warszawa_,
1828. [8º.

_Wybór Romansów, wyd. W. Maleckiéj. Tom. XIII_.

[Another edition.] _Warszawa_, 1831. [8º.

III.

_Paryzyna_, Kalmar i Orla, dwa poemata ... Przekład Ign. Szydłowskiego.
pp. 58.

_druk. J. Zawadzkiego: Wilno_, 1834. [8º.

IV.

Poezye/ Lorda Byrona/ tłumaczone/ Giaur/ przez/ Adama Mickiewicza,/
Korsarz/ Przez/ Edwarda Odyńca./ Wydanie Alexandra Jełowickiego./ W.
Pary[.z]u./ 1835/ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xiv. + 202.

V.

Tłómaczenia/ Antoniego Edwarda/ Odyńca./ Tom Drugi./ Narzeczona z
Abydos./ W Lipsku/ u Breitkopfa i Haertela./ 1838./

_Collation_--

Pp. 216.

_Note_.--The translation of the _Bride of Abydos_, with the Notes, is on
pp. 1-83 of this volume.

VI.

Tłomaczenia/ Antoniego Edwarda/ Odyńca./ Tom Trzeci./ Korsarz./ Niebo i
Ziemia./ W Lipsku/ u Breitkopfa i Haertela./ 1841./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 201.

_Note_.--The translation of the _Corsair_, with Notes, is on pp. 1-112;
of _Heaven and Earth_, pp. 116-201.

VII.

_Poemata_. Z oryginału przełožył Ant. Zawadzki. (Żale Tassa; Werner;
Narzeczona z Abydos; Wyspa.) pp. 392. _H. Skimborowicz: Warszawa_, 1846.
[8º.

VIII.

Pięć Poematów/ Lorda Birona/ Przełožył/ Franciszek Dzieržykraj
Morawski./ Nakladem Autora./ Leszno./ Drukiem Ernesta Günthera./ 1853./
[8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 272.

_Note_.--The translations include _Manfred_; _Mazeppa_; _The Siege,
etc._; _Parisina_; and _The Prisoner, etc_.

IX.

KRUZER (Karol) Przekłady i rymy własne. 5 tom. _druk. E. Skiwskiego:
Warszawa_, 1876. [8º.

Tom. 3. Parisina. Lara. Kain. Poezje ulotne.

Tom. 4. Poezje ulotne Lorda Byrona.


_Portuguese_.

Traducçōes/ Poeticas/ de/ Francisco José Pinheiro Guimarāes/ Bacharel em
sciencias sociaes e juridicas/ Childe Harold e Sardanapalo,/ De Lord
Byron;/ O Roubo da Madeixa, de Pope;/ Hernani, de Victor Hugo/ Rio de
Janeiro/ Typographia universal de Laemmert/ Rua dos Invalidos, 61 B./
1863./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 636.

_Note_.--The Title-page, a Dedication, and _O Sonho_, an imitation of
Byron's _Dream_, are unpaged. The translations of _Childe Harold_,
Cantos I.-IV., and of _Sardanapalus_, are on pp. 1-424.


_Roumanian_.

Din Scrierile/ Loui/ Lord Byron/ 3 P^t/ Tradduce/ de/ J. Eliad/
Boukouresti/ In Tipographia loui Eliad/ 1834/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 74.

_Note_.--The Title-page, in old Roumanian character, has been
transliterated. The translations consist of _The Prisoner of Chillon_,
_The Lament of Tasso_, and _Beppo_. The volume concludes with a
Half-title, _The Vampire_.


_Spanish_.

I.

Odas/ A Napoleon,/ Por lord Byron./ Traduccion castellana./
[Emblem--eagle flying to the sun.] Paris,/ Libreria americana,/ Calle
del Temple, Nº 69./ 1830./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 60.

_Note_.--The translations include the _Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte_;
_Napoleon's Farewell_; _On the Star of "The Legion of Honour"_; _From
the French_; _Ode from the French_.

II.

Biblioteca Jané./ Poemas/ de Lord/ Byron,/ Con notas, comentarios y
aclaraciones/ Primera version española, en vista de la ultima edicion/
Por Ricardo Canales./ Lara.--El Sitio de
Corinto.--Parisina.--Mazeppa./--La Peregrinacion de Childe--Harold.--Las
Lamentaciones/ del Tasso.--Beppo./ Barcelona./ Jané Hermanos, Editores./
Ronda de San Antonia, 58./ [?1876.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 352 + _Indice_, p. [353].

III.

Cuatro poemas/ de/ Lord Byron/ Traducidos en verso castellano/ Por/
Antonio Sellen/ Parisina.--El prisionero de Chillon.--/ Los lamentos del
Tasso.--La novia de Abydos/ New York./ Imprenta y librería de N. Ponce
Leon, 40 y 42 Broadway/ 1877/ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xiii. + 15-111.

IV.

D. Juan/ El Hijo de Doña Inés/ Poema de/ Lord Byron/ seguido de/ Las
lamentaciones del Tasso/ del proprio autor/ Version de/ J.A.R./
Ilustrada con dibujos à la pluma/ Por R. Escaler/ Barcelona/
Administracion: Nueva San Francisco, 11 y 13/ 1883/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 9-414 + _Indice_, p. [415].

_Note_.--Part of the "Biblioteca Amena é Instructiva."




COLLECTIONS OF DRAMAS.

I.

Dramas/ By/ Lord Byron./ In Two Volumes./ Vol. I./ London:/ John Murray,
Albemarle Street./ 1837./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. 403.

Vol. II.: pp. 391.

_Note_.--Vol. I. contains _Manfred_; _Marino Faliero_; _Heaven and
Earth_; _Sardanapalus_. Vol. II. contains _The Two Foscari_; _Cain_;
_The Deformed Transformed_; _Werner_. The Title-vignette on the
illustrated Title-page of Vol. I. is "Fall of the Staubach," engraved by
E. Finden, from a drawing by G. Bulmer from a sketch by Mrs. Somerville.
These volumes, together with the _Miscellanies_, _Tales_, etc., were
bound in green cloth, with Lord Byron's arms with supporters stamped in
gold on one side.

II.

Dramas./ By Lord Byron./ In Two Volumes.--Vol. I./ Containing/ Manfred./
Marino Faliero./ Heaven and Earth./ Sardanapalus./ London:/ John Murray,
Albemarle Street./ 1853./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. 325. The Imprint (_Bradbury & Evans, Printers,
Whitefriars_.) is at the foot of p. 325.

Vol. II.: pp. 318. The Imprint (_London: Bradbury & Evans, Printers,
Whitefriars_.) is at the foot of p. 318.

_Note_.--Vol. II. contains _The Two Foscari_, _Cain_, _The Deformed
Transformed_, and _Werner_.




TRANSLATIONS OF COLLECTIONS OF DRAMAS.


_German_.

Lord Byrons/ Dramatische Werke./ Deutsch/ von/ W. Grüzmacher./ Manfred.
Kain. Himmel und Erde. Sardanapal./ Hildburghausen./ Verlag des
Bibliographischen Instituts./ 1870./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 323 + Inhalt, p. [324].

_Note_.--No. 112 of the "Bibliothek Ausländischer Klassiker."


_Italian_.

I.

Marino Faliero/ E/ I Due Foscari/ Tragedie/ di/ Lord G. Byron/ Versione
dall' originale inglese/ del/ P.G.B. Cereseto/ Delle scuole pie./ Savona
1845./ Presso Luigi Sambolino/ Editore-librajo./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 304.

II.

Tragedie/ di/ Giorgio Lord Byron/ Traduzione/ del/ Cav. Andrea Maffei./
Sardanapalo.--Marino Faliero./ I Due Foscari./ Firenze./ Felice Le
Monnier./ 1862./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 493 + Indice, p. [495].


_Spanish_.

Poemas dramáticos/ De Lord Byron/ Caín.--Sardanápalo.--Manfredo./
Traducidos en verso castellano/ Por D. José Alcalá Galiano/ con una
carta prólogo de/ D. Marcellino Menéndez y Pelayo/ Madrid/ Imprenta de
A. Pérez Dubrull/ Flor Baja, núm. 22./ 1886./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxxvi. + 382.

_Note_.--Vol. 45 of the "Coleccion de Escritores Castellanos. "POEMS,
DRAMAS, AND COLLECTIONS OF POEMS.


_The Age of Bronze_.

The/ Age of Bronze;/ or,/ Carmen Seculare et Annus Haud Mirabilis./
"Impar _Congressus_ Achilli."/ London, 1823:/ Printed for John Hunt,/
22, Old Bond street./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _London: Printed by C.H. Reynell, Broad Street, Golden
Square_./), pp. 1, 2; Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Text, pp. 5-36. The
Imprint (_London:/ C.H. Reynell, Printer, 45, Broad-Street,
Golden-Square_.) is at the foot of p. 36.

_Note_.--The Second and Third Editions are identical with the First,
save that in the Third Edition the Imprint at the foot of p. 36 runs
thus: _London:/ Printed by C.H. Reynell, Broad Street, Golden-Square_. A
page of advertisements ("_Works about to be published by_ Mr. John Hunt,
22, _Old Bond Street_") follows p. 36 in the Second Edition. The _Age of
Bronze_ was reissued by John Hunt in 1825 and in 1830 (the Miscellaneous
Works, Part II. pp. 1-35), and by (?) W. Dugdale, 1824, together with
other poems; and, in France, by A. and W. Galignani, Paris, 1823 (12º.),
but was not included in any of John Murray's Collected Editions till
1831.


_Beppo_.

I.

Beppo,/ A Venetian Story./ ROSALIND. Farewell, Monsieur Traveller: Look,
you lisp, and wear/ Strange suits; disable all the benefits of your own
country; be out of love/ with your Nativity, and almost chide God for
making you that countenance/ you are; or I will scarce think that you
have swam in a GONDOLA./ AS YOU LIKE IT, Act iv. Sc. 1./ _Annotation of
the Commentators_./ That is, been at _Venice_, which was much visited by
the young English/ gentlemen of those times, and was then what _Paris_
is _now_--the seat of all dissoluteness. S.A./ Second Edition./ London:/
John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1818./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 49. The Imprint (_T. Davison, Lombard-Street, Whitefriars,
London_./) is at the foot of the Reverse of the Half-title.

_Note_ (1).--The Text numbers 95 stanzas.

_Note_ (2).--"Beppo, a Venetian Story. [Quotation.] London: _John
Murray, Albemarle Street_. 1818. 8vo. Pp. 49" (the First Edition), is
included in the catalogue of the _Rowfant Library_, 1886, p. 146.

II.

Beppo,/ A Venetian Story./ By Lord Byron./ [Motto, nine lines, as
above.] Fifth Edition./ London:/ John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1818./
[8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 51. The Imprint, as above, is at the foot of p. 51. The Imprint (_T.
Davison, Lombard-Street, Whitefriars_./) is at the foot of the Reverse
of the Half-title.

_Note_.--The Text numbers 99 stanzas. Byron sent four additional
stanzas, viz. stanzas xxviii., xxxviii., xxxix., lxxx., to Murray
_circ._ March 9, 1818. A Second Edition of Beppo, _vide supra_, was
published March 12, 1818, and the fifth, May 30, 1818. The intervening
editions, third and fourth, were not advertised in the _Morning
Chronicle_, _Morning Post_, _Courier_, and, in the absence of direct
evidence, it may be conjectured that the additional stanzas first
appeared in the Fifth Edition. A Sixth Edition, and a Seventh Edition
identical with the Fifth Edition, were issued in 1818.

III.

_Beppo; a Venetian Story_. Boston. 1818. [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 36.

IV.

_Beppo, A Venetian Story_. Paris, A. and W. Galignani. 1821. [12º.

[Quérard, 1827.]


_Translations of Beppo_.


_Dutch_.

Vertalingen/ En/ Navolgingen/ In Poezy/ door/ Mr. J. Van Lennep./
[Motto, seven lines.] Te Amsterdam, bij/ P. Meljer Warnars./ 1834./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Beppo,/ Eine Venetiansche/ Vertelling./ Naar het Engelsch/ van/ Lord
Byron./ pp. 119-159.

_Note_.--The Title-vignette is the Muse of Poetry with Cupids and
scrolls labelled Walter Scott, Moore, Byron, and Shakespeare.


_French_.

S. Clogenson/ Beppo/ Poëme/ de Byron/ Traduit en vers français, avec
texte anglais en regard/ Paris,/ Michel Lévy frères, libraires
éditeurs/ Rue Vivienne, 2 bis, et boulevard des Italiens, 15/ à la
librairie-nouvelle./ 1865./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 159 + Notes, pp. [161, 162].


_Russian_.

Беппо ... пер. Д. Минаева. Современникъ, [Cyrillic: Beppo ... per. D.
Minaeva Sovremennik"] 1863. No. 8.]


_Spanish_.

_Beppo, novela veneciana_, por L.B. traduccion castellana. Paris, 1830.
[8º.

[_Le Moniteur_, etc., 1845.]


_Swedish_.

Beppo,/ En Venetiansk Historia/ AF/ Lord Byron./ Af Lord Byron./
Öfversättning/ Af/ Talis Qualis./ Stockholm,/ J.L. Brudins Förlag./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 48. (A Preliminary Note, _n.p._, on fly-leaf.)

_Note_.--Part (No. 5) of "Byron's Poetiska Berättelser," 1853, etc.


_Bride of Abydos_.

I.

The/ Bride of Abydos./ A Turkish Tale./ By Lord Byron./ Had we never
loved so kindly,/ Had we never loved so blindly,/ Never met or never
parted,/ We had ne'er been broken-hearted./ Burns./ London/ _Printed by
T. Davison, Whitefriars_, For John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1813./
[8º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf; Dedication, one leaf; Text, pp. 1-60; Notes, pp. 61-72.
The Imprint (_T. Davison, Lombard Street,/ Whitefriars, London/_) is at
the foot of p. 72.

_Note_.--Canto I. numbers 483 lines; Canto II., 724 lines (_not_, as
numbered, 722 lines, line 492 being numbered 490).

II.

The/ Bride of Abydos./ A Turkish Tale./ By Lord Byron./ [Motto, five
lines, as above.] Second Edition./ London:/ _Printed by T. Davison,
Whitefriars,/_ For John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1813./ [8º.

_Collation_--

_Vide supra_.

_Note_.--Canto II. numbers 730 lines (not, as numbered, 724). On p. 45,
after line 401, six additional lines ("Blest as the Muezzin's, ...
long-loved voice endears") are inserted; but line 414 is numbered 410,
and the wrong enumeration of the First Edition is repeated. A Third
Edition is identical with the Second.

III.

The/ Bride of Abydos,/ etc. Fourth Edition,/ etc. 1813./ [8º.

_Collation_--

_Vide supra_.

_Note_.--Canto II. numbers 732 lines. The additions in the Fourth
Edition are lines 662, 663 (p. 157), "Hark---- to the hurried," etc. The
enumeration of the lines is correct. A Fifth Edition is identical with
the Fourth.

IV.

The/ Bride of Abydos,/ etc. Sixth Edition,/ etc. 1814./ [8º.

This edition is identical with the Second and Third Editions. Lines 622,
623 are omitted. Seventh, Eighth, and Tenth Editions, issued in 1814,
are identical with the Fourth. An Eleventh Edition was issued in 1815.

V.

The Bride of Abydos./ A Turkish Tale./ By Lord Byron./ Had we never
loved so kindly,/ Had we never loved so blindly,/ Never met or never
parted,/ We had ne'er been broken-hearted./ Burns./ Philadelphia:/
Published by Moses Thomas,/ No. 52 Chestnut-Street./ William Fry,
Printer./ 1814./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 72.

VI.

The Bride of Abydos:/ A Turkish Tale,/ By Lord Byron./ [Motto.] [London,
1844.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 1-39.

_Note_.--Part of "Clarke's Home Library."

_Translations of Bride of Abydos_.


_Bohemian_.

Lorda Byrona/ Nevěsta z Abydu./ Pověst turecká./ Z anglického prěložil/
Josef V. Frič./ V Praze./ Tisk a náklad Jaroslava Pospíšila./ 1854./
[16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 66.


_Bulgarian_.

Абидонска Невѣста, поболгарилъ Н.Д. Катрамов' Москва [Cyrillic:
Abidonska Neviesta, pobolgaril" N.D. Katramov". Moskva], 1850.


_Dutch_.

De/ Abydeensche/ Verloofde./ Uit het Engelsch van/ Lord Bijron/ door/
Mr. J. Van Lennep./ Te Amsterdam, bij/ P. Meijer Warnars./ 1826./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. iv. + 67.

_Note_.--The Title-vignette represents a pillar with skull and
cross-bones struck by lightning. The "ghastly-turbaned head" (line 1208)
hovers above. There is a Half-title, with Motto and Transl., on the
Reverse.


_French_.

I.

_Zuleika et Selim, on la vierge d'Abydos_: par lord Byron: trad, de
l'anglais par Léon Thiessé; et suivi de notes augmentées du _Fare Thee
Well_, et autres morceaux du même auteur. A Paris, chez Plancher. 1816.
[12º.

[_B. de la France_, Oct. 5, 1816.]

II.

_La Fiancée d'Abydos_, poëme en 11 chants, avec des notes; imité de
l'angl. par Aug. Clavareau, Gand, Houdin. 1823. [8º.

[Quérard, 1827.]


_German_.

I.

_Die Braut von Abydos_. Deutsch. v. Dr. J. v. Adrian. Frankfurt-a-M.,
Sauerländer. 1819. [8º.

[_Centralblatt_, 1890, vii. 456.]

II.

_Die Braut von Abydos_, eine türkische Sage. Getreu in's Deutsche übers.
u. seinen Schülern gewidmet von Finck de Bailleul. Landau. 1843. [8º.

[Kayser, 1848.]

III.

_Die Braut von Abydos_. Aus der engl. in freie, deutsche Dichtg.
übertrag. von Frdr. Kley. Halle, Schmidt. 1884. [8º.

[Kayser, 1887.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 62.


_Hungarian_.

_Az abydoszi ara_. [_The Bride of Abydos_, transl. by Tercsi.] Hangok a
multból és Byrontol énekek. pp. 25-66. B'pest. 1884.

[_Egyetemes Philologiai Közlöny_, 1901, xxv. 227.]


_Italian_.

_La fidanzata d'Abido_. Traduzione di Giov. Giovio. Milano, Guglielmini.
1854. [8º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]


_Polish_.

_Dziewica z Abydos, poema_. Prezkt. Wł. hr. Ostrowskiego. Warszawa,
Glücksberg. 1818. [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 94.


_Russian_.

I.

Абидосская НевѢста. Турецкая повѢстъ М. Каченовскій. Выборъ изъ
сочиненій лорда Байрона. [Cyrillic: Abidosskaya Neviesta. Turetskaya
poviest". M. Kachenovskiĭ. Vyibor" iz" sochineniye lorda Bairona.] 1821.

_Note_.--_Bride of Abydos_, pp. 177-255.

II.

Невѣста Абидосская. Турецкая повѢстъ лорда Байрона. Перевелъ съ
англійскаго Иванъ Коэловъ. [Cyrillic: Neviesta Abidosskaya. Turetskaya
poviest" lorda Bairona. Perevel" s" angliyeskago Ivan" Kozlov".]
pp. i.-x. 1-92. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: S.-Peterburg"], 1826. 8º.

Second Edition С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: S.-Peterburg"], 1831. 16º.

III.

Абидосская Невѣста ... Передѣлана ... М. Политковской Москва [Cyrillic:
Abidosskaya Neviesta ... Perediellana ... M. Politkovskoye. Moskva],
1859.

_Collation_--

Pp. 1-57.


_Swedish_.

Bruden Från Abydos,/ En Turkisk Berättelse/ Af/ Lord Byron./
Öfversättning./ Stockholm,/ J.L. Brudins Förlag./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 72.

_Note_.--No. 7 of "Byron's Poetiska Berättelser," 1853, etc.


_Cain_.

[_Note_.--_Cain, A Mystery_ was published by John Murray, together with
_Sardanapalus, A Tragedy_, and _The Two Foscari, A Tragedy_, Dec. 21,
1821; _vide post, Sardanapalus, A Tragedy_, No. i. (p. 293).]

I.

Cain;/ A Mystery./ By the author of Don Juan./ "Now the Serpent was more
subtil than any beast of/ the field which the Lord God had made."/ Gen.
iii. I./ London:/ _Printed for the Booksellers_,/ By W. Benbow,
Castle-Street, Leicester-Square./ 1822./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. vii. + 8-93.

II.

Cain;/ A Mystery./ By Lord Byron./ To which is added/ a Letter from the
Author/ To/ Mr Murray, the original Publisher./ "Now the Serpent was
more subtil than any Beast of the Field which the Lord/ God had made."/
Gen. iii. I./ Second Edition./ London:/ Printed and Published by R.
Carlile, 55, Fleet Street./ 1822./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. iv. + 5-23 + Letter, etc., p. [24].

III.

Cain;/ A Mystery./ By Lord Byron./ "Now the Serpent was more subtil than
any beast of the/ field which the Lord God had made."/ Gen. iii. I./
London:/ Printed for the Booksellers,/ _By H. Gray, No. 2, Barbican._/
1822./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. vii. + 8-72.

IV.

_Cain, A Mystery_. New York. 1822. [24.

_Collation_--

Pp. 100.

V.

_Cain, a Mystery_. Paris, A. and W. Galignani. 1822. [12º.

[Quérard, 1827.]

VI.

Cain,/ A Mystery./ By Lord Byron./ "Now the Serpent was more subtil than
any beast of the/ field which the Lord God had made."/ Gen. iii. I./
London:/ Printed for the Booksellers,/ Published by W. Benbow, 252, High
Holborn./ 1824./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. vii. + 8-85.

VII.

Lord Byron's/ Cain, A Mystery:/ with/ Notes:/ Wherein the/ Religion of
the Bible/ Is considered, in reference to acknowledged/ Philosophy and
Reason./ By Harding Grant;/ _Author of "Chancery Practice."_/ "Judge
Righteous Judgment,"/ "Prove all things."/ "Justify the ways of God."/
London:/ William Crofts, 19, Chancery Lane./ 1830./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xvi. + 432.

VIII.

Cain;/ A Mystery./ By Lord Byron./ "Now the Serpent was more subtil than
any beast of the field/ which the Lord God had made."--Gen. iii. I./ To
which is added/ A Letter from the Author/ To/ Mr. Murray, the original
Publisher./ London:/ J. Watson, 33, Windmill Street,/ Finsbury./ 1832./
[12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. iv. + 5-47 + Letter, etc., p. [48].

IX.

_Cain, a Mystery_. Breslau, Kern. 1840. [16º.

[Kayser, 1841.]

X.

Cain./ By/ Lord Byron./ "I tread on air, and sink not; yet I fear to
sink."/ New and Complete Edition.--Price One Penny./ London: J. Dicks,
313, Strand; and all Booksellers./ New York Samuel French & Son, 122,
Nassau Street--Sole Agents./ 1883, etc./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 143-160.

_Note_.--No. 203 of "Dicks' Standard Plays."




_Translations of Cain_.


_Bohemian_.

Kain/ Dramatická Báseň/ Lorda Byrona/ Prěložil/ Jose Durdík/ V Praze/
Tisk a náklad dra. Ed. Grégra/ 1871/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 117.


_French_.

Caïn,/ Mystère dramatique/ En trois actes,/ De Lord Byron,/ Traduit en
vers français,/ Et réfuté dans une suite de remarques philosophiques/ et
critiques;/ Précédé/ d'une lettre adressée à Lord Byron, sur les motifs/
et le but de cet ouvrage,/ Par Fabre d'Olivet./ à Paris,/ Chez Servier,
libraire,/ rue de L'Oratoire, No. 6./ 1823./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 248 + p. [249], Table (R. "Fautes à corriger").


_German_.

I.

_Cain, ein Mysterium_. Deutsch v. G. Parthey. Berlin, Nicola'ische
Buchh. 1831. [12º.

[_Centralblatt_, vii. 468.]

II.

_Cain. Ein Mysterium_. Von Lord Byron. Frei übers. v. Adf. Seubert.
Leipzig. 1871-1876.

[Kayser, 1877.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 70.

_Note_.--No. 779 of _Universal Bibliothek_.

_Hebrew_.

קין, שיר-חזיון על-פי כתבי הקדש/מאת/לורד בירון/תרגם מאנגלית
                     לעברית/דוד פרישמן/ווארשא תר"ס

[Hebrew: Kine, shir-chizayon al-pi kitvey hakodesh / me'et / Lord Byron
/ tirgem me'anglit le'ivrit / David Frishman / Varsha TR"S ]

_Collation_--

Pp. xl. + 44.


_Hungarian_.

I.

_Kain_. [_Cain_, transl. by Ilona Györy.] Franklin-Társulat 1895.

[_Eg. Phil. Köz_., 1901, xxv. 222.]

II.

_Kain_. [_Cain_, transl. by Lajos Mikes.] (_Magyar Könyvtár_, p. 128.)
B'pest, Lampel. 1898.

[_Eg. Phil. Köz_., 1901, xxv. 224.]


_International Language_.

Kain./ Mistero/ de/ Lord Byron/ (Bajron)./ Tradukis A. Kofman./
Nurnbergo./ Presejo de W. Tümmel./ 1896./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. ix. + 102.


_Italian_.


_Caino: mistero_, tradotto da Andrea Maffei. Milano, Pirola. 1852-6.
[8º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]


_Polish_.

Kain./ Poemat Dramatyczny/ Lorda Bajrona/ W trzech aktach/ przełożyl/
Adam Pajgert./ A waż był chytrzejszy nad wszystkie/ zwierzęta polne,
które uczynił Pan Bóg./ Genezis R. III. w. I./ Lwów/ Nakładem
Wydawnictwa Dziennika Literackiego./ 1868./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 125.


_Russian_.

I.

Каинъ ... Переводъ Ефрена Барышева. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Kain" ...
Perevod" Efrena barysheva. S.-Peterburg"], 1881.

II.

Каинъ ... Переводъ П.А. Каленова. Москва [Cyrillic: Kain" ... Perevod"
P.A. Kalenova. Moskva], 1883.


_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_.

I.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage./ A Romaunt./ By/ Lord Byron./ L'univers est
une espèce de livre, dont on n'a lu que la première page quand on n'a vu
que son pays./ J'en ai feuilleté un assez grand nombre, que j'ai trouvé
également mauvaises. Cet examen ne m'a point/ été infructueux. Je
haïssais ma patrie. Toutes les impertinences des peuples divers, parmi
lesquels j'ai vécu,/ m'ont réconcilié avec elle. Quand je n'aurais tiré
d'autre bénéfice de mes voyages que celui-là, je n'en re/gretterais ni
les frais, ni les fatigues./ _Le Cosmopolite_./ London:/ Printed for
John Murray, 32, Fleet-Street;/ William Blackwood, Edinburgh; and John
Cumming, Dublin./ _By Thomas Davison, White-Friars./_ 1812./ [4º.

_Collation_--

Title, one page, pp. i., ii.; Preface, pp. iii.-vi.; Cont. (_Errata_ on
Reverse); Sec. Half-title, pp. 1, 2; Text, pp. 3-226 + two pages of
publisher's advertisements, pp. [227, 228]. The Imprint (_T. Davison,
Lombard Street,/ Whitefriars, London./_) is at the foot of p. [228].

_Contents_--

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, Canto I                                p. 1
Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, Canto II                              p. 59
Notes to Canto I                                                 p. 111
Notes to Canto II                                                p. 119
Poems--
I. Written in an Album                                           p. 165
II. To...                                                        p. 166
III. Stanzas                                                     p. 169
IV. Stanzas                                                      p. 171
V. Written at Athens                                             p. 177
VI. Written after Swimming, etc.                                 p. 178
VII. Song                                                        p. 181
VIII. Translation of a Greek War Song                            p. 183
IX. Translation of a Romaic Song                                 p. 186
X. Written Beneath a Picture                                     p. 189
XI. On Parting                                                   p. 190
XII. To Thyrza                                                   p. 192
XIII. Stanzas                                                    p. 195
XIV. To Thyrza                                                   p. 197
Appendix--
Romaic Books and Authors                                         p. 203
Specimens of the Romaic                                          p. 207
Fac Simile of a Romaic Letter [inserted between
Cont. and Half-title]

II.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage./ A Romaunt./ By/ Lord Byron./ [Motto from
_Le Cosmopolite_, seven lines.] The Second Edition./ London:/ Printed
for John Murray, Fleet Street;/ William Blackwood, Edinburgh; and John
Cumming,/ Dublin./ _By Thomas Davison, White-Friars._/ 1812./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title; Title, one leaf; Preface; Cont., pp. i.-xii.; Note on the
Errors in the Inscriptions at Orchomenus, _n.p._; Text, pp. 1-300. The
Imprint (_T. Davison_,/ _Lombard Street, Whitefriars, London_./) is at
the foot of p. 300.

_Contents_--

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, Cantos I. (93 stanzas),            pp. 3-201
II. (88 stanzas) (N.)
_Poems_ (as in First Ed., Nos. I.-XIV.)                      pp. 205-237
XV. Euthanasia                                                    p. 241
XVI. Stanzas ("And thou art dead," etc.)                          p. 244
XVII. Stanzas ("If sometimes," etc.)                              p. 249
XVIII. On a Cornelian Heart, etc.                                 p. 252
XIX. To a Youthful Friend                                         p. 253
XX. To ---- ("Well! thou art happy")                              p. 260
Appendix                                                          p. 267
Specimens of the Romaic                                           p. 273
Fac Simile of a Romaic Letter [inserted between
Half-title and Title]

III.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage,/ A Romaunt: and/ Other Poems./ By/ Lord
Byron./ [Motto from _Le Cosmopolite_, six lines.] Third Edition./
London: _Printed by T. Davison, Whitefriars._/ For John Murray, Fleet
Street;/ W. Blackwood, Edinburgh; and J. Cumming, Dublin./ 1812./ [8º.

_Note_.--Collation and Cont. are identical with those of the Second
Edition. The Note on the Errors in the Inscriptions at Orchomenus is
omitted. The Fac Simile of a Romaic Letter is inserted at the end of the
volume, after p. 300.

IV.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage,/ a Romaunt:/ and/ Other Poems./ By Lord
Byron./ [Motto from _Le Cosmopolite_, six lines.] Fourth Edition./
London:/ _Printed by T. Davison, Whitefriars_,/ For John Murray, Fleet
Street;/ William Blackwood, and J. Ballantyne and Co. Edin-/ Burgh; and
J. Cumming, Dublin./ 1812./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Preface, pp. v.-ix.; Addition to the
Preface, pp. ix.-xii.; Cont., pp. xi., xii. (_sic_); Text, pp. 1-300.
The Imprint is at the foot of p. 300.

_Note_.--The Cont. are identical with those of the Second Edition. The
Fac Simile of the Romaic Letter is inserted at the beginning of the
volume (in a bound copy between pp. 184, 185).

V.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage,/ A Romaunt:/ and/ Other Poems./ By/ Lord
Byron./ [Motto from _Le Cosmopolite_, six lines.] Fifth Edition./
London:/ _Printed by T. Davison, Whitefriars_,/ For John Murray,
(_removed to_) Albemarle-Street;/ William Blackwood, Edinburgh; and J.
Cumming,/ Dublin./ 1812./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, pp. iii., iv.; Title, one leaf, pp. v., vi.; Preface, pp.
vii.-xi.; Addition to the Preface, pp. xi.-xiv.; Cont., pp. xv.-xvi.;
Text, pp. 1-300. The Imprint is at the foot of p. 300.

_Note_.--The Cont. are identical with those of the Second Edition; but
the Fac Simile of the Romaic Letter is not mentioned in the Table of
Cont. nor inserted in the volume.

VI.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage,/ A Romaunt:/ and/ Other Poems./ By Lord
Byron./ [Motto--_Le Cosmopolite_.] The First American Edition./
Philadelphia:/ Published by Moses Thomas,/ No. 52, Chestnut-Street./
William Fry, Printer. 1812./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 179.

_Note_.--"For sale in Philadelphia, by the publisher, M. Carey, and
Bradford and Inskip; in New York, by Inskip and Bradford, and J.
Eastburn; in Boston, by Munroe and Francis, and West and Blake; and in
Baltimore, by F. Lucas, Junr. William Fry, Printer. 1812."

VII.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage,/ A Romaunt:/ And/ Other Poems./ By/ Lord
Byron./ [Motto from _Le Cosmopolite_, six lines.] The Sixth Edition./
London:/ _Printed by T. Davison, Whitefriars_,/ For John Murray,
Bookseller to the Admiralty,/ And to the Board of Longitude,/ 50,
Albemarle-Street./ 1813./ [8º.

_Note_.--The Collation and Cont. are identical with those of the Fifth
Edition; but in the Table of Cont. the words "Fac Simile of a Romaic
Letter" occur as in the Fourth Edition; but in the copy belonging to
the British Museum the letter is not inserted. In the Sixth Edition the
words _Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_ are printed in Roman type, and the
words _A Romaunt_ in Gothic type, whereas in all other editions
_Childe_, etc., is in Gothic, and _A Romaunt_ in Roman type.

VIII.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage,/ A Romaunt:/ And/ Other Poems./ By/ Lord
Byron./ [Motto from _Le Cosmopolite_, six lines.] Seventh Edition./
London:/ _Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars_,/ For John Murray,
Albemarle-Street,/1814./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title; Title, one leaf; Preface, etc.; Cent., pp. iii.-xvi.; Text,
pp. 1-296. The Imprint (_T. Davison, Lombard-Street,/ Whitefriars,
London_./) is at the foot of p. 296. The Fac Simile of the Romaic Letter
is inserted between pp. 294, 295.

_Contents_--

To Ianthe                                                           p. 3
Childe Harold's, etc., Canto I. (93 stanzas)                        p. 6
Childe Harold's, etc., Canto II. (98 stanzas)                      p. 65
Notes to Canto I.                                                 p. 121
Notes to Canto II.                                                p. 125
Poems--
Nos. I.-XX. as in Eds. II.-VI.                                    p. 191
XXI. From the Portuguese                                          p. 245
XXII. Impromptu in Reply to a Friend                              p. 246
XXIII. Address to Drury-Lane Theatre                              p. 246
XXIV. To Time                                                     p. 250
XXV. Translation of a Romaic Love Song                            p. 252
XXVI. A Song ("Thou art not false," etc.)                         p. 255
XXVII. Origin of Love                                             p. 257
XXVIII. Remember him                                              p. 257
XXIX. Lines inscribed upon a Cup formed from a Skull              p. 261
Romaic Books and Authors                                          p. 264
Specimen of the Romaic                                            p. 271

IX.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage,/ A Romaunt:/ And/ Other Poems./ By/ Lord
Byron./ [Motto from _Le Cosmopolite_, five lines.] Eighth Edition./
London:/ Printed for John Murray, Albemarle-Street:/ _By Thomas Davison,
Whitefriars_./ 1814./ [8º.

_Collation_--Title, one leaf, pp. i., ii.; Preface, pp. iii.-vii.;
Addition to the Preface, pp. vii.-x; Cont., pp. xi., xii.; Text, pp.
1-296.

_Note_.--The Cont. are identical with those of the Seventh Edition.

X.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage,/ A Romaunt:/ And/ Other Poems./ By/ Lord
Byron./ [Motto from _Le Cosmopolite_, five lines.] Tenth Edition./
London:/ Printed for John Murray; Albemarle-Street,/ 1815./ [8º.

_Collation_--Title (R. _T. Davison, Lombard street/ Whitefriars,
London./_), pp. i., ii.; Preface, pp. iii.-vii.; Addition to the
Preface, pp. vii.-x.; Cont., pp. xi., xii.; Text, pp. 1-302. The Imprint
(_T. Davison, Lombard-Street, /Whitefriars, London._/) is in the centre
of p. [304].

_Note_.--The Cont. are identical with those of the Seventh Edition, save
for the insertion of a thirtieth (No. XXX., p. 263) poem, "On the Death
of Sir Peter Parker."

XI.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage./ Canto the Third./ By Lord Byron./ "Afin que
cette application vous forçât de penser à autre chose; il n'y a/ en
vérité de remède que celui-là et le temps."/ Lettre du Roi de Prusse à
D'Alembert, Sept. 7, 1776./ London:/ Printed for John Murray,
Albemarle-Street./ 1816./ [8º.

_Collation_--Half-title (R. Published THIS DAY in 8vo. 5_s_.6_d_./ THE
PRISONER OF CHILLON;/ A DREAM;/ And Other Poems./ By the Right Hon. Lord
Byron./ _T. Davison, Lombard Street,/ Whitefriars, London._/); Title,
one leaf; Text, pp. 1-79.

_Note_ (1).--The Imprint, as above, is at the foot of p. 79; and on the
reverse of p. 79, "List of the Poems," etc.

_Note_ (2).--_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_, Canto III., was published at
Boston, 1817, 16º, pp. 72; and, together with _The Prisoner of Chillon_
and other Poems, at Philadelphia, 1817, 16º.

XII.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage./ Canto the Fourth./ By Lord Byron./ Visto ho
Toscana, Lombardia, Romagna,/ Quel Monte che divide, e quel che serra/
Italia, e un mare e l'altro, che la bagna./ Ariosto, Satira iii./
London:/ John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1818./ [8º.

_Collation_--Title, pp. i., ii.; Dedication, pp. iii.-xiv.; Cont.,
_n.p._; Text, pp. 1-257. The Imprint (_T. Davison, Lombard-Street,
Whitefriars, London_.) is at the foot of p. [259].

_Contents_--

Childe Harold's, etc., Canto IV. [N.]                               p. 3
Poems. _Romance_, etc.                                            p. 240
Translation                                                       p. 241
Per Monaca. Sonetto di Vittorelli                                 p. 256
Translation                                                       p. 257

_Note_ (1).--In another copy, Cont., _n.p._, precedes the Dedication.

_Note_ (2).--_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_, Canto IV., to which are added
_Beppo_, and other Poems, was published at Philadelphia in 1818, 24º,
pp. 270.

XIII.

Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage./ Canto the Fourth./ By Lord Byron./
[Motto--Ariost., Sat. iii., four lines.] New York:/ Published by James
Eastburn and Co./ At the Literary Rooms, Broadway./ Clayton & Kingsland,
Printers./ 1818./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 143.

XIV.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage,/ A Romaunt:/ And/ Other Poems./ By/ Lord
Byron./ [Motto from _Le Cosmopolite_, six lines.] Eleventh Edition./
London:/ John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1819./ [8º.

_Note_.--The Collation of the preliminary matter is identical with that
of the Tenth Edition. The Cont. are also identical, save that on p. 274
a note headed "Conclusion" (on pp. 301, 302 of the Tenth Edition) is
omitted. The Imprint (_London:/ Printed by Thomas Davison,
Whitefriars./_) is at the foot of p. 274.

XV.

Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage./ A Romaunt,/ In Four Cantos./ By the Right
Honourable/ Lord Byron./ In Two Volumes./ Vol. I./ [Vol. II.] Containing
Cantos I., II./ London:/ John Murray,/ Albemarle-Street./ 1819./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: Title (R. _London:/ Printed by T. Davison, Whitefriars./_), pp.
iii., iv.; Half-title (R. Motto, _Le Cosmopolite_, eight lines), pp. v.,
vi.; Preface, pp. vii.-xiv.; Cont., one leaf; Text, pp. 1-218. The
Imprint (_T. Davison, Lombard Street,/ Whitefriars, London./_) is in the
centre of p. [220].

Vol. II.: Title (R. Imprint, as above); Cont., one leaf; Text, pp.
1-273; Advt. of _Historical Illustrations_ (R. Imprint, _London:/
Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars_), pp. [275, 276].

XVI.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_. [Two vols.] Leipzig, Brockhaus. 1820. [8º.

[Kayser, 1834.]

XVII.

Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage./ A Romaunt./ By Lord Byron./ London:/
Printed and Published by W. Dugdale,/ Russell Court, Drury Lane./ 1825./
[12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. vi. + 7-182.

XVIII.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_. [Two vols.] Paris, A. and W. Galignani.
1825. [32º.

XIX.

Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage,/ A Romaunt:/ By Lord Byron./ London:/
Printed and Published by W. Dugdale/ 23, Russell Court, Drury Lane./
1826./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. vi. + 1-162.

XX.

Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage;/ A Romaunt./ In Four Cantos./ By Lord
Byron./ London:/ Printed for Thomas Colmer,/ 2, Bell-Isle, Battle
Bridge./ 1827./ [24º.

_Collation_--

Pp. vi. + 161.

XXI.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_, a poem by Lord Byron. [Two vols.] Paris.
1827. [16º.

[_Le Moniteur_; etc., 1845.]

XXII.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage./ A Romaunt./ By the/ Right Hon. Lord Byron./
London:/ John Buncombe, 19, Little Queen Street,/ Holborn./ [1831?]
[12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 9-270.

_Note_.--The Front. is "Lord Byron," by T. Phillips, R.A., engraved by
R. Page.

XXIII.

Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage./ A Romaunt/ By/ Lord Byron./ Campe's
Edition./ Nuremberg and New York./ Printed and Published by/ Frederick
Campe and Cº/ [1831.] [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 333.

XXIV.

Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage./ A Romaunt./ By Lord Byron./ London:/ John
Murray, Albemarle Street./ 1837. [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 329. The Imprint (_London:/ Printed by A. Spottiswoode,/
New-Street-Square._) is in the centre of p. [330].

_Note_.--The Front., "Byron," is engraved by E. Finden, from the
portrait by E. Sanders. The Vignette, or illustrated Title, is the "Lake
of Geneva," engraved by E. Finden from a drawing by G. Stainfield, R.A.
This edition is bound in green cloth, stamped with coat-of-arms, uniform
with No. xiv. of Miscellaneous Poems.

XXV.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_. Mannheim, Hoffmann. 1837. [12º.

[Kayser, 1841.]

XXVI.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage./ A Romaunt./ By Lord Byron./ London:/ John
Murray, Albemarle Street./ 1841. [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. Motto from _Le Cosmopolite_, seven lines), pp. i., ii.;
Title (R. _Bradbury and Evans, Printers extraordinary to the Queen,
Whitefriars._), pp. iii., iv.; Preface, and Addition to Preface, pp.
v.-viii.; List of Embellishments, pp. ix.-xi.; Half-title, pp. xiii.,
xiv.; To Ianthe, pp. xv., xvi.; Text, pp. 1-320. The Imprint, as above,
is at the foot of p. 320.

_Note_.--The Front. is a portrait of "Lord Byron, in his Albamanian
Dress," by T. Phillips, R.A., engraved by W. Finden. The Title-vignette
on illustrated title is the "Monument of Lysicrates," drawn by H.
Warren, engraved by W. Finden. There are fifty-nine other
"embellishments," and, inserted between pp. [228], [229], a Map of Lord
Byron's Route through Spain, Portugal, Holland, etc., with "Picturesque
Border."

XXVII.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_, with Notes by Lord Byron, Carton demi rel.
Jolie éd. London. 1842. [12º.

[_Le Moniteur_, etc., 1845.]

XXVIII.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage./ A Romaunt./ By Lord Byron./ London:/ John
Murray, Albemarle Street./ 1853./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xii. (To Ianthe, pp. xi., xii.) + 311. The Imprint (_London:/
Bradbury and Evans, Printers, Whitefriars./_) is in the centre of P.
[312].

XXIX.

_Childe Harold herausg. von Aug. Mommsen_. Hamburg, Th. Niemeyer. 1853.
[Hamburg, 1869.] [8º.

[Kayser, 1860.]

_Collation_--

Pp. iv. + 189.

XXX.

_Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage_,/ von/ Lord Byron./ [Two Vols.] Erklärt/
von/ Ferd. Brockerhoff./ Erstes Bändchen./ Berlin./ Verlag von Th. Chr.
Fr. Enslin./ 1854./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 163.

_Note_.--Bdchn. of _Sammlung englischer Schriffsteller_. Berlin, Th.
Enslin. 1853-1855. "Siebentes Bändchen" contains Cantos I., II.;
"Neuntes Bändchen" (pp. 214), published in 1855, contains Cantos III.,
IV.

XXXI.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage/ A Romaunt/ By Lord Byron/ Illustrated From
Original Sketches/ London:/ John Murray, Albemarle Street./ 1859./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title (R. Motto, _Le Cosmopolite_, six lines; Note, two lines);
Vignette, "Newstead Abbey" (R. The Illustrations drawn on Wood by
Percival Skelton./ Engraved by J.W. Whymper and J. Cooper./); List of
Illustrations, four pages; Text, pp. 1-329. The Imprint (_Printed by R.
and R. Clark, Edinburgh_) is at the foot of p. 329.

_Note_.--This edition was reissued in 1869.

XXXII.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage./ A Romaunt./ By Lord Byron./ New Edition./
London:/ John Murray, Albemarle Street./ 1860./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 192. The Imprint (_London: Printed by William Clowes and Sons,
Stamford Street_) is at the foot of p. 192.

_Note_.--Murray's Complete Edition. Price One Shilling. The Front. is
"The Earliest Portrait of Byron. Taken at the age of 7 years, from an
original by Kay, Edinburgh," engraved by E. Finden.

XXXIII.

Childe Harold's Pilgrimage./ A Romaunt./ By Lord Byron./ A New Edition./
London:/ John Murray, Albemarle Street./ 1860./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 60. The Imprint (_London: Printed by William Clowes and Sons,
Stamford Street,/ And Charing Cross./_) is on Reverse of Title.

_Note_.--"Murray's Complete Edition." Price Sixpence. The Front. is a
lithograph of the portrait of Lord Byron, by T. Phillips, R.A.

XXXIV.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_. A Romaunt. Leipzig, B. Tauchnitz. 1862.
[16º.

[Kayser, 1865.]

XXXV.

Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage/ A Romaunt/ By/ Lord Byron/ With a Memoir/
By/ William Spalding, A.M./ Professor of Logic and Rhetoric in the
University of Saint Andrews/ Illustrated/ London/ Charles Griffin and
Company/Stationer's Hall Court/ [1866] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 180.

_Note_.--The Front, is an engraving of the medallion by E.W. Wyon.

XXXVI.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_. A Romaunt. Mit erläut. Anmerkungen zum
Schul-u. Privatunterricht bearb. von P. Weeg. 1867. [8º.

_Note_.--No. V., Sammlung gediegener u. interessanter Werke der
englischen Litteratur. Münster, Brunn's Verl. 1868-1870. [Kayser, 1871.]

XXXVII.

Byron's/ Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage/ A Romaunt/ With Notes/ W. & R.
Chambers/ London and Edinburgh/ 1877/ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 180.

XXXVIII.

Lord Byron/ Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage/ Édition classique/ Par/ James
Darmesteter/ Docteur ès-Lettres/ Directeur-Adjoint à l'École des Hautes
Études/ Paris/ librairie Ch. Delagrave/ 15, rue Soufflot, 15/ 1882/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxxv. + 342.

XXXIX.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_. Texte anglais, revu et annoté par l'abbé
A. Julien. Paris, Poussielque frères. 1883. [12º.

[Lorenz, 1886.]

XL.

Clarendon Press Series/ Byron/ Childe Harold/ Edited/ With Introduction
and Notes/ By/ H.F. Tozer, M.A./ Fellow and Tutor of Exeter College,
Oxford/ At the Clarendon Press/ 1885/ [_All rights reserved_]/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 336.

XLI.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_. Illustrated. London, Chatto. 1885. [8º.

[_Eng. Cat._, 1891.]

XLII.

Lord Byron,/ Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage./ A Romaunt./ Erklärt/ von/
August Mommsen./ Berlin./ Weidmannsche Buchhandlung./ 1885./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxxvi. + 367.

XLIII.

Cassell's National Library./ Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage./ By/ Lord
Byron./ Cassell & Company, Limited:/ London, Paris, New York &
Melbourne./ 1886./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 192.

XLIV.

Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage/ A Romaunt/ By Lord Byron/ Illustrated/
Boston/ Ticknor and Company/ 1886/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 236.

XLV.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_: edited with Notes by W.J. Rolfe,
Philadelphia. 1886. [16º.

[Detroit Public Library.]

XLVI.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_. Leipzig, Gressner & Schramm. 1886. [16º.

[Kayser, 1887.]

XLVII.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_. By Lord Byron. Im Auszuge m. Anmerkgn. zum
Schulgebrauch hrsg. v. Mart. Krummacher. Mit Anmerkgn. unter dem Text.

_Note_.--No. 13 of "English Authors." Bielefeld, Velhagen, and Klasing.
1885-1886. [Kayser, 1887.]

XLVIII.

Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage/ A Romaunt/ By/ Lord Byron/ London/ George
Routledge and Sons/ Broadway, Ludgate Hill/ Glasgow and New York/ 1888/
[16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 9-320.

_Note_.--Part of "Routledge's Pocket Library."

XLIX.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_. Im Auszuge hrsg. v. Mart. Krummacher.
1891. [Reissued in 1893.] [12º.

_Note_.--Part of "English Authors," _vide supra_, No. xlvii.

L.

Sir John Lubbock's Hundred Best Books/ 29/ Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage/
A Romaunt/ By/ Lord Byron/ London/ George Routledge and Sons, Limited/
Broadway, Ludgate Hill/ Manchester and New York/ 1892/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. x. + 11-249.

LI.

Byron's/ Childe Harold/ With Introduction and Notes/ By/ H.G. Keene,
Hon. M.A. Oxon.,/ Fellow of Calcutta University, Author of "A Manual of/
French Literature," etc./ London/ George Bell & Sons, York St., Covent
Garden/ And New York/ 1893/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xx. + 255.

LII.

Byron/ Childe Harold/ Texte Anglais/ Publié avec une Notice, des
Arguments/ Et des Notes en Français/ Par Émile Chasles/ Inspecteur
général de l'Instruction publique/ Paris/ Librairie Hachette et C'ie/
79, Boulevard Saint-Germain, 79/ 1893/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxvi. + 261.

_Note_.--This edition was reissued in 1894.

LIII.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage: a Romaunt_. New York, T.Y. Crowell & Co.
1894.

[_Amer. Cat._, 1895.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 9 + 283.

LIV.

Arnold's British Classics for Schools/ General Editor:/ J. Churton
Collins, M.A./ Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage/ Edited by/ The Rev. E.C.
Everard Owen, M.A./ Late Fellow of New College, Oxford; Assistant
Master/ In Harrow School./ Edward Arnold/ London/ 37 Bedford Street/ New
York/ 70 Fifth Avenue/ [1897] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. lxii. + 236.

LV.

Childe/ Harold/ A Romaunt/ George/ Gordon/ Lord/ Byron/ 1898. Published.
by. J.M. Dent. / And. Co.. Aldine. House. London. E.C./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xii. + 310 + Note (one leaf) by Editor, I.G., October 1, 1898.

_Note_.--Part of the "Temple Classics," edited by Israel Gollmer, M.A.
The Front. is a photogravure of the portrait of "George Gordon Lord
Byron," by T. Phillips, R.A.

LVI.

Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage/ A Romaunt by Lord Byron/ Cantos I. and II./
Edited with Notes and an Introduction by/ Edward E. Morris/ Professor of
English in the University of Melbourne/ London/ Macmillan and Co.,
Limited/ New York: The Macmillan Company/1899/ _All rights reserved/_
[8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxxvi. + 115.

LVII.

Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage/ A Romaunt by Lord Byron/ Cantos III. and
IV./ Edited with Notes and an Introduction by/ Edward E. Morris/
Professor of English in the University of Melbourne/ London/ Macmillan
and Co., Limited/ New York: The Macmillan Company/ 1899/ _All rights
reserved/_ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxxvi. + 168.

_Note_.--The Introduction (pp. vii.-xxxvi.) is a repetition of the
Introduction to the preceding volume.

LVIII.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage: a Romaunt_. Cantos 1, 2, 3, and 4; Edited
with Notes and Introduction by E. Morris. New York, The Macmillan Co.
[Two vols.] 1899. [8º.

[_Amer. Cat._, 1900.]

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. 36 + 115.

Vol. II.: pp. 36 + 168.

_Note_.--Part of "Macmillan's English Classics."

LIX.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage: a Romaunt_. Edited with Introduction and
Notes by Andrew J. George. New York., The Macmillan Co. 1899. [16º.

[_Amer. Cat._, 1900.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 34 + 282.

_Note_.--Part of "Macmillan's Pocket English Classics."

LX.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_. New York, Cassell. 1900.

[_Amer. Cat._, 1901.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 192.

_Note_.--Part of "Cassell's National Library," N.S.

LXI.

Lord Byron/ Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage/ Canto II./ Edited by/ John
Downie, M.A./ Editor of Macaulay's Lives of Johnson and Goldsmith, Etc.
Etc./ London/ Blackie and Son, Limited, 50 Old Bailey, E.C./ Glasgow and
Dublin/ 1901/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 47.

LXII.

Lord Byron/ Childe Harold's/ Pilgrimage/ Canto III./ Edited by/ John
Downie, M.A./ [etc., _vide supra_, No. lxi.] 1901/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 47.

_Note_.--This and the preceding volume form part of "Blackie's English
Classics."


_Translations of Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_.


_Armenian_.

Lord Byron/ Childe Harold's Pilgrimage/ Italy/ [Canto IV.] Venice/
Printed/ at the Armenian Monastery of S. Lazarus/ 1872/ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 147.

_Note_.--The Armenian verse, translated by Gheuond Alíshanian,
accompanies the English original. The Notes are in the Armenian
language.


_Bohemian_.

_Childe Haroldova pout'_ Prelozila El. Krásnohorská [in Kabinetní
Knihovna]. 1890.


_Danish_.

Junker Harolds Pilgrimsfart./ Et Romantisk Kvad./ Af/ Byron./ Oversat
af/Adolf Hansen/Kjøbenhavn./ Forlagt af J.H. Schubothes Boghandel./
Græbes Bogtrykkerei. 1880/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 237.


_French_.

I.

_Le Pélerinage de Childe Harold_, poème romantique de lord Byron,
traduit en vers français par l'auteur des _Helléniennes_ et des
_Mélodies poétiques_. Paris, Dupont. 1828. [18º.

[Quérard, 1846.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 288.

II.

_Le Pélerinage de Childe Harold_, traduit par P.A. Deguer. Paris,
Ponthieu. 1828. [18º.

[Quérard, 1846.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 84.

III.

Le Pélerinage/ de/ Childe Harold/ Traduction en vers français/ Par/
Eugène Quiertant./ [Motto, _Le Cosmopolite_, nine lines.] Paris/
Librairie de Ch. Blériot,/ rue Bonaparte, 25. 1861./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 266 + "Note de L'Éditeur," one leaf.

_Note_.--Le premier chant de cette traduction avail déja été publié en
1852. [Lorenz, 1867.]

IV.

Childe Harold/ Poëme de Lord Byron/ Traduit en vers français/ Par/
Lucien Davésiès de Pontès./ Tome premier./ Paris/ E. Dentu,
libraire-éditeur,/ Galerie D'Orléans, Palais-Royal./ 1862./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. lv. + 232.

Vol. II.: pp. 334 + "Errata," one leaf, p. [335].

V.

_Le Pélerinage de Childe Harold_, traduit en vers d'après l'édition
anglaise de 1812; précédé de Marie-Magdaleine, poëme, et de diverses
poésies, par Victor Robert Jones, Saint-Quentin, _imprimerie Monreau_.
1862. [12º.

[Lorenz, 1867.]

VI.

_Childe Harold_, poëme de lord Byron, traduit en vers français par
Lucien Davésiès de Pontès, 2^e édition revue et corrigée par le
bibliophile Jacob. Paris, _Amyot_. 1870. [12º.

[Lorenz, 1876.]

VII.

_Childe Harold_. Expliqué littéralement, traduit en français et annoté
par H. Bellet. Paris, _Hachette et Cie_. 1881.

[12º.

[Lorenz, 1886.]

VIII.

_Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_. Traduction française littérale, par l'Abbé
A. Julien. Paris, _Poussielque frères_. 1883.

[12º.

[Lorenz, 1886.]

IX.

_Childe Harold_, Édition classique, précédée d'une notice littéraire,
par M.A. Elwall. Paris, _Delalain frères_. 1892.

[12º.

[Lorenz, 1900.]

X.

_Childe Harold_, Édition classique, avec une notice biographique et
littéraire, un appendice et des notes par Douglas Gibb. Paris, _Belin
frères_. 1892. [12º.

[Lorenz, 1900.]

_German_.

I.

_Harold, der Verwiesene_. Aus. d. Engl. v. Karl Baldamus. Leipzig,
Hartmann. 1835. [8º.

[Kayser, 1841.]

II.

Ritter Harold's Pilgerfahrt./ Aus dem Englischen/ des/ Lord Byron./ Im
Versmass des Originals übersetzt/von/ Zedlitz:/ Stuttgart und Tübingen,/
Verlag der J.G. Cotta'schen Buchhandlung. 1836./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xvi. + 381 + Berichtungen, p. [382].

III.

_Jungherrn Harold's Pilgerfahrt_. Aus d. Engl. ins Deutsche übersetzt
von Dr. Herm. v. Pommer Esche. Stralsund, Löffler'sche Buch. 1839. [8º.

[Kayser, 1841.]

IV.

_Erster Gesang des Childe Harald_. Freie Uebertragung in Reimen v. C.D.
Ansbach, Dollfuss. 1845. [12º.

[Kayser, 1848.]

V.

Byron's/ Ritter Harold/ von/ Adolf Böttger/ Diamantausgabe./ Leipzig./
Druck und Verlag von Otto Wigand./ 1846./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 194.

_Note_.--The Front. is a portrait of "Byron" (by G. Sanders), engraved
by A.H. Payne.

VI.

Childe Harold's/ Pilgerfahrt/ von/ Lord George Gordon Byron./ Aus dem
Englischen im Versmass des Originals/ übersetzt/ von/ Alexander
Büchner./ Frankfurt a/ M./ Verlag von Meidinger Sohn und Cie./ 1853./
[16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxiii. + 342.

_Note_.--The translation was reissued in 1855.

VII.

Harold's/ Pilgerfahrt./ Aus dem Englischen des Lord Byron./ Uebersetzt
von/ Erich von Monbart./ Köln, 1865./ Druck, Franz Greven,
Burgmauer-Ecke 113. [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 143.

VIII.

Childe Harold's/ Pilgerfahrt/ von/ Lord Byron./ Deutsch/ von/ A.H.
Janert./ Hildburghausen./ Verlag des Bibliographischen Instituts./
1868./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 191.

_Note_.--No. 87 of the "Bibliothek ausländischer Klassiker."

IX.

Jung Harold's/ Pilgerfahrt./ Von Byron./ Aus dem Englischen metrisch
übersetzt/ von/ Ferdinand Schmidt./ Berlin./ Verlag von W.O.H.
Stempelmann./ 1869./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 132 + "Anmerkungen," pp. [133, 134].

X.

_Ritter Harold's Pilgerfahrt_. Eine Romanze v. Lord Byron. Frei ubers.
v. Adf. Seubert. [16º.

[Kayser, 1877.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 224.

_Note_.--Nos. 516, 517 of the "Universal Bibliothek," Leipzig, 1871-76.

XI.

_Childe Harold's Pilgerfahrt_. Ein Epos. Übertr. v. F. Dobbert. 1893.
[8º.

[Kayser, 1894.]

_Collation_--

Pp. vi. + 192.

_Note_.--Part of the "Bibliothek der Gesammtlitteratur d. In u.
Auslandes."

_Hungarian_.

Childe Harold/ Byron/ után/ anya nyelvéböl magyarra forditotta/
Bickersteth Johanka/ Nyomtatta PUKY MIKLOS Genfben/ 1857/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 211. [Line-borders.]



_Italian_.

I.

L'Italia,/ Canto IV./ del pellegrinaggio/ di Childe H_A_Rold,/ Scritto/
da Lord Byron,/ E tradotto/ da Michele Leoni./ Italia,/ 1819./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 77.

II.

_Il pellegrinaggio del Giovine Aroldo_: poema di Lord Byron, tradotto dá
Giuseppe Gazzino genovese. Genova, tipografia arcivescovile, 1836. [8º.

[_Bibl. Ital._, Nov.-Dec., 1836.]

III.

L'Italia/ Canto/ di Lord Byron/ Accomodato/ All' indole del verso
italiano/ da/ Melchior Missirini/ Publicato per cura/ del professore/
Francesco Longhena./ Milano/ Coi tipi di Vincenzo Guglielmini/ 1848/
[8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 95.

IV.

_Il pellegrinaggio del giovane Aroldo_: poema recato in italiano da Fr.
Armenio. Napoli, 1858. [8º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

V.

_Il pellegrinaggio del giovane Aroldo_: con la traduzione armena. Ultimo
canto. Venezia. t.s. Lazard, 1860. [8º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

VI.

Byron/ Pellegrinaggio D'Aroldo/ Traduzione/di/Giovanni Giovio/ [Then
something on poetry/] Schak./ Milano/ Giuseppe Bernardoni/
Tipografo-editore/ 1866/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxxiii. + 122 + "Note," pp. [125, 126].

VII.

Italia/ Canto di Giorgio Byron/ Tradotto/ da/ Andrea Maffei./ Firenze,/
Successori le Monnier./ 1872./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 190.

_Note_.--This edition was reissued in 1874 and in 1897.

VIII.

Il pellegrinaggio/ D'Aroldo./ Poema/ di Lord Byron/ Tradotto/ da Carlo
Faccioli./ [Emblem, rose and butterfly, with motto, "_Non Bramo Altr'
Esca._"] Firenze,/ G. Barbèra, editore./ 1873./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xii. + 249 + Indice, p. [251].


_Polish_.

I.

_Poezye w tłumaczeniu polskiém_. Tom. I. (przez Michała Budzyúskiego):
Wedrówki Czaild Harolda. pp. 256. _M. Wolf: Petersburg_, 1857. [8º.

II.

_Pielgrzymka Czajlda Harolda_ ... z=polszczone przez Wiktora z Baworowa,
_etc. we Lwowie_, 1857. [12º.

III.

_Wędrówki Czaild-Harolda_ ...Przełożył Frederyk Krauze. 1865-71.

IV.

_Wędrówki Rycerza Harolda_ ...Przekład Jana Kasprowicza. _Warszawa_,
1895.

V.

_Wędrówki Czaild-Harolda_ ... Tłómaczony ... przez A.A. K[rajewskiego],
_Kraków_, 1896.


_Russian_.

I.

Чайльдъ-Гарольдъ ... пер. Д. Минаева. ["Русское Слово," 1864.]
[Cyrillic: Chail'd"-Garol'd" ... per. D. Minaeva. "Russkoe Slovo,"
1864.]

II.

Чайльдъ-Гарольдъ ... пер. П.А. Козлова. ["Русская Мыслъ," 1890. No. 1,
2, 11.] [Cyrillic: Chail'd"-Garol'd" ... per. P.A. Kozlova. "Russkaya
Miesl"]


_Swedish_.

Childe Harolds/ Pilgrimsfärd/ Af/ Lord Byron./ Öfversatt Af/ A.F.
Skjöldebrand./ Stockholm./ Tryckt Hos Johan Hörberg,/ 1832./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 192.


_The Corsair_.

I.

The Corsair,/ A Tale./ By Lord Byron./ "---- I suoi pensieri in lui
dormir non ponno."/ Tasso, _Canto decimo, Gerusalemme Liberata_./
London:/ _Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars_, For John Murray,
Albemarle-Street./ 1814./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf, pp. i., ii.; Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.;
Dedication, "To Thomas Moore, Esq.," pp. v.-xi.; Text (and Notes), pp.
1-100.

_Note_.--The Text numbers 1863 lines, the half-lines 154, 159, 669 being
reckoned as whole lines. Other half-lines are not so reckoned, and the
First Edition actually numbers 1860 lines.

II.

The Corsair,/ A Tale./ By Lord Byron./ "---- I suoi pensieri in lui
dormir non ponno."/ Tasso, _Canto decimo, Gerusalemme Liberata_./ Second
Edition./ London:/ _Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars_,/ For John
Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1814./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, etc. (_vide supra_); Text, with Notes and Six Poems, pp.
1-108. The Imprint (_T. Davison, Lombard Street,/ Whitefriars,
London./_) is at the foot of p. 108.

_Poems_--

To a Lady weeping                                               p. [101]
From the Turkish                                                  p. 102
Sonnet, To Genevra ("Thine eyes," etc.)                           p. 104
Sonnet, To Genevra ("Thy cheek," etc.)                            p. 105
Inscription on the Monument of a Newfoundland Dog                 p. 106
Farewell ("Farewell! if ever," etc.)                              p. 108

III.

The Corsair,/ A Tale./ ... Third Edition./ ... 1814./ [8º.

_Collation_--

_Vide supra_, No. 1. The Imprint (_Printed by T. Davison,
Lombard-Street,/ Fleet Street._/) is at the foot of p. 100.

_Note_.--The Poems which were inserted in the Second Edition pp.
[101]-108, were omitted in the Third Edition.

IV.

The Corsair,/ A Tale./ ... Fourth Edition.... 1814./ [8º.

_Collation_--

_Vide supra_, the Second Edition, No. ii.

_Note_.--The Poems inserted in the Second, and omitted in the Third, are
included in the Fourth Edition.

V.

The Corsair,/ A Tale./ By Lord Byron./ [Motto as above, No. i.] Fifth
Edition./ London:/ Printed for John Murray, Albemarle-Street;/ _By
Thomas Davison, Whitefriars_,/ 1814./ [8º.

_Collation_--

_Vide supra_, the Second Edition, No. ii.

VI.

The Corsair,/ A Tale./ ... Sixth Edition./ ... 1814./ [8º.

_Collation_--

For Title, _vide supra_, the Fifth Edition, No. v.

VII.

The Corsair,/ A Tale./ ... Seventh Edition./ ... 1814./ [8º.

_Collation_--

_Vide supra_, Second Edition, No. ii.

_Note_.--In this edition the last four lines of Canto I. stanza xi.
("The first may turn ... still it stings!") were added, together with
the Note, to Canto II., p. 33, line 18, "It has been objected," etc. The
poem numbers 1863 lines, the additional lines not being included in the
numeration.

VIII.

The Corsair,/ A Tale./ By Lord Byron./ [Motto as above.] From the Fifth
London Edition./ New-York:/ Published by Eastburn, Kirk, and Co./
Literary Rooms, Corner of Wall and Nassau Streets./ 1814./ [6º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xi. + 108.

_Note_.--_The Corsair_ was also published in Philadelphia in 1814, 16º.

IX.

The Corsair;/ A Tale./ By Lord Byron./ [Motto as above.] Ninth Edition./
London:/ Printed for John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1815./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf, pp. i., ii.; Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.;
Dedication, pp. v.-xi.; Text, with Notes, pp. 1-112. The Imprint (_T.
Davison, Lombard-Street,/ Whitefriars, London._/) is at the foot of p.
112.

_Note_.--The poem numbers 1864 lines, the four new lines at the end of
Canto I. stanza xi. being included in the numeration. Pp. 101-104
contain "Note 17, p. 95, last line," on the Pirates of Barataria, and
(secondly) on Archbishop Blackbourne.

X.

The Corsair,/ A Tale./ By Lord Byron./ [Motto as above.] Tenth Edition./
London:/ John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1818./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _London:/ Printed by T. Davison, Whitefriars_./), pp. 1,
2; Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Dedication, pp. 5-9; Text, pp. 11-96;
Notes, pp. 97-105; Poems, pp. [107]-114.

_Note_.--The poem is (incorrectly) numbered 1873 lines, line 1506 being
numbered 1511.

XI.

The Corsair./ A Tale./ By Lord Byron./ [Motto as above.] London: Printed
and Published by W. Dugdale,/ _23, Russell Court, Drury Lane_./ 1825./
[12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 72.

XII.

The Corsair./ A Tale./ By Lord Byron./ "---- I suoi pensieri in lui
dormir non ponno"--Tasso./ [London, 1844.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. iv. + 5-48.

_Note_.--Part of "Clarke's Home Library."

XIII.

The Corsair:/ A Tale./ By/ Lord Byron./ London: Archd. K. Murray & Co.,/
30 Queen Square, W.C.:/ Glasgow: 243 Parliamentary Road./ 1867./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 122.

_Note_.--- Part of "Murray's Standard Poets."


_Translations of The Corsair_.


_German_.

I.

_Der Korsar_, eine Erzählung. [Deutsch v.] F.L. von Tschirsky. Berlin,
Maurer. 1816. [12º.

[_Centralblatt, etc._, 1890, vol. vii, p. 472.]

II.

_Der Korsar_, eine Erzählung. [Deutsch von] Elise von Hohenhausen.
Altona, Hammerich. 1820. [8º.

[_Centralblatt, etc._, 1890, vii. 461.]

III.

_Der Korsar_. Erzählung. Aus d. Engl. übers. v. Friederike Friedmann.
Leipzig, Brockhaus. 1852. [16º.

[Kayser, 1853.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 90.

IV.

_Der Corsar_. Gedicht, Aus d. Engl. von Viet. v. Arentsschild. Mainz,
Iabern. 1852. [16º.

[Kayser, 1853.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 139.

V.

_Der Korsar_. Eine Erzählg. v. Lord Byron. Frei übers. v. Adf. Seubert.
Leipzig, Ph. Reclam, jr. [1871-76.] [16º. [Kayser, 1877.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 69.

_Note_.--No. 406 of the "Universal-Bibliothek."


_Hungarian_.

A Kalóz./ Irta/ Lord Byron./ Angolból Forditotta/ Kacziány Géza./
Budapest./ Franklin-Társulat/ Magyar Irod. Intézet és Könyvnyomda./
1892./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 74.


_Italian_.

I.

Il Corsaro/ Novella/ di/ Lord Byron/ Versione in prosa/ di L.C./ Torino/
Vedova Pomba e figli/ 1819/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. v. + 131.

_Note_.--The Front. is a lithograph of the portrait of "Giorgio Byron,"
by G.H. Harlow. A translation, "Al Tempo," "Time on whose arbitrary
wing," pp. [129], 131, follows the Notes to the _Corsair_. The
translation includes the four additional lines at the end of Canto I.
stanza xi., but not the Note on the "Pirates of Barataria."

II.

Il Corsaro/ Novella/ di/ Lord Byron/ Versione in prosa/ di L.C./ Seconda
edizione riveduta dall' autore./ Milano/ Presso Rodolfo Vismara/ 1820/
[8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 4 + 5-123.

_Note_.--For Front., _vide supra_, No. i.

III.

_Il Corsaro_, novella di lord Byron. Traduzione dall' inglese di
Giuseppe Nicolini. Milano, tip. di Giovanni Silvestri. 1842. [16º.

[_Bibl. Ital._, June, 1842.]

_Collation_--

Pp. xlviii. + 106.

IV.

_Il Corsaro_, novella Inglese, tradotta da Eritreo Migdonio. Firenze,
1842, tipografia Piatti.

[_Bibl. Ital._, July, 1843.]

V.

Il/ Corsaro/ di/ Lord Byron/ Versione del Cavaliere/ Luigi Serenelli
Honorati/ Già Presid. di Corte d'Appello/ Bologna/ Tip. Mareggiani All'
Insegna di Dante/ _1797, Via Malcontenti_, 1797/ 1870/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 95.

VI.

II Corsaro/ Novella di Lord Byron/ Versione/ di/ Carlo Rosnati/ [1879]
[8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 96 + Sonnet, "Santa Rosa," p. [97].


_Russian_.

Морской разбойникъ Переводъ В. Олина (Въ прозѣ). С.-Петербургъ
[Cyrillic: Morskoye razboynik". Perevod" B. Olina (B" prozye).
S.-Peterburg"], 1827.


_Spanish_.

I.

_El Corsario_. Por el Byron, traducido en castellano por M.... Imp. de
David à Paris. A Paris, rue du Temple, N. 69. 1827. [18º.

[_Bibl. de le France_, Aug. 22, 1827.]

II.

_El_/ _Corsario_/ Por/ Lord Byron./ Valencia:/ Imprenta de Cabrerizo./
1832./ [32º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 272.


_Swedish_.

Corsaren./ Af/ Lord Byron./ [Motto as above.] Stockholm,/ Tryckt Hos
Joh. Beckman, 1868./

_Collation_--

Pp. 96.

_Note_.--"Ofversattning af Talis Qualis."

_The Curse of Minerva_.

I.

The Curse of Minerva./ London:/ Printed by T. Davison, Lombard Street,
Whitefriars./ 1812./ [4º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. 1, 2; Text, pp. 3-25. The Imprint (_Printed by T.
Davison, Lombard Street,/ Whitefriars, London_./) is in the centre of p.
[27].

_Note_.--The pages of the Text measure 280 x 220.

II.

The/ Curse of Minerva./ A Poem,/ By the Right Honourable/ Lord
Byron/---- Pallas te hac [_sic_] vulnere, Pallas/ Immolat, et poenam
scelerato ex sanguine sumit./ Philadelphia:/ Printed for De-Silver and
Co./ 1815./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 24.

_Note_.--It is probable that this edition, which closely resembles the
later separate issues of the _Corsair_, the _Bride of Abydos_, and the
_Giaour_, was printed in London.

III.

The/ Curse of Minerva./ A Poem./ By the Right Honourable/ Lord
Byron./---- Pallas te hac [_sic_] vulnere, Pallas/ Immolat, et poenam
scelerato ex sanguine sumit./ Third Edition./ Paris./ Published by
Galignani/ at the French, English, Italian, German and Spanish/ Library,
No. 18, Rue Vivienne./ 1818./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf, pp. 1, 2; Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Text, pp.
5-[21]. The Imprint (_Printed by A. Belin_) is at the foot of P. [21].

_Note_ (1).--A Fourth Edition, identical with the Third, was issued by
Galignani in 1820. Quérard (1827) records the issue of a Second Edition,
published by A. and W. Galignani in 1818.

_Note_ (2).--_The Curse of Minerva_ (full text) is included in the fifth
volume of the edition of Byron's Works published by Louis and Baudry in
1825 (see W. No. xviii.); in the first volume of the Fifth Edition, in
sixteen volumes, published by A. and W. Galignani in 1822 (see W. No.
xix.), but was not published, in its entirety, in England till 1831 (see
W. No. xliii.).

For a bibliographical note on _The Curse of Minerva_, first published as
_The Malediction of Minerva, or The Athenian Marble Market_ (111 lines),
in the _New Monthly Magazine_, April, 1818, vol. iii. p. 240, and often
reprinted in a mutilated form, see _Poetical Works_, 1898, i. 452.


_The Deformed Transformed_.

The/ Deformed Transformed;/ A Drama. By the/ Right Hon. Lord Byron./
London, 1824:/ Printed for J. and H.L. Hunt,/ Bond Street, and Tavistock
Street./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _London:/ Printed by C.H. Reynell, Broad Street, Golden
Square./_), pp. 1, 2; Title, pp. 3, 4; Author's Advt., p. 6; _Dramatis
Personæ_, one leaf, pp. 7, 8; Text, pp. 9-88. The Imprint, as above, is
at the foot of p. 88.

_Note_.--A Second and Third Editions, identical with the First, were
issued in 1824.

II.

_The Deformed Transformed_, a drama by the Right hon. lord Byron. Impr.
de A. Belin, à Paris, chez A. et W. Galignani, 1824. [12º.

[_Bibl. de le France_, March 27, 1824.]

_Note_.--_La Metamorphose du Bossu_ forms part (pp. 1-103) of Tome
Quinzième of _Oeuvres Complètes_ de Lord Byron. Paris, Ladvocat/ 1824./
(See Transl. of Coll. Ed. No. i.)

III.

The/ Deformed Transformed./ By/ Lord Byron./ [Illustration, "What do I
see?"] New and Complete Edition. --Price one Penny./ London: J. Dicks,
313, Strand; all Booksellers./ [1883, etc.] [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 583-597.

_Note_.--The _Deformed Transformed_ is No. 113 of "Dicks' Standard
Plays."


_Translation_.


_Hungarian_.

Budapesti/ Árvizkönyv./ etc. Szerkeszti/ B. Eötvös József./ Negyedik
Rötet./ Pesten,/ Kiadja Heckenast Gusztáv./ 1840./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Lord Byron'/ Elváltoztatott Idomtalanjából/ Töredek,/ Lukács Móricztól./
pp. 111-140.

_Don Juan_.

_Cantos I., II._

I.

Don Juan./ "Difficile est proprie communia dicere."/ Hor. _Epist. ad
Pison._/ London:/ Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars./ 1819./ [4º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf; Title, one leaf; Second Half-title, pp. 1, 2;
Text, pp. 3-227. The Imprint (_London:/ Printed by Thomas Davison,
Whitefriars./_) is in the centre of p. [228].

_Contents_--

Canto I.                                                            p. 3
Notes to Canto I.                                               p. [115]
Canto II.                                                       p. [119]


_Note_ (1).--The following lines and stanzas are omitted: Canto I.
stanzas xv,, cxxix. lines 7, 8, cxxx. lines 7, 8, cxxxi. The omissions
were first included in the Text in the edition of 1833. (See vol. xv. p.
40.)

_Note_ (2).--For the "Dedication" in pamphlet form, _vide post_, p. 304.

II.

Don Juan./ "Difficile est proprie communia dicere."/ Hor. _Epist. ad
Pison._/ A New Edition./ London:/ Printed by Thomas Davison,
Whitefriars./ 1819./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf; Title, one leaf; Second Half-title, pp. 1, 2;
Text, pp. 3-227. The Imprint, as above, is in the centre of p. [228].

_Note_.--For omitted lines and stanzas, _vide supra_, No. i. "A New
Edition," identical with that of 1819, was issued in 1820.

III.

Don Juan./ "Difficile est," etc. Hor. _Epist. ad Pison_./ An exact Copy
from the Quarto Edition./ London./ Published by J. Onwhyn, No. 4,
Catherine-Street./ Strand./ Price Four Shillings./ 1819./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, pp. 1, 2; Half-title, pp. 3, 4; Text, pp. 5-117. The Imprint (_E.
Thomas, Printer, Denmark-Court, Strand_) is at the foot of p. 117.

IV.

Don Juan./ "Difficile est," etc./ Hor. _Epist. ad Pison._/ London:/
Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars./ 1820./ [8º.

_Note_.--This edition is identical with the "New Edition" of 1820, but
is in smaller type, and the size is crown, not post, octavo.

V.

Don Juan./ "Difficile," etc./ Hor. _Epist. ad Pison._/ An exact copy
from the Quarto Edition./ London:/ Printed for Sherwin and Co.
Paternoster Row./ Price Four Shillings./ 1820./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf, pp. 1, 2; Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Text, pp.
5-117. The Imprint (_Sherwin and Co. Printers, Paternoster Row_.) is at
the foot of p. 117.

VI.

Don Juan./ "Difficile est proprie communia dicere."/ Hor. _Epist. ad
Pison._/ A New Edition./ London:/ Printed by Thomas Davison,
Whitefriars./ 1822./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _London:/ Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars._/);
Title, one leaf, etc., _vide supra_, No. ii.

_Note_.--The "New Edition" of 1822, with the exception of the first
Half-title, is identical with the "New Edition" of 1819.


_Cantos III., IV., V._

I.

Don Juan,/ Cantos III, IV, and V./ "Difficile est," etc./ Hor. _Epist.
ad Pison_./ London: Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars./ 1821./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf; Title, one leaf; Second Half-title, pp. 1,2; Text,
pp. 3-218. The Imprint, as above, is in the centre of p. [220].

_Contents_--

Canto III.                                                          p. 3
Notes to Canto III.                                                p. 65
Canto IV.                                                          p. 71
Notes to Canto IV.                                                p. 131
Canto V.                                                          p. 135
Notes to Canto V.                                                 p. 215


_Note_.--Canto V. stanza lxi. is omitted. This edition of Cantos III.,
IV., V. was issued in post and in crown octavo.

II.

Don Juan./ "Difficile est," etc./ Hor. _Epist. ad Pison_./ Cantos III.
IV. and V./ London:/ Printed for Sherwin and Co. Paternoster Row./ Price
Four Shillings./ 1821./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, pp. 3, 4; Text, pp. 5-114. The Imprint (_Printed by Sherwin and
Co./ Paternoster-Row./_) is at the foot of p. 114.

III.

Don Juan./ Cantos III, IV, and V./ "Difficile est," etc. Hor. _Epist. ad
Pison._/ Fifth Edition,/ Revised and Corrected./ London:/ Printed by
Thomas Davison, Whitefriars./ 1822./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf; Title, one leaf; Second Half-title, pp. 1, 2;
Text, pp. 3-222. The Imprint (_London:/ Printed by Thomas Davison,
Whitefriars_) is in the centre of p. [224].

_Note_.--The additional matter consists of the citations and corrections
of ten of Bacon's apophthegms, and a defence of the literary merits of
Voltaire, pp. 217-222, which was omitted from the First Edition (see
letter to Murray, August 21, 1821, _Letters_, 1901, v. 351).


_Cantos I.-V._

I.

Don Juan./ A/ Poem,/ By/ Lord Byron./ London./ Printed & Sold by W.
Benbow./ At the Lord Byron's Head./ 9, Castle Street, Leicester Square./
1822./ [12º.

_Collation_--

[Cantos I.-V.], pp. 214 + Notes to Canto First, etc., pp. [215]-[220].
The Imprint (_Sudbury, Printer, High Holborn_) is at the foot of p.
[220].

II.

Don Juan./ "Difficile est," etc./ Hor. _Epist. ad Pison._/ With/ A
Preface,/ By a Clergyman./ London:/ Printed by and for Hodgson & Co.,/
10, Newgate Street./ 1822./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, pp. i., ii.; Title, pp. iii., iv.; Publisher's Preface, pp.
v.-x.; Text, pp. 3-226. The Imprint (_Printed by Hodgson and Co. 10,
Newgate Street, London_.) is at the foot of p. 226.

_Note_.--The Front. is a lithograph of "Lord Byron." This edition was
reissued in 1823 with another Front., a lithograph of "Lord Byron,"
after the portrait by G. Harlow.

III.

Don Juan./ In Five Cantos./ A New Edition, with Notes./
[Title-vignette,? Newstead Abbey.] And/ Three Engravings after
Corbould./ London:/ Printed by and for Peter Griffin,/ Tabernacle Walk,/
and sold by all Booksellers in Town and Country./ [1823.] [12º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf; Title (R. _Arliss. Typ. London_); Second
Half-title, with motto, "Difficile est," etc./ Hor./; Cont.; Text
[Cantos I.-V.], pp. 1-180.

_Note_.--A paper cover with ornamental border bears the date MDCCCXXIII.

IV.

Don Juan./ "Difficile est," etc./ Hor. Epist. ad Pison./ A Correct Copy
from the original edition./ London:/ Printed by G. Smeeton, St. Martin's
Church Yard,/ Charing Cross./ [1826?] [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. 1, 2; Text, pp. 3-215 + Notes to Canto I., etc.,
pp. [217]-[228]. The Imprint (_Printed by G. Smeeton, St. Martin's
Church Yard_.) is at the foot of p. [228].

_Note_.--There is an illustrated Title (Don Juan/ Cantos 1 to 5/
London./ Printed by G. Smeeton St. Martins Church Yard./) with
Title-vignette, head of Lord Byron encircled with bay leaves, and six
coloured illustrations by I.R. Cruikshank.


_Cantos VI., VII, VIII._

I.

Don Juan./ Cantos VI.--VII.--And VIII./ "Dost thou think because thou
art virtuous, there shall be no more/ Cakes and Ale?"--"Yes, by St.
Anne; and Ginger shall be hot i' the/ mouth too!"--_Twelfth Night, or
What you Will._/ Shakespeare./ London, 1823:/ Printed for John Hunt,/
38, Tavistock Street, Covent Garden, And/ 22, Old Bond Street./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title (R. London:/ _Printed by C.H. Reynell, Broad Street, Golden
Square._/), pp. i., ii.; Preface to Cantos VI.--VII.--and VIII., pp.
[iii.]-vii.; Second Half-title, one leaf; Text, pp. 1-184; "Publications
by John Hunt ... July, 1823," pp. [185], [186].

_Note_.--Notes to Canto VIII. are on pp. [183], 184. This edition was
reissued in 1825--Printed for Hunt and Clarke,/ Tavistock Street, Covent
Garden./ The pagination, etc., is identical with that of the edition of
1823. The Imprint (_London:/ Printed by C.H. Reynell, Broad Street,
Golden Square._/) is on p. [186].

II.

Don Juan./ Cantos VI.--VII.--VIII./ "Dost thou think," etc. [Motto,
four lines]./ London: Printed and Published by W. Dugdale, 19, Tower
Street, Seven Dials./ 1823./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. i., ii.; Preface, pp. iii., iv.; Text, pp. 1-221 +
Notes to Cantos IX. X. XI., pp. [223], [224]. The Imprint (_Benbow,
Printer, 9, Castle-Street, Leicester-square, London._) is at the foot of
p. [224].

_Note_.--This edition includes Cantos IX., X., XI.

III.

Don Juan./ Cantos VI.--VII.--VIII./ "Dost thou think," etc. [Motto, four
lines]./ London: 1823./ Printed for John Hunt, 22, Old Bond-Street, and
38, Tavistock-/ Street, Covent Garden./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Title (R. _London:/ Printed by C.H. Reynell, Broad Street, Golden
Square._/), pp. i., ii.; Preface, pp. iii.-vi.; Text, pp. 7-97. The
Imprint, as above, is at the foot of p. 97.


_Cantos IX., X., XI._

I.

Don Juan./ Cantos IX.--X.--And XI./ "Dost thou think because thou art
virtuous, there shall be no more/ Cakes and Ale?"--"Yes, by St. Anne;
and Ginger shall be hot i' the/ mouth too!"--_Twelfth Night_, or What
you Will./ Shakspeare./ London, 1823:/ Printed for John Hunt,/ 38,
Tavistock Street, Covent Garden, And/ 22, Old Bond Street./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. 1, 2; Half-title, pp. 3, 4; Text, pp. 5-151. The
Imprint (_London;/ Printed by C.H. Reynell, Broad Street, Golden
Square._/) is in the centre of p. [152].

_Note_ (1).--The Notes to Canto IX. are on pp. [49], 50; the Notes to
Canto X. on pp. [97]-99; and the Notes to Canto XI. on pp. [149]-151.
Canto XI. stanza lvii. lines 5-8 and stanza lviii. are omitted.

_Note_ (2).--The motto is here given in full; and note "Shakspeare," not
"Shakespeare," as before.

II.

Don Juan./ Cantos IX.--X.--XI./ "Dost thou think," etc. [Motto, four
lines]./ Shakespeare./ London, 1823:/ Printed for John Hunt, 38,
Tavistock Street, Covent/ Garden; and 22, Old Bond Street./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Title (R. _Printed by G.H. Reynell,/ 45, Broad-Street,
Golden-Square_,/), pp. 1, 2; Text, pp. 3-72.


_Cantos XII., XIII., XIV._

I.

Don Juan./ Cantos XII.--XIII.--And XIV./ [Motto as above, three lines.]
Shakspeare./ London, 1823:/ Printed for John Hunt,/ 38, Tavistock
Street, Covent Garden, and/ 22, Old Bond-Street./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title (R. _London./ Printed by C.H. Reynell, Broad Street, Golden
Square./_), pp. 1, 2; Half-title, pp. 3, 4; Text, pp. 5-168. The
Imprint, as above, is at the foot of p. 168.

_Note_.--The Notes to Canto XII. are on pp. [51], 52; the Notes to Canto
XIII. on pp. [111], 112; and the Notes to Canto XIV. on pp. [167], 168.

II.

Don Juan./ Cantos XII.--XIII.--XIV./ "Dost thou think," etc. [Motto,
four lines]./ London, 1823:/ Printed for John Hunt, 38, Tavistock
Street, Covent/ Garden: and 22, Old Bond-Street./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Title (R. _Printed by G.H. Reynell,/ 45, Broad-Street,
Golden-Square./_), pp. 1, 2; Text, pp. 3-83 + six pages of "Publications
by John Hunt," dated December, 1823. This edition is bound in a paper
cover with ornamental border--Don Juan./ Cantos/ XII. XIII. XIV./ Price
One Shilling./

III.

Don Juan./ Cantos XII.--XIII.--XIV./ "Dost thou think," etc. [Motto,
four lines (Shakspeare)]./ London:/ Printed for the Booksellers./ 1823./
[12º.

_Collation_--

Title (R. _Sudbury, Printer, 252, High Holburn_.), pp. 1, 2; Text, pp.
3-83. The Imprint, as above, is at the foot of p. 83.

IV.

Don Juan,/ Cantos XII, XIII, XIV./ "Dost thou think," etc. [Motto, four
lines (Shakespeare)]./ Paris:/ Published by A. and W. Galignani,/ at the
French, English, Italian, German, and Spanish Library,/ No. 18, Rue
Vivienne./ 1824./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _Paris: Printed by A. Belin_.); Title, one leaf;
Half-title, with Motto, pp. 1, 2; Text, pp. 3-162 + Notes to Canto XIV.,
pp. [163], [164].


_Cantos XV., XVI._

I.

Don Juan./ Cantos XV. And XVI./ [Motto as above, three lines.]
Shakspeare./ London, 1824:/ Printed for John and H.L. Hunt,/ Tavistock
Street, Covent Garden. [8º.

_Collation_--

Title (R. Imprint as above), pp. 1, 2; Half-title, pp. 3, 4; Text, pp.
5-125; [Works] Published by John and H.L. Hunt, ... March, 1824, pp.
[131], [132]. The Imprint, as above, is in the centre of p. [130].

_Note_.--The Notes to Canto XV. are on pp. [55]-57; the Notes to Canto
XVI. on pp. [127]-129. The following note is on p. [126]: ["The errors
of the press in this Canto,--if there be any,--are not to be attributed
to the Author, as he was deprived of the opportunity of correcting the
proof-sheets."]

II.

Don Juan./ Cantos XV. and XVI./ "Dost thou think," etc. [Motto, three
lines]. Shakspeare./ London, 1824:/ Printed for John and H.L. Hunt,/
Tavistock Street, Covent Garden./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Title (R. _London:/ Printed by C.H. Reynell, Broad Street, Golden
Square./_), pp. 1, 2; Half-title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Text, pp. 5-130.
The Imprint, as above, is at the foot of p. 130.

III.

Don Juan./ Cantos XV. and XVI./ "Dost thou think," etc. [Motto, four
lines]./ Shakspeare./ London:/ Printed for the Booksellers./ 1824./
[12º.

_Collation_

Title (R. _Sudbury, Printer, 252, High Holborn_.), pp. 1, 2; Text, pp.
3-62. The Imprint, as above, is at the foot of p. 62.

IV.

Don Juan./ Cantos XV. and XVI./ "Dost thou think," etc. [Motto, three
lines]./ Shakspeare./ London, 1824:/ Printed for John Hunt, 38,
Tavistock-Street, Covent/ Garden; and 22, Old Bond-Street./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Title (R. _Printed by G.H. Reynell/ 45, Broad-Street, Golden-Square./_),
pp. 1, 2; Text, pp. 3-62.

_Note_.--The Title-page and setting of the Notes, and the quality of the
paper of this edition differ from that of the preceding, but the text
appears to have been set up from the same type.

V.

Don Juan,/ Cantos XV, XVI./ "Dost thou think," etc. [Motto, four
lines]./ Paris: Published by A. and W. Galignani,/ At the French,
English, Italian, German, and Spanish Library,/ No. 18, Rue Vivienne./
1824./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _Paris: Printed by A. Belin_.); Title, one page; Second
Half-title, with Motto, pp. 1, 2; Text, pp. 3-125.


_Full Text_.

I.

Don Juan./ By/ Lord Byron./ Cantos I. To VI./ "Difficile est proprie
communia dicere."/ Hor./ Vol. I./ [Vol. II.] London: Printed for the
Booksellers./ MDCCCXXVI./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: General Title (The/ Works/ of/ Lord Byron./ Vol. XII./ London:/
Printed for the Booksellers./ 1826); Title (R. _Thomas White, Printer,/
Johnson's Court./_); Text, pp. 1-353. The Imprint, as above, is at the
foot of p. [354].

Vol. II.: General Title (_The/ Works_,/ etc. Vol. XIII./ etc.); Title
(Don Juan./ By/ Lord Byron./ Cantos VII. To XVI./ "Dost thou think,"
etc. [Motto, three lines]./ Shakspeare./ Vol. II., etc.) (R. Imprint as
above); Half-title, pp. 1, 2; Text, PP. 3-398.

II.

Don Juan:/ In/ Sixteen Cantos./ By Lord Byron./ "Difficile est proprie
communia dicere."/ _Hor. Epist. ad Pison._/ Complete in one volume./
London:/ Printed for William Clark,/ 60, Paternoster-Row./ 1826./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Title (R. _W. Wilson, Printer,/ 57, Skinner-Street, London./_), pp. i.,
ii.; Biographical Notice, pp. iii.-xii.; Text, pp. 1-432. The Imprint
(_W. Wilson, Printer, 57, Skinner-Street, London_.) is at the foot of p.
452.

III.

Don Juan:/ In/ Sixteen Cantos./ By the/ Right Hon. Lord Byron./
Difficile est proprie communia dicere./ Hor. Epist. ad Pison./ Complete
in one volume./ With a short Biographical Memoir of the/ Author./
[Title-vignette, the Royal Arms.] London:/ Printed for T. and J.
Allman,/ Great Queen-Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields./ 1827./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf; Title (R. _Doncaster:/ Printed by C. and J. White,
Baxter-Gate./_), pp. i., ii.; Biographical Memoir, pp. iii.-ix.; Text,
pp. 1-537. The Imprint, as above, is at the foot of p. 537.

_Note_.--The Front. (dated 1828) is a portrait of Lord Byron by T.
Phillips, R.A., engraved by W. Wise.

IV.

Don Juan./ "Difficile est proprie communia dicere."/ Hor. _Epist. ad
Pison._/ In Two Volumes./ Vol. I./ London:/ Thomas Davison,
Whitefriars./ 1828./ [8º.

Don Juan./ "Dost thou think, because thou art virtuous, there shall be/
no more cakes and ale?--Yes, by St. Anne; and ginger/ shall be hot i'
the mouth too!"--_Twelfth Night; or What/ you Will./_ Shakspeare./ In
Two Volumes. Vol. II./ London:/ Thomas Davison, Whitefriars./ 1828./
[8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: Half-title, one leaf; Title, one leaf; Text, pp. 1-343. The
Imprint (_London:/ Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars./_) is in the
centre of p. [344].

Vol. II.: Half-title, one leaf; Title, one leaf; Text, pp. 1-371. The
Imprint, as above, is in the centre of p. [372].

_Note_.--The Front. to Vol. I. is "Don Juan, C. ii. St. 89," drawn by R.
Westall, R.A., and engraved by E. Finden; the Front. to Vol. II. is "Don
Juan, Canto II. St. 144," by the same artist and engraver.

V.

Don Juan./ By/ Lord Byron./ Cantos I. To VI./ "Difficile est proprie
communia dicere."/ Hor./ Vol. I./ London:/ Printed for the Booksellers./
1828./ [8º.

Don Juan./ By/ Lord Byron./ Cantos VII. To XVI./ "Dost thou think," etc.
[Motto, three lines]./ Shakespeare./ Vol. II./ London: Printed for the
Booksellers./ 1828./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: Half-title, one leaf; Title (R. _Hamblin, Printer_, 63, _Upper
Thames Street_.); Text, pp. 1-351. The Imprint, as above, is at the foot
of p. [352].

Vol. II.: Half-title, one leaf; Title (R. Imprint as above); Second
Half-title, one leaf, pp. 1, 2; Text, pp. 3-392. The Imprint, as above,
is at the foot of p. 392.

VI.

_Don Juan in 16 Cantos_. Campe's Edition. Nuremberg and New York, Campe
and Co. 1832. [12º.

[Kayser, 1834.]

VII.

Don Juan,/ In/ Sixteen Cantos,/ With Notes;/ By Lord Byron./ "Difficile
est," etc./ Horace./ "Dost thou think," etc. [Motto, three lines.
"Shaks."]/ London: Printed for Scott and Webster,/ 36, Charter-House
Square./ 1833./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. 1, 2; Text, pp. 3-359. The Imprint (_C. Morris,
Printer, 20, Sydney Grove, Sydney St._) is at the foot of p. 359.

_Note_.--The Front. is "Don Juan and Julia," by H. Corbould, engraved by
C. Heath. The Title-vignette of the illustrated Title (Don Juan:/
Complete./ By Lord Byron./ London:/ Engraved for the English Classics,/
Published by Scott & Webster./) is from a drawing by H. Corbould,
engraved by C. Heath.

VIII.

Don Juan,/ In/ Sixteen Cantos,/ With Notes;/ By Lord Byron./ "Difficile
est," etc./ Horace./ "Dost thou think," etc. [Motto, three lines.
"Shaks."]./ London/ Printed for the Booksellers. 1835./ [12º.

_Collation_--

_Vide supra_, No. vii.

_Note_.--The Front. and illustrated Title are omitted.

IX.

Don Juan./ By/ Lord Byron./ In Two Volumes./ Vol. I./ [Vol. II.]
London:/ John Murray, Albemarle Street./ 1837./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. 376. The Imprint (_London_:/ Printed by _A. Spottiswoode,/
New-Street-Square_./) is at the foot of p. 376.

Vol. II.: pp. 395. The Imprint, as above, is in the centre of p. [396].

_Note_.--The Title-vignette of illustrated Title of Vol. I. is "Cape
Colonna Sunium," engraved by E. Finden from a drawing by T. Helpman. The
Title-vignette of illustrated Title of Vol. II. is "The Brig of
Balgownie near Aberdeen," engraved by E. Finden from a drawing by G.
Bulmer. The vols. are bound in green cloth, with coat-of-arms in gold.

X.

_Don Juan_. Mannheim, Hofmann. 1838. [16º.

[Kayser, 1841.]

XI.

Don Juan:/ In/ Sixteen Cantos./ By/ Lord Byron./ "Difficile est," etc./
_Hor. Epist. ad Pison._/ London: H.G. Bohn, York Street, Covent Garden./
1849./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. 1, 2; Text, pp. 3-438.

_Note_.--The Front. is "The Siesta of Haidée and Juan." The
Title-vignette on illustrated Title (Don Juan,/ etc. London. MDCCCXLVI./
(_sic_)) is Newstead Abbey from the Lake.

XII.

Don Juan/ By Lord Byron/ Complete Edition with Notes/ "Dost thou think,"
etc. [Motto, three lines]/ London and New York/ George Routledge and
Sons/ [1874] [16º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf, pp. 1, 2; Title (R. _Charles Dickens and Evans,/
Crystal Palace Press_./), pp. 3, 4; Text, pp. 5-431. The Imprint, as
above, is in the centre of p. [432].

XIII.

Don Juan./ By/ Lord Byron./ "Difficile est," etc./ "Dost thou think,"
etc. [Motto, three lines (Shakespeare)]./ London: Chatto & Windus,
Piccadilly./ 1875./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf; Title, one leaf; List of Cantos, pp. 1, 2; Text,
pp. 3-359.

_Note_.--Part of "The Golden Library."

XIV.

Don Juan/ By/ Lord Byron/ "Difficile est," etc./ Complete Edition, with
Notes/ London/ George Routledge and Sons/ Broadway, Ludgate Hill/ New
York: 9 Lafayette Place/ 1886/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf; Title (R. Advt. of Routledge's Large Type
Three-Volume Classics.); Text, pp. 1-476. The Imprint (_R. Clay and
Sons, London and Bungay_.) is at the foot of p. 476.

_Note_.--The Front. is "Don Juan," from Canto IV. stanza xvii. The same
issue without the Front. forms part of Routledge's "Excelsior Series."


_Translations of Don Juan_.


_Danish_.

I.

Don Juan.... Metrisk bearbeidet efter den engelske Original af H. Schou.
1. Hefte Fredericia. 1854. [4º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 16.

_Note_.--No more published. Without Title-page; the above Title appears
on the wrapper.

II.

Byron: Don Juan./ Oversat Paa Dansk/ Af/ Holger Drachmann./ Med
Indledningsdigt Af Oversaetteren./ KjøBenHavn./ Forlagt Af J.H.
Schubothes Boghandel./ Groebes Bogtrykkeri./ 1880./ [8º.

_Note_.--The translation was issued in parts. The first volume,
containing Cantos I.-VI. pp. 1-437, was completed in 1882. A second
volume (1890-1902) contains Cantos VII.-XVI. pp. 1-465.


_French_.

I.

Don Juan, poeme héroï-comique en 16 chants, traduit et précédé de la vie
de Lord Byron [par A.P.] avec notes et commentaires. Tomes i. et ii.
Deux Volumes. Impr. de P. Renouard à Paris. A Paris, rue Poupée, n. 16.
1827. [Tome III. was issued Sept. 15.] [18º.

[_Bibl. de la France_, June 2, 1827.]

II.

_Don Juan_. Traduit en vers français. 2 vol. Paris, _Librairie
centrale_. 1866. [12º.

[Lorenz, 1876.]

III.

Paul Lehodey./ Don Juan/ de/ Lord Byron,/ Traduction nouvelle, précédée
d'une préface/ de M. Legouvé,/ de l'Académie française./ Paris,/
DeGorge-Cadot, libraire-éditeur,/ 37, rue Serpente./ [1869.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xi. + 450 + Table des Matières, p. [451].

IV.

_Don Juan_. Traduit en vers français par Adolphe Fauvel. Troisiéme
Édition, entièrement revue et corrigée, 1878. Paris, Lemerre. [8º.

[Lorenz, 1886.]

_Note_.--La I^re^ édition de cette traduction est de 1866, la 2^e de
1868.


_German_.

I.

_Don Juan, aus d. Engl._ Im Versmass des Originals übersetzt von Ad. v.
Marées. Essen, Bädeker. 1839. [12º.

[Kayser, 1841.]

II.

Byron's/ Don Juan/ übersetzt/ von/ Otto Gildemeister./ "Difficile est
proprie communia dicere."/ Horatius./ "Vermeinst du, weil du
tugendhaft," etc. [Motto, six lines]./ Shakspeare./ Bremen./ Druck und
Verlag von Carl Schünemann./ 1845./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. 314.

Vol. II.: pp. 276.

III.

Byron's/ Don Juan/ von/ Adolf Böttger./ Diamantausgabe./ Leipzig,/
Verlag von Otto Wigand./ 1849./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 413.

_Note_.--The Front. is "Haidie." This edition was reissued in 1858.

IV.

Byron's/ Don Juan./ Deutsch/ von/ Wilhelm Schäffer./ Erster Theil./
Erster und Zweiter Gesang./ Hildburghausen./ Verlag des
Bibliographischen Instituts./ 1867./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. 124.

Vol. II. (Cantos III.-VI.): pp. 152.

_Note_.--Nos. 47, 48 of the "Bibliothek ausländischer Klassiker."


_Italian_.

I.

_Don Giovanni_: poema, tradotto da Ant. Caccia. Torino, 1853. [16º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

II.

_Don Giovanni_ ridotto in 8^a rima da Antonietta Sacchi, Milano,
Guglielmini, 1865. [8º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

III.

Giorgio Byron/ Aidea/ Episodio del don Giovanni/ Saggio d'una traduzione
completa/ di/ Vittorio Betteloni/ Verona/ Stabilimento tipografico di G.
Civelli/ 1875/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 119.

IV.

Il/ Don Juan/ di/ Lord Byron/ Recato/ In altrettante stanze italiane/
dal cavaliere/ Enrico Casali/ Milano/ Natale Battezzati editore/ 1876/
[8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 548 + Indice, p. [549].

V.

_Don Giovanni_. Traduzione di Vitt. Betteloni, Milano, Ottino, 1880.
[8º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]


_Polish_.

I.

Don Żuan./ Lorda Bajrona./ Pieśń/ Pierwsza/ przełożona/ przez/ Wiktora z
Baworowa. Tarnopol./ Drukiem Józefa Pawłowskiego./ 1863./ Na dochód
Rannych./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. v. + 60.

_Note_.--This edition was issued during the last Polish insurrection,
for the benefit of the wounded.

(_Part of Canto II._)

II.

Ustęp z drugiéj pieśni Don Żuana, przełożył Wiktor z Baworowa. pp. 28.
_Druk. "Czasu." Kraków, 1877_. [8º.

(_Canto III._)

III.

_Don Żuan_, pieśń trzecia, przekład Wiktora z Baworowa. pp. 35. _redak.
"Przeglądu Polskiego," Druk. "Czasu." Kraków, 1877._ [8º.


(_Cantos II., III., IV.--Haida_.)

IV.

_Don Żuan_, pieśń druga, trzecia i czwarta. Opowiadanie o Haidzie;
przekład Wiktora z Baworowa. pp. 118. viii. _Tow. Bratniéj Pomocy
Słuchaczów Wszechn. Lwowskiéj: Tarnopol, 1879_. [8º.

V.

_Don Żuan_ ... Przekład Edwarda Porębowicza. _Warszawa_, 1885.


_Roumanian_.

Don Juan/ dela/ Lord Byron./ Poema epica./ Tradusa de I. Eliade./
[Emblem--Cupid and Mask.]/ _Eliade: Bucurescĭ_./ In tipograsia lui
Eliade./ 1847./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 183.

_Russian_.

I.

Донъ-Жуанъ ... Переводъ И. Жандра. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Don" Zhuan"
... Perevod" I. Zhandra. S.-Peterburg"], 1846. [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 1-91.

II.

Донъ-Жуанъ ... Вольный переводъ В. Любичъ-Романовича. С.-Петербургъ
[Cyrillic: Don" Zhuan" ... Vol'nyĭ perevod" B. Liubich"-Romanovicha.
S.-Peterburg"], [1847.] 2 vols. [12º.

III.

Донъ-Жуанъ ... Глава первая. Переводъ Н.А. Маркевича. Лейпзигъ
[Cyrillic: Don" Zhuan" ... Glava pervaia. Perevod" N.A. Markevicha.
Leĭpzig"], 1862. [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 164.

IV.

Донъ-Жуанъ ... Перев. Д. Минаева. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Don" Zhuan"
... Perev. D. Minaeva. S.-Peterburg"], 1866, 67.

V.

Донъ-Жуанъ ... Переводъ П. Козлова. Иэданіе 2-e с" примѣчаніями П.
Вейнберга. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Don" Zhuan" ... Perevod" P. Kozlova.
Izdanīe 2-e s" primiechanīiami P. Veĭnberga. S.-Peterburg"], 1889. 2
vols.

VI.

Донъ-Жуанъ ... Переводъ А. Козлова. 2 TOM. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Don"
Zhuan" ... Perevod" A. Kozlova. 2 TOM. S.-Peterburg"], 1892.


_Servian_.

Дон-Жуанъ ... Перевод у прози Окице Глушчевиѣа 2 свес. Београд
[Cyrillic: Don-Zhuan" ... Perevod u prozi Okitse Glushcheviya 2 sves.
Beograd], 1888.


_Spanish_.

I.

_Don Juan, novela_. Por lord Byron. Deux Volumes. Impr. de Decourchant,
à Paris, A Paris rue du Temple, N. 69. 1829. [18º.

[_Bibl. de le France_, January 24, 1829.]

II.

Don Juan/ Poema/ de/ Lord Byron./ Traduccion de/ F. Villalva/ Difficile
est proprie communia dicere./ Horacio. _Epistola á los Pisones._/ Tomo
1/ Madrid/ Librería de Leocadio Lopez/13--Calle del Cármen--13/ 1876/
[8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. xv. + 384 + Indice, p. [385].

Vol. II.: pp. 420 + Indice, p. [421].


_Swedish_.

I.

Don Juan/ Af/ Lord Byron./ Första Sången./ Med upplysande och utwalde
Noter./ Öfversatt ifrån Engelska Originalet./ Stockholm,/ Nordströmska
Boktryckeriet,/ 1838./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 80.

II.

Don Juan/ Af/ Lord Byron./ Förra Delen./ Sångerna I-VI./ Stockholm,/
J.L. Brudins Förlag. [1857.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. 349.

Vol. II.: [Sednare Delen. Sångerna VII.-XVI.--1862], pp. 384.

_Note_.--This edition ("Öfversättning Af Carl. Wilh. Aug. Strandberg")
was issued in paper covers with vignette portrait of Lord Byron.


_English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers_.

I.

The/ British Bards,/ A Satire./ [1808.] [4º.

_Collation_--

No Title-page. Pp. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16
[pp. 17, 18, 19, 20, proof-sheets of 84 lines:--(line 1), "Health to
Immortal Jeffrey! once in name;"--(line 84), "Her son, and vanish'd in a
Scottish mist" + p. 21, proof-sheet uniform with pp. 1-16, of 20
lines:--(line 1), "Illustrious Holland! hard would be his lot;"--(line
20), "Reforms each error, and refines the whole"], pp. 19, 20, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.

Signature C is at the foot of p. 5; D, p. 9; E, p. 13; G, p. 21; H, p.
25.

Pp. 1-16 contain 284 lines: (line 1), "Time was, e'er yet in these
degenerate days;" (line 284), "Of Jefferies! monarch of the Scourge and,
chain." (Lines 281-284 are erased.)

Pp. 19-29 contain 200 lines: (line 1), "Now to the drama turn, oh!
motley sight;" (line 200), "And urge thy bards, to gain a name like
thine." The last line of p. 29 is numbered 520, and the date 1808 is
subscribed.

_Note_.--The page measures 278 X 218. The water-mark on the last page
(p. 29) is 1807; the water-mark on the original wrapper, "J.W. & B.B.
1806." A wrapper of the original sheets is inscribed, "This is the
original Satire which L^d B. put into my hands. It was printed in the
Country, where he had been staying. He added 110 lines before it was
published. R.C.D." (_B.M._, E.G. 2028.)

II.

English Bards,/ And/ Scotch Reviewers./ A Satire./ I had rather be a
kitten, and cry, mew!/ Than one of these same metre ballad-mongers./
Shakspeare./ Such shameless Bards we have; and yet 'tis true,/ There are
as mad, abandon'd Critics too./ Pope./ London:/ Printed for James
Cawthorn, British Library,/ No. 24, Cockspur Street./ [1809.] [12º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf, pp. i., ii.; Title (R. _T. Collins, Printer, No.
1, Harvey's Buildings, Strand_), pp. iii., iv.; Preface, pp. v., vi.;
Text (696 lines), pp. 1-54. The Imprint (_T. Collins, Printer, Harvey's
Buildings, Strand_) is at the foot of p. 54.

_Note_.--The words "Scotch Reviewers" on the Title are in Gothic
characters. Facsimile of the Title-page faces p. xiv. of _Poetical
Works_, 1898, vol. i.

III.

English Bards,/ And/ Scotch Reviewers;/ A Satire./ By/ Lord Byron./ I
had rather be a kitten, and cry, mew!/ Than one of these same metre
ballad-mongers./ Shakspeare./ Such shameless Bards we have; and yet 'tis
true,/ There are as mad, abandon'd Critics too./ Pope./ Second Edition,/
With/ Considerable Additions and Alterations./ London:/ Printed for
James Cawthorn, British Library, No. 24,/ Cockspur Street./ 1809./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf, pp. i., ii.; Title (R. _Printed by Deans & Co.
Hart-Streeet, Covent Garden_./), pp. iii., iv.; Preface to the Second
Edition, pp. v.-vii.; Text (1050 lines), pp. 1-82; Postscript, pp.
83-85. The Imprint, as above, is at the foot of p. 85. The Advt. (_In
the Press,/ And speedily will be published_,/ HENRY COUNT DE KOLINSKY, a
Polish Tale./) is in the centre of p. [86].

_Note_.--The words "A Satire" on the Title, and the words "Scotch
Reviewers" on the Half-title, are in Gothic characters.

IV.

English Bards,/ And/ Scotch Reviewers;/ A Satire./ By/ Lord Byron./ I
had rather be a kitten, and cry, mew!/ Than one of these same metre
ballad-mongers./ Shakspeare./ Such shameless Bards we have; and yet 'tis
true,/ There are as mad, abandon'd Critics too./ Pope./ Third Edition./
London:/ Printed for James Cawthorn, British Library, No. 24,/ Cockspur
Street./ 1810./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf, pp. i., ii.; Title (R. Printed by _T. Collins,
Harvey's Buildings, Strand, London_.), pp. iii., iv.; Preface to the
Third Edition, pp. v.-vii.; Text (1050 lines), pp. 1-82; Postscript, pp.
83-85 + Advt. of "Books Published by James Cawthorn," etc., pp.
[86]-[88]. The Imprint (_Printed by T. Collins, No. 1, Harvey's
Buildings, Strand, London_.) is at the foot of p.[88].

_Note_.--The Advt. of "The British Circulating Library, 24 Cockspur
Street," etc., is dated March 30, 1810. The words "A Satire" and
"London" on the Title, and the words "English Bards" on Half-title, are
in Gothic characters.

V.

English Bards,/ And/ Scotch Reviewers;/ A Satire./ By/ Lord Byron./ I
had rather be a kitten, and cry, mew!/ Than one of these same metre
ballad-mongers./ Shakspeare./ Such shameless Bards we have; and yet 'tis
true,/ There are as mad, abandon'd Critics too./ Pope./ Fourth Edition./
London:/ Printed for James Cawthorn, British Library, No. 24,/ Cockspur
Street./ 1810./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf, pp. i., ii.; Title (R._Printed by T. Collins,
Harvey's Buildings, Strand, London_.), pp. iii., iv.; Preface to the
Third Edition, pp. v.-vii.; Text (1050 lines), pp. 1-82; Postscript, pp.
83-85 + "Books Published by James Cawthorn," etc., pp.[86]-[88]. The
Imprint (_Printed by T. Collins, No. 1, Harvey's Buildings, Strand,
London_) is at the foot of p.[88].

_Note_.--The Advt. of the "British Circulating Library, 24, Cockspur
Street," etc., is dated March 30, 1810. The words "Satire" and "London"
on the Title, and the words "English Bards" on the Half-title, are in
Gothic characters.

VI.

English Bards,/ And/ Scotch Reviewers;/ A Satire./ By/ Lord Byron./ I
had rather be a kitten, and cry, mew!/ Than one of these same metre
ballad-mongers./ _Shakespeare_/ Such shameless Bards we have; and yet
'tis true,/ There are as mad, abandon'd Critics too./ Pope./ Fourth
Edition./ London:/ Printed for James Cawthorn, British Library, No. 24,/
Cockspur Street; and Sharpe and Hailes, Piccadilly./ 1811./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf, pp. i., ii.; Title (R. _Printed by Cox, Son, and
Baylis, Gt. Queen Street, London_.), pp. iii., iv.; Preface, pp.
v.-vii.; Text (1052 lines), pp. 1-82; Postscript, pp. 83-85 + "Books
published by James Cawthorn," etc., pp. [87], [88]. The Imprint
(_Printed by Cox, Son, and Baylis, Great Queen Street,
Lincoln's-Inn-Fields_./) is at the foot of p. 85.

_Note_.--On the Title-page of another copy of this edition there is a
period instead of a comma after "James Cawthorn." The word "Satire" on
the Title, and the words "Scotch Reviewers" on the Half-title, are in
Gothic characters.

VII.

[Fifth Edition.] [8º.

[For Title-page, _vide supra_, Fourth Edition, 1811, No. vi. No special
Title-page for a Fifth Edition was printed.]

_Collation_--

Text, pp. 1-83. [Signature B, p. [1]; C, p. 17; D, p. 33; E, p. 49; F,
p. 65; G, p. 81.] There is no Imprint on pp. [1], 83, or on p. [84]. The
Text numbers 1070 lines.

_Note_ (1).--The Half-title prefixed to the Title-page of the Fourth
Edition of 1811, which precedes the Museum copy of the Fifth Edition,
bears the MS. signature, "R.C. Dallas," and a blank leaf the following
note: "This is one of the very few copies preserved of the suppressed
edition, which would have been the Fifth. No Title-page was printed--the
one prefixed was taken from the preceding edition."

_Note_ (2)--Mr. S. Leicester Warren (Lord de Tabley) records the
following MS. notes inscribed in a copy of the Fifth Edition, which had
formerly belonged to James Boswell, jun., and was then in the possession
of Mr. J.R.P. Kirby, of Bloomsbury Street:--

A. A note on the abortive duel between Jeffrey and Moore is dated
November 4, 1811.

B. A note on the fly-leaf in the handwriting of James Boswell, jun.--

"This copy purports on the title-page to be the fourth edition, but is
in truth the fifth. Having pointed out to Murray, the bookseller, a
variation between the copy of the fifth edition and this, he borrowed it
from me, that he might show it to Lord Byron to have the circumstance
explained; that his lordship told him he had printed the fifth edition,
but, before its publication, having repented of the work altogether, he
determined to destroy the whole impression. But the printer, as he
observed, must have retained at least this one copy, and, by putting a
false title-page, had sold it as the fourth edition," etc.--_Notes and
Queries_, 1887, Series V. vol. vii. pp. 203, 204.

Mr. Murray's copy of the Fifth Edition contains, on the fly-leaves at
the beginning of the volume, MS. versions of (1) _The Curse of Minerva_,
pp. [i.]-[xi.]; (2) The Answer to Fitzgerald's Epigram, written at the
"Alfred," on _English Bards, etc._, p. [xv.]; and on p. xvi. the
following MS. Title-page:--

English Bards/ and Scotch Reviewers; a/ Satire/ By Lord Byron./ I had
rather be a kitten, and cry, mew!/ Than one of these same metre
ballad-mongers./ Shakspere./ Such shameless Bards we have; and yet 'tis
true,/ There are as mad, abandon'd critics too./ Pope./ Fifth Edition,/
Unpublished; with considerable additions./ London:/ Printed for James
Cawthorne,/ Cockspur Street./ 1812./

At the end of the volume a MS. version of "Lines on the Removing Lady
Jersey's Portrait from the Gallery of Beauties," is on pp. [85], [86],
and a MS. version of "On a Recent Discovery, 1813," on p. [89].

P. xiv. is headed by the following MS. note: "Lord Byron has two copies
of this work, R.C. Dallas, Esq., has likewise two copies, and Mr. Leigh
Hunt one."

VIII.

_English Bards, etc.; a Satire_. 1st Amer. from 3rd London Ed.
Philadelphia. 1811. [8º.

[Cat. of Boston Athenæum Library, 1874.]

IX.

_English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers; A Satire_. By Lord Byron.
Charleston: Moxford, Wellington & Co., 1811. [8º.

X.

_English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers_. Boston. 1814. [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 72.

XI.

English Bards/ And/ Scotch Reviewers;/ A Satire./ By Lord Byron./ From
the last London Edition./ I had rather be a kitten, and cry mew!/ Than
one of these same metre ballad-mongers./ Shakspeare./ Such shameless
bards we have; and yet 'tis true/ There are as mad, abandon'd critics
too./ Pope./ New York:/ Published by A.T. Goodrich & Co., 124
Broad-/Way, Corner of Cedar-Street./ _I. Seymour, print._/ 1817;./
[12º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. i., ii.; Preface to the Third Edition, pp. iii.,
iv.; Text, pp. 5-54.

_Note_.--The text numbers 1050 lines, but lacks the Postscript. The
misprint "ingenious" for "ingenuous youth," in footnote (p. 7) to line
56, which belongs to the Fourth Edition of 1811, and was corrected by
Byron for the Fifth Edition, occurs in this edition.

XII.

English Bards, And/ Scotch Reviewers;/ A Satire./ Ode to the Land of the
Gaul.--Sketch/ From Private Life.--Windsor/ Poetics, Etc./ By/ The Right
Honorable/ Lord Byron./ Second Edition./ Paris:/ Published by Galignani/
At the French, English, Italian, German, and Spanish/ Library, No. 18,
Rue Vivienne./ 1818./ [12º.


_Collation_--

Title, one leaf; Second Half-title, pp. 1, 2; Preface, pp. 3-5; Text,
pp. 7-70; Postscript, pp. 71-73; Ode, etc., pp. 75-84.

_Note_.--The Text numbers 1052 lines. This edition follows the Fourth
Edition of 1811. The misprint "ingenious" for "ingenuous" is in a
footnote, p. 10. A Third Edition, identical with the Second, was issued
in 1819.

XIII.

English Bards,/ And/ Scotch Reviewers;/ A Satire./ With Notes and
Preface,/ By/ Lord Byron./ Brussels,/ Published at the English
Repository of Arts, No. 602,/ Rue de L'Impératrice./ Printed by Demanet,
Rue des Bogards./ 1819./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf; Half-title with Mottoes, pp. 1, 2; Preface, pp.
[3]-[5]; Text, pp. 7-62; Postscript, pp. 63, 64.

_Note_.--The Front. is "Lord Byron," "_lith. par Toland_." The Text
numbers 1052 lines. This edition follows the Fourth Edition of 1811. The
misprint "ingenious" is at the foot of p. 10.

XIV.

English Bards,/ And/ Scotch Reviewers;/ A Satire./ By/ The Right
Honorable/ Lord Byron./ I had rather be a kitten, and cry, mew!/ Than
one of these same metre ballad-mongers./ _Shakspeare_./ Such shameless
Bards we have; and yet 'tis true,/ There are as mad, abandon'd Critics
too./ _Pope_./ Geneva:/ Published by P.G. Ledouble,/ No. 24, Rue de la
Cité./ 1820./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. Advt. of Joseph Forsyth's Remarks on Antiquities, etc.,
and Imprint, _Printed by Sestié Fils_.); Title, one leaf, pp. 1, 2;
Preface, pp. 3-5; Text, pp. 1-66; Postscript, pp. 67, 68.

_Note_.--The Text numbers 1052 lines. This edition follows the Fourth
Edition of 1811.

XV.

English Bards,/ and/ Scotch Reviewers./ A Satire./ By Lord Byron./ I had
rather be a kitten, and cry, Mew!/ Than one of these same metre
ballad-mongers./ _Shakespeare_./ Such shameless Bards we have; and yet,
'tis true,/ There are as mad, abandon'd Critics too./ _Pope_./ London:/
Benbow, Printer and Publisher, Byron's Head,/ Castle-Street,
Leicester-Square./ 1823,/ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. v. + [7]-61. The Imprint (_W. Benbow, Printer, Castle-st.
Leicester-sq._) is at the foot of p. 61.

_Note_.--The Text numbers 1050 lines. This edition follows the Third
Edition of 1810.

XVI.

English Bards/ And/ Scotch Reviewers;/ A Satire./ By Lord Byron./
[Mottoes as above, six lines.] A New Edition,/ With a Life of the
Author./ To which is added/ Fare Thee Well, A Poem./ Glasgow:/ Printed
by James Starke,/ and sold by All the Booksellers./ 1824./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xiv. + 15-52 + Fare Thee Well! pp. [53], [54].

_Note_.--The Text numbers 1050 lines, as in the Third Edition. The
misprint "ingenious" for "ingenuous" occurs in a footnote to p. 16.

XVII.

English Bards/ and/ Scotch Reviewers:/ A Satire./ By Lord Byron./
[Mottoes as above, six lines ("Shakspeare").] A New Edition,/ With a
life of the Author./ To which is added/ Fare Thee Well, A Poem./
Glasgow:/ Printed for M'Intosh & Co./ And sold by All the Booksellers./
1825./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xiv. + 34.

_Note_.--The Text numbers 1050 lines. This edition is differently
paginated from the preceding, and the Notes are reset (the misprint
"ingenious" is corrected), but the Text, Preface, and the "Life of the
Author" seem to have been set up from the same type.

XVIII.

English Bards/ and/ Scotch Reviewers;/ A Satire,/ By Lord Byron./
London:/ Printed and Published by W. Dugdale,/ _23, Russell Court, Drury
Lane_./ 1825./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 50.

_Note_.--The Text numbers 1050 lines. The Notes are printed after the
text, pp. 35-50. In Note 3 the misprint "ingenious" is retained. _The
English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers_ (Third Edition, of 1050 lines) was
included in the _British Satirist_, Glasgow, 1826, 12º, pp. 1-46, and
formed part (pp. 139-178) of a collection of Satires, Gilford's _Baviad
and Mæviad_, etc., published by J.F. Dove, London, 1827, 12º. The
misprint "ingenious" has been corrected in both these issues.

XIX.

English Bards,/ And/ Scotch Reviewers,/ A Satire./ By/ Lord Byron./ I
had rather be a kitten, and cry, mew,/ Than one of these same metre
ballad-mongers./ _Shakspeare_./ Such shameless bards we have; and yet,
'tis true,/ There are as mad abandoned critics too. _Pope_./ A New
Edition./ London:/ Printed by T. Kay, at the Egyptian Press, 1, Welbeck
Street,/ Cavendish Square, For the Booksellers./ 1827./ [8º

_Collation_--

Half-title, pp. i., ii.; Title, pp. iii., iv.; Preface, pp. v.-vii.;
Text, pp. 1-78; Postscript (_sic_), pp. [79]-80. The Imprint (_Printed
by T. Kay, 1, Welbeck Street, Cavendish Square_.) is at the foot of p.
80.

_Note_.--The Text follows the Third Edition of 1810. The misprint
"ingenious" occurs in a footnote to p. 4. The words "A Satire,"
"Shakspeare," and "Pope" on the Title-page are in Gothic characters.


_Fare Thee Well_.

I.

_Fare Thee Well_. First Version, consisting of Thirteen Stanzas, dated
March 18, 1816. [249 x 190.

_Collation_--

Pp. [1]-[3].

II.

_Fare Thee Well_! [Printed and distributed, April 4, 1816.] [4º.

_Collation_--

Pp. [1]-3. P. [4] is blank. A copy of this pamphlet in the British
Museum is marked as "Privately printed for Lord Byron," and measures 237
x 173. The watermark is "J. GREEN, 1815."

_Note_.--The Text numbers 60 lines. Lines 1-24 are on p. [1]; lines
25-56 on p. 2; and lines 57-60 on p. 3. In line 28 "may" is printed
"ḿay." _Fare Thee Well_ was first published in _The Champion_, Sunday,
April 14, 1816.

III.

_Fare Thee Well_. Second Version, consisting of Sixty Lines, dated
Monday, "April 7, 1816." [250 x 190.

_Collation_--

Pp. 1-3.

IV.

_A Sketch from Private Life_, consisting of 104 lines, dated March 30th,
1816. [250 x 190.

_Collation_--

Pp. [1]-4.

V.

_A Sketch, etc._ Another copy, dated March 30, 1816, and endorsed,
"Correct with most particular care, and print off 50 copies, and keep
standing. 1816, April 2."

VI.

_Fare Thee Well_!--A Sketch, etc.--Napoleon's Farewell.--On the Star of
the Legion of Honour.--An Ode. By Lord Byron. London: _Printed for
Sherwood, Neely and Jones, Paternoster Row_, 1816. [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 27.

_Note_.--"Original blue paper cover."--_Catalogue of Rowfant Library_,
1886, p. 146.

VII.

Fare Thee Well,/ A Poem./ A Sketch/ From Private Life,/ A Poem,/ By Lord
Byron./ Bristol:/ Printed for Barry & Son, High-Street./ 1816./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, pp. 1, 2; Title (R. _Barry & Son, Printers_.), pp. 3, 4;
Text (_Fare Thee Well_), pp. 5-7; (A Sketch, etc.), pp. 8-12. The
Imprint, as above, is at the foot of p. 12.

The Text is identical with that of the pamphlet.

VIII.

Fare Thee Well!/ And/ Other Poems./ By Lord Byron./ Edinburgh:/ Printed
for John Robertson,/ 132, High Street./ 1816./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. 1, 2; Text, pp. 3-32. The Imprint (_Walker and
Greig, Printers_) is at the foot of p. 32.

_Contents_--

Fare Thee Well                                                      p. 3
A Sketch                                                            p. 7
Napoleon's Farewell                                                p. 13
On the Star of "The Legion of Honour"                              p. 15
Ode from the French                                                p. 18
Ode ("Oh, shame to thee," etc.)                                    p. 25
Madame Lavalette                                                   p. 30


_Note_.--An editorial note (p. 24) states that the Ode "Oh, shame to
thee" was first published in the _Morning Chronicle_, July 31, 1815,
under the signature "Brutus." "It has been ascribed by many to the
Author of the _Pleasures of Hope_." A second note (p. 30) apologizes for
the inclusion of "Madame Lavalette" [first published in the _Examiner_,
January 21, 1816], which "has appeared in some other Editions of these
Poems."


_The Giaour._

I.

The Giaour,/ A Fragment of/ A Turkish Tale./ By Lord Byron./ "One fatal
remembrance--one sorrow that throws/ "Its bleak shade alike o'er our
joys and our woes--/ "To which Life nothing brighter nor darker can
bring,/ "For which joy hath no balm--and affliction no sting."/ Moore./
London:/ _Printed by T. Davison, Whitefriars_,/ For John Murray,
Albemarle-Street./ 1813./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf; Title, one leaf; Dedication, "To Samuel Rogers,
Esq.;" Text, pp. 1-41. The Imprint (_T. Davison, Lombard-Street,/
Whitefriars, London_./) is in the centre of p. [42].

_Note_.--The First Edition of the _Giaour_ (June 5, 1813) numbers 685
lines.

II.

The Giaour,/ A Fragment of/ A Turkish Tale./ By Lord Byron./ "One fatal
remembrance--one sorrow that throws/ "Its bleak shade alike o'er our
joys and our woes-- / "O'er which Life nothing brighter nor darker can
fling,/ "For which joy hath no balm--and affliction no sting." / Moore./
A New Edition, with some Additions./ London:/ _Printed by T. Davison,
Whitefriars_,/ For John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1813./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf; Title, one leaf; Dedication as above; Advt., "The
tale," etc.; Text, pp. 1-47. The Imprint, as above (No. i.), is in the
centre of p. [48].

_Note_.--The Second Edition of the _Giaour_, published at the end of
June or the beginning of July, numbers 816 lines. Note the misprints in
third line of the motto, "O'er which" for "To which," and "fling" for
"bring." The first edition of the Song, _A Selection of the Irish
Melodies_, 1807, i. 45, and other editions read "bring."

III.

The Giaour,/ A Fragment of/ A Turkish Tale./ By Lord Byron./ "One fatal
remembrance," etc. [Motto, four lines, as in the Second Edition]./
Moore./ Third Edition,/ With Considerable Additions./ London:/ _Printed
by T. Davison, Whitefriars_,/ For John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1813./
[8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. Advt. of "Madame de Stael's Long Suppressed Work" [_De
L'Allemagne_]); Title, one leaf; Dedication; Advt., pp. 1, 2; Text, pp.
3-53 + Advt. of "Books Lately Published by John Murray," pp. [54]-[56].
The Imprint (_T. Davison, Lombard Street,/ Whitefriars, London_./) is at
the foot of p. [56].

_Note_.--The Text numbers 950 lines. The numbers 5, 10, etc., are
printed on the margin. The First and Second Editions are not numbered.

IV.

The Giaour,/ A Fragment of/ A Turkish Tale./ By Lord Byron./ "One fatal
remembrance--one sorrow that throws/ It's bleak shade alike o'er our
joys and our woes--/ O'er which Life nothing brighter nor darker can
fling,/ For which joy hath no balm--and affliction no sting."/ Moore./
From the Third London Edition./ Boston:/ Printed by John Eliot,/ No. 5,
Court Street./ 1813.

_Collation_--

Pp. 72.

_Note_.--The _Giaour_ was also published at Philadelphia in 1813, 53 pp.
24º.

V.

The Giaour,/ A Fragment of/ A Turkish Tale./ By Lord Byron./ "One fatal
remembrance," etc. [Motto, four lines, as in Second Edition]./ Moore./
Fifth Edition,/ With Considerable Additions./ London:/ _Printed by T.
Davison, Whitefriars_,/ For John Murray, Albemarle Street./ 1813./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf; Title, one leaf; Advt.; Text, pp. 1-66.

_Note_.--The Text numbers 1215 lines. The concluding note, "The
circumstance," etc., is enlarged (p. 66) by nine lines: "I do not
know"--"Hall of Eblis." The Dedication is wanting in the copy of the
Fifth Edition in the British Museum.

VI.

The Giaour,/ etc./ Sixth Edition,/ etc./ 1813./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf; Dedication; Advt.; Text, pp. 1-66.

_Note_.--The Text numbers 1215 lines. The Half-title is missing in the
Museum copy.

VII.

The Giaour,/ A Fragment of/ A Turkish Tale./ By Lord Byron./ "One fatal
remembrance," etc. [Motto, four lines, as in the First Edition, "bring"
for "fling," etc.]./ Moore./ Seventh Edition, With some Additions./
London:/ _Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars_,/ For John Murray,
Albemarle Street./ 1813./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf; Title, one leaf; Dedication; Advt.; Text, pp.
1-75. The Imprint (_T. Davison, Lombard Street_,/ Whitefriars, London./)
is in the centre of p. [76].

_Note_.--The Text numbers 1334 lines. The Notes are printed at the end
(pp. 65-75) of the volume.

VIII.

The Giaour,/ etc./ The Ninth Edition,/ etc./ 1814./ [8º.

_Collation_--

_Vide supra_, No. vi.

_Note_.--The Half-title is missing in the Museum copy.

IX.

The Giaour,/ etc./ The Tenth Edition,/ etc./ 1814./ [8º.

_Collation_--

_Vide supra_, No. vi.

_Note_.--Four pages of "Interesting Works Published in February, 1814,
By John Murray, Bookseller of the Admiralty, and Board of Longitude,"
etc., are bound up with the Tenth Edition.

X.

The Giaour,/ etc./ The Eleventh Edition,/ etc./ 1814./ [8º.

_Collation_--

_Vide supra_, No. vi.

_Note_.--The Half-title is missing in the Museum copy.

XI.

The Giaour,/ etc./ The Twelfth Edition./ London:/ Printed for John
Murray, Albemarle-Street:/ _By Thomas Davison, Whitefriars_./ 1814./
[8º.

_Collation_--

_Vide supra_, No. vi.

XII.

The Giaour,/ etc./ The Fourteenth Edition./ London:/ Printed for John
Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1815./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf; Title (R. _T. Davison, Lombard-Street_,/
_Whitefriars, London_,/); Dedication; Advt.; Text, pp. 1-75. The
Imprint, as above, is in the centre of p. [76].

_Note_.--Four pages of Advts., dated "Albemarle--Street, London,
January, 1818," are bound up with the Fourteenth Edition.

XIII.

The Giaour;/ A Fragment of/ A Turkish Tale./ [Motto, four lines.]
Moore./ London:/ Printed and Published by W. Dugdale,/ _23, Russell
Court, Drury Lane_./ 1825./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 51. The Imprint (_W. Dugdale, Printer, 23, Russell Court, Drury
Lane_) is at the foot of p. [52].

XIV.

The Giaour:/ A/ Fragment of a Turkish Tale./ By/ Lord Byron./ London:
John Murray, Albemarle Street./ Sold also by/ Tilt and Bogue, Fleet
Street:/ Edinburgh, Oliver and Boyd: Dublin, John Gumming./ 1842./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 67. The Imprint (_London:/ Printed by A. Spottiswoode,/
New-Street-Square_./) is in the centre of p. [68].

XV.

The Giaour:/ A Fragment of a Turkish Tale,/ By Lord Byron./ [Motto, four
lines.] Moore./ [1844.] [8º.


_Collation_--

Pp. 40. The Imprint (_H.G. Clarke and Co., 66, Old Bailey_) is at the
foot of p. 40.

_Note_.--Part of "Clarke's Home Library."


_Translations of The Giaour_.

_French_.

_Le Giaour_, fragments d'un cante turc, poème traduit de l'anglais de
lord Byron, par J.M.H. Bigeon, Paris, Ponthieu, Ledoyen, 1828. [18º.

[Quérard, 1846.]


_German_.

I.

_Der Gauer_, Bruchstück einer türkischen Erzählung, nach der 7.
englischen Ausgabe im Deutschen metrisch bearbeitet. Berlin, F. Dümmler.
1819. [12º.

[_Centralblalt, etc._, 1890, vol. vii. p. 456.]

II.

_Der Gjaur_. In deutsche Verse übersetzt v. Arthur v. Nordstern. Mit d.
engl. Text zur Seite. Leipzig, Göschen. 1820. [8º.

[Kayser, 1834.]

III.

_Der Gjaur_. Bruchstück e. türk. Erzählg. v. Lord Byron. Frei übers. v.
Adf. Seubert. Leipzig. 1871-76. [16º.

[Kayser, 1877.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 48.

_Note_.--No. 669 of the _Universal-Bibliothek_.

_Italian_.

I.

_Il Giaurro_, frammento di novella turca; recato dall' ingl. in versi
ital. da Pellegrino Rossi. Genova e Parigi, Paschoud, 1817. [12º.

[Quérard, 1827.]

II.

_Il Giaurro_. Traduzione di Andrea Maffei. Milano, Hoepli. 1884. [64º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]


_Polish_.

I.

_Giaur_, ułomki powieści tureckiéj, poema ... Przeldadania Władysl. hr.
Ostrowskiego. pp. 83. _W drukarni bibliotecznéj; Puławy_, 1830. [8º.

II.

_Giaur_, Ułamki powieści tureckiéj, tłum. Adam Mickiewicz, _Ksiegarnia
Katol._: Paryż, 1834 [_Wrocław_, 1835]. [8º.


_Romaic_.

I.

Ποιηματα Βυρωνος / ὁ Γκιαουρ / τεμαχιον / τουρκικου Διηγηματος /
Μεταφρασις / Αἰκατερινης κ. Δοσιου / Ἐκδιδεται το Δευτερον / Ὑπο / Ἀρ. Κ.
Δοσιου / Ἀθηνησι / Τυποις Ἀνδρεου Κορομηλα / [Greek: Poiêmata Byrônos /
ho Gkiaour / temachion / tourkikou Diêgêmatos / Metaphrasis /
Ai)katerinês k. Dosiou / E)kdidetai to Deuteron / HYpo / A)r. K. Dosiou
/ A)thênêsi / Tupois A)ndreou Koromêla /] / 1873/ [4º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf; Title, one leaf; Translator's Advt.; Προλογος
[Greek: Prologos], pp. ά-ί [Greek: a'-i'] + Text, pp. 1-69 + Παροραματα
[Greek: Paroramata], p. [70].

II.

Σακελλαριου Βιβλιοθηκη του Λαου / Ποιηματα Βυρωνος / ὁ Γκιαουρ /
τεμαχιον / τουρκικου / Διηγηματος / Μεταφρασις / Αἰκατερινης κ. Δοσιου /
Ἐν Ἀθηναις / Τυποις και Ἀναλωμασι Π. Δ. Σακελλαριου / [Greek:
Sakellariou Bibliothêkê tou Laou / Poiêmata Byrônos / ho Gkiaour /
temachion / tourkikou / Diêgêmatos / Metaphrasis / Ai)katerinês k.
Dosiou / E)n A)thênais / Tupois kai A)nalômasi P.D. Sakellariou / ]
[1898?] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 91. The Imprint ( Τυπογραφειον Π. Δ. Σακελλαριου ἐν Ἀθηναις [Greek:
Typographeion P.D. Sakellariou e)n A)thênais ] ) is in the centre of p.
[92].

_Russian_.

I.

Джяуръ. Отрывки изъ одной турецкой повѣсти. "Выборъ из сочиненій лорда
Байрона" М. Каченвекаго. [Cyrillic: Dzhiaur". Otryvki iz" odnoĭ
turetskoĭ poviesti. Vybor" izh sochinenīĭ lorda Bairona M.
Kachenvekago.] pp. 107-176. 1821.

II.

Джяуръ. Отрывки турецкой повѣсти. ... Переводъ Н.Р. [Cyrillic: Dzhiaur".
Otryvki. ... turetskoĭ poviesti Perevod" N.R.] pp. 31. Москва [Cyrillic:
Moskva], 1822. [8º.

III.

Гяуръ ... Перевелъ Е. Мишелъ. [Cyrillic: Gayur" ... Perevel" E.
Mishel.] [In prose.] С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: S.-Peterburg"], 1862.
[8º.

_Collation_--
Pp. 49.

IV.

Гяуръ ... Перев. размѣромъ подлинника В. Петровъ. С.-Петербургъ
[Cyrillic: Gayur" ... Perev. razmierom" podlinnika V. Petrov".
S.-Peterburg"], 1873.

V.

Гяуръ Байрона и Крымскіе сонеты Минкевича. Перевелъ В.А. Петровъ.
Изданіе 2-ое. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Gayur" Baĭrona Kryemskie sonety
Minkevicha. Perevel" V.A. Petrov" Izdanie 2-oe. S.-Peterburg"], 1874.


_Servian_.

Ђаур лорда Бајрона. Сроски од Ац. Поповиђа [Cyrillic: Djaur lorda
Bairona. Sroski od Ats. Popovidja]. pp. 67. Д. Хипц: у Новот-Саду,
[Cyrillic: D. Khipts: u Novot-Sadu], 1860. [12º.


_Spanish_.

_El Giaur ó el infiel_, por lord Byron. Traduccion Castellana. Paris,
1828: Madrid, lib. Europea. [12º. [_Dicc. Gen. de Bibl. Esp_. por D.
Dion. Hidalgo, 1862.]

_Swedish_.

Giaurn,/ Ett. Stycke Af en Turkish Berättelse,/ Af/ Lord Byron./
Öfversättning / Stockholm./ J.L. Brudins Förlag./ 1855./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 80.

_Note_.--No. 6 of "Byron's Poetiska Berattelser," translated by
Talis-Qualis.

_Heaven and Earth_.

I.

_[Note_.--For the First Edition of _Heaven and Earth_, see _The
Liberal_, No. II., pp. 165-206 (London, L. Hunt, 1822).]

Heaven and Earth,/ A Mystery;/ Founded on the Following Passage in
Genesis,/ Chap. vi./ "And it came to pass ... that the sons of God saw
the/ daughters of men that they were fair; and they took them/ wives of
all which they chose."/ "And woman wailing for her Demon lover."/
Coleridge./ London:/ Benbow, Printer and Publisher, 252, High Holborn./
1824./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 35 + "Benbow's Catalogue of Books," p. [36]. The Imprint (_Benbow,
Printer, 9, Castle Street, Leicester Square, London_) is at the foot of
p. [36].

II.

_Heaven and Earth, a Mystery_, Paris, Galignani, 1823. [12º.

[Quérard, 1827.]

III.

_Heaven and Earth, etc._ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 36.

_Note_.--This edition, printed by (?) W. Dugdale in (?) 1825, bears
neither Title-page nor Imprint, and is bound up with _The Bride of
Abydos_, printed for Thomas Wilson in 1825, and _The Corsair_, printed
and published by W. Dugdale in 1825.


_Translations of Heaven and Earth_.


_French_.

Essai/ Sur Le Génie et Le Caractère/ de Lord Byron,/ Par A.P.... T.;/
etc./ Paris./ Ladvocat, Libraire, Palais-Royal,/ Galerie de Bois, No.
195./ 1824/ [12º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, Le Ciel/ Et La Terre./ Mystère/ Fondé sur ce Passage de La
Genèse:/ (Chap. VI)/: "Et il arriva ... que les fils de Dieu virent que
les filles des/ hommes étaient belles; et ils prirent pour femmes/
celles d'entre elles qu'ils choisirent./ "La femme regrettant son dèmon
bien-aimé."/ (Coleridge.)/ (R. _Personnages_.), pp. [195], [196] + Text,
pp. 197-252.

_Italian_.

_Cielo e terra_: mistero, tradotto da Andrea Maffei. Milano, Gnocchi,
1853. [16º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]


_Russian_.

Небо и Земля. Н.В. Гербель, [Cyrillic: Nebo i Zemlya. N.V. Gerbel',]
"Полное собраніе стихотвореній." [Cyrillic: Polnoe sobranie
stikhotvoreniĭ] TOM. I.


_Hebrew Melodies_.

I.

A Selection of/ Hebrew Melodies/ Ancient and Modern/ with appropriate
Symphonies and accompaniments/ By/ I: Braham & I: Nathan/ the Poetry
written expressly for the work/ By the Right Hon^ble^/ Lord Byron/ ent^d
at Sta^rs^ Hall/ [Title-vignette, angel holding crown] 1^st^ Number/
Published and Sold by I: Nathan No. 7 Poland Street Oxford Str^t / and
to be had at the principal Music and Booksellers/ Price one Guinea/
[1815] [fol.

[The Title-page is enclosed in an ornamental border, and below the
words, "_Drawn by Edward Blore_" is the signature "I. Braham;" and below
the words, "_Engraved by W. Lowry_," the signature "I. Nathan."]

_Collation_--

Part I.: Illuminated Dedication "To Her Royal Highness the Princess
Charlotte of Wales," one leaf; Preface, signed "I. Braham, I. Nathan,"
and dated "London, April, 1815," one leaf; Index to the First Number,
one leaf; Music and Words, pp. 1-64.

Part II.: Title (A Selection of,/ etc.... By the Right Honorable Lord
Byron.)/ [Motto], "The harp the Monarch Minstrel swept," etc., five
lines./ See Page 4./ Lord Byron./ 2^nd^ Number, Price 1 Guinea./ Ent^d
at Stationers' Hall./ Published and Sold, etc./ _Prickett scrip. et
sculp._/ [The Title-vignette is King David playing a harp with angel and
tripod, engraved by H. Moses.] The title is signed "I. Nathan."

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf; Dedication, as above, one leaf; Index to the Second
Number, one leaf; Music and Words, pp. 65-133.

_Contents_--Part I.--

She walks, etc.                                                     p. 1
The Harp, etc.                                                      p. 5
If that high World                                                 p. 14
The wild Gazelle                                                   p. 19
Oh, weep for those                                                 p. 25
On Jordan's Banks                                                  p. 29
Jephtha's Daughter                                                 p. 36
Oh, snatch'd away                                                  p. 41
My Soul is dark                                                    p. 44
I saw thee weep                                                    p. 49
Thy days are done                                                  p. 52
It is the Hour                                                     p. 63

Part II.--

Warriors and Chiefs                                                p. 65
We sate down and wept                                              p. 71
Vision of Belshazzar                                               p. 75
Herod's Lament                                                     p. 83
Were my Bosom                                                      p. 86
The Destruction of Sennacherib                                     p. 91
Thou whose spell                                                   p. 97
When Coldness wraps                                               P. 107
Fame, Wisdom, Love                                                p. 111
From the last Hill                                                p. 115
Francisca                                                         p. 120
Sun of the Sleepless                                              p. 129

_Note_.--For a reissue, with additions, of this collection, see
_Fugitive Pieces and Reminiscences of Lord Byron, etc._, by I. Nathan,
1829, No. xii., p. 254.

II.

Hebrew Melodies./ By Lord Byron./ London:/ Printed for John Murray,
Albemarle-Street./ 1815./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (Hebrew Melodies. _T. Davison, Lombard-Street,/ Whitefriars,
London_./), one leaf; Title, one leaf; Advt.; Cont.; Text (_Hebrew
Melodies_), pp. 1-53.

_Note_.--The Cont. are identical with the preceding, save that the
lines, "Francisca," a variant of _Parisina_ (lines 15-28), are omitted;
the lines _From Job_ are inserted pp. 49, 50; and the stanzas "On the
Death of Sir Peter Parker" (pp. 51-53) are printed at the end of the
volume.

III.

_Hebrew Melodies_. Boston. 1815. [24º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 2 + 43.

IV.

_Hebrew Melodies_. Philadelphia. 1815. [16º.

V.

Hebrew Melodies./ By the Right Honourable/ Lord Byron./ London: Printed
and Published by W. Dugdale,/ _Green Street, Leicester Square_./ 1823./
[12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 36. The Imprint (_Printed by W. Dugdale, Great Street, Leicester
Square_./) is at the foot of p. 36.

_Note_.--The lines "It is the Hour" (_Parisina_, 1-14) and "Francisca"
(_ibid._, lines 15-28) are omitted.

VI.


Hebrew Melodies./ By Lord Byron./ London:/ Printed and Published by W.
Dugdale,/ _23, Russell Court, Drury Lane_./ 1825./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 22. The Imprint (_Printed by W. Dugdale, 23, Russell Court, Drury
Lane_.) is at the foot of p. 22.

_Note_.--For Cont., _vide supra_, No. v.


_Translations of Hebrew Melodies_.


_Bohemian_.

_Hebrcjské melodie_. Přeložili Jaroslen Vrchlický a J.V. Sládek. _v
Praze_, 1890.


_Danish_.

Lord Byron:/ Jødiske sange./ oversatte/ af/ F. Andresen Halmrast/
Christiania./ Jacob Dybwads forlag./ 1889./

_Collation_--

Pp. 41 + Indhold, pp. [43], [44].


_German_.

I.

Hebräische Gesänge./ Aus dem Englischen/ des Lord Byron/ von/ Franz
Theremin./ Mit beigedrucktem englischen Text./ Berlin./ Verlag von
Dunker und Humblot./ 1820./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 3-87.

II.

_Hebräische Gesänge_. Aus d. Engl. übersetzt von Jos. Emn. Hitscher. Mit
gegenüberstehendem Originale. Laibach, 1833. [8º.

[Kayser, 1841.]

III.

Germanische/ Melodien./ Theilweise/ frei nach Lord Byron's hebräischen
Melodien/ von/ Hugo Oelbermann./ Bonn./ Rheinische Verlags-Anstalt./
1862./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 49.

IV.

Lord Byron's/ Hebräische Gesänge./ Aus dem Englischen/ übertragen/ und
mit sachlichen Einleitungen und Bemerkungen/ versehen/ von/ Eduard
Nickles./ Karlsruhe./ Druck und Verlag von Friedrich Gutsch./ 1863./

_Collation_--

Pp. 105 + Anmerkung, p. 106 + Anhang, pp. 107-112.

_Note_.--The English text is printed over against the German. The
"Anhang" contains translations of "In the valley," etc., and "They say
that hope," etc.

V.

Hebräischer Gesänge./ Aus d. Engl. übers. von Heinr. Stadelmann.
Memmingen. 1866. Hartwig in Comm. [16º.

[Kayser, 1871.]


_Hebrew_.

Hebrew Melodies/ of/ Lord Byron/ Translated by/ Dr. S. Mandelkern./
Leipzig./ 1890./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 45 + Cont. (Hebrew character) (R. Advt. of Hebrew Poems (with vowel
points) of Dr. S. Mandelkern), pp. [47], [48].

_Note_.--The Hebrew translation is over against the English text. The
Title-page, which is in Hebrew and English, is enclosed in an arabesque
border.


_Italian_.

I.

Melodie ebraiche/ di/ Lord G. Byron/ Versione/ di P.P. Parzanese/
Napoli/ dalla tipografia all' insegna di Tasso/ via Concezione a Toledo
No. 3./ 1837/

_Collation_--

Pp. 47.

_Note_.--Printed on green paper.

II.

_Le Melodie ebree_, coll' aggiunta di alcuni altri poemetti. Ivrea,
1855. [16º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]


_Russian_.

Еврейскія мереводъ П. Козлова. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Evreĭskiya
merevod" P. Kozlova. S.-Peterburg"], 1860.


_Swedish_.

Hebreiska Melodier/ af/ Lord Byron./ Öfversatta/ af/ Theodor Lind./
Helsingfors,/ Theodor Sederholms Forlag./ [1862.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 41 + Innehåll, p. [43].


_Fugitive Pieces and Minor Poems_.

Fugitive Pieces By/ George Gordon Lord Byron/ A Facsimile Reprint of/
The Suppressed/ Edition of/ 1806/ [Title-vignette, Venus Anadyomene in
shell with attendant Cupids.] London/ Printed for Private Circulation/
1886/ [4º.

_Collation_--

Advt. of issue (No. 22 of 100 numbered copies) of--_Printers,/ Chiswick
Press, Tooks Court,/ Chancery Lane, London_./ signed (MS.) "Charles
Whittingham & Co.," pp. i., ii.; Half-title (BYRON'S FUGITIVE PIECES),
pp. iii., iv.; Title, one leaf, pp. v., vi.; Preface (editorial of
facsimile), pp. vii.-x. + blank leaf + Half-title (FUGITIVE PIECES), one
leaf + Dedication--"To/ Those Friends,/ At/ Whose Request They were
printed,/ For whose/ Amusement or Approbation/ They are/ Solely
Intended;/ These TRIFLES are respectfully Dedicated,/ by the/ Author."/
(R. As these POEMS were never intended to meet the public eye, no
apology is necessary for the form in which they now appear. They are
printed merely for the perusal of a few friends to whom they are
dedicated; who will look upon them with indulgence; and as most of them
were composed between the age of 15 and 17, their defects will be
pardoned or forgotten, in the youth and inexperience of the WRITER.) +
Text, pp. [1]-66; (the Imprint (_Printed by S. and J. Ridge, Newark_.)
is at the foot of p. 66) + p. [67] (emblem-heraldic lion with shield and
monogram, subscribed with the Imprint, _Chiswick Press:--C. Whittingham
and Co., Tooks Court,/ Chancery Lane./_).

Contents-

On Leaving N...st...d                                             p. [i]

To E.                                                               p. 3

On the Death of Young Lady, Cousin to the Author and very Dear      p. 4
to him

To D.                                                               p. 5

To...                                                               p. 6

To Caroline                                                         p. 7

To Maria ----                                                      p. 10

Fragment of School Exercises, From the Prometheus Vinctus of       p. 11
Oeschylus(_sic_)

Lines in "Letters of an Italian Nun," etc.                         p. 12

Answer to the above, addresse'd to Miss ----                       p. 13

On a change of Masters, At a Great Public School                   p. 14

Epitaph on a Beloved Friend                                        p. 15

Adrian's Address to his Soul, when dying                           p. 16

Translation                                                        p. 16

To Mary                                                            p. 17

"When to their airy hall, my father's voice"                       p. 19

To ----                                                            p. 20

"When I hear you express an, affection so warm"                    p. 21

On a distant view of the Village and School of Harrow on The       p. 23
Hill. 1806.

Thoughts Suggested by a College Examination                        p. 25

To Mary, on Receiving her Picture                                  p. 28

On the Death of Mr. Fox, the following illiterate Impromptu        p. 30
appeared in the _Morning Post_

To which the Author of these Pieces sent the subjoined Reply,      p. 30
for insertion in the _Morning Chronicle_

To a Lady, who presented the Author a Lock of Hair, etc.           p. 31

To a Beautiful Quaker                                              p. 33

To Julia                                                           p. 36

To Woman                                                           p. 38

An Occasional Prologue, etc.                                       p. 39

To Miss E.P.                                                       p. 41

To Tear                                                            p. 43

Reply to some verses of J.M.B. Pigot, Esq., on the Cruelty of      p. 46
His Mistress

Granta, A Medley                                                   p. 49

To the Sighing Strephon                                            p. 54

The Cornelian                                                      p. 57

To A ----                                                          p. 59

As the Author was discharging his Pistols in a Garden, Two         p. 61
Ladies, etc.

Translation form Catullus: Ad Lesbiam                              p. 63

Translation of the Epitaph on Virgil and Tibullus by Domitius      p. 64
Marsus

Imitation of Tibullus "Sulpitia ad Cerintum" Lib. Quart.           p. 64

Translation from Cattulus: Luctus de Morte Passeris                p. 65

Imitated from Catullus. To Anna                                    p. 66


_Note_.--The original volume measures 8¾ ins. x 7½ ins. The wrapper is
of plain greenish-grey paper. The full Titles are given in the Table of
Cont. or in the heading of the Poems in _Poetical Works_, 1898, vol. i.
pp. xviii., etc. In the original issue the pages are numbered on the
head of each page, and subscribed with a double rule. "Ornaments" are to
be found on pp. [1], 3, 13, 14, 16, 40, 58, 60, 64, 66.

The signatures B (p. [1]) to S (p. 65) are in due sequence. The numbers
at the head of the pages are subscribed with a double rule.

II.

Poems/ On/ Various Occasions./ VIRGINIBUS PUERISQUE CANTO./ Hor. Lib. 3.
Od. 1./ Newark: Printed by S. & J. Ridge./ MDCCCVII./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 12 + 144--Half-title, one leaf, pp. [1], [2]; Title, one leaf, pp.
[3], [4]; Dedication (as above), pp. [5], [6]; Author's Advt., dated
December 23, 1806, pp. [7], [8]; Cont., pp. [9]-11; Text, 1-144. The
Imprint (_Printed by S, and J. Ridge, Newark_.) is at the foot of p.
144.

_Contents_--

On leaving Newstead                                                 p. 1
On a distant view, etc.                                             p. 4
To D.                                                               p. 7
Epitaph on a beloved Friend                                         p. 8
A Fragment                                                         p. 10
Fragments of School Exercises                                      p. 11
To E.                                                              p. 13
Reply to some verses of J.M.B. Pigot, Esq., etc.                   p. 14
To the sighing Strephon                                            p. 17
The Tear                                                           p. 21
To Miss ----                                                       p. 26
Lines written in "Letters," etc.                                   p. 28
Answer to the foregoing                                            p. 29
The Cornelian                                                      p. 30
On the Death of a Young Lady                                       p. 33
To Emma                                                            p. 35
To M.S.G.                                                          p. 38
To Caroline                                                        p. 41
To Caroline                                                        p. 43
To Caroline                                                        p. 46
Stanzas to a Lady with the Poems of Camoens                        p. 48
To Mary, on receiving her Picture                                  p. 50
To Lesbia                                                          p. 52
To Woman                                                           p. 55
To M.                                                              p. 57
Lines addressed to a Young Lady                                    p. 59
To M.S.G.                                                          p. 62
To a beautiful Quaker                                              p. 64
To a Lady who presented the Author with a Lock of her hair         p. 67


TRANSLATIONS AND IMITATIONS.

Adrian's Address to his Soul                                       p. 73
Translation                                                        p. 74
Translation from Catullus                                          p. 75
Translation of the Epitaph on Virgil, etc.                         p. 77
Imitation from Tibullus                                            p. 78
Translation from Catullus                                          p. 79
Imitation from Catullus                                            p. 81
Fragment from Horace                                               p. 82
Translation                                                        p. 83
Fragment of a Translation from Virgil                              p. 85


FUGITIVE PIECES.

On a change of Masters, etc.                                       p. 89
Thoughts suggested, etc.                                           p. 91
An occasional Prologue                                             p. 95
On the Death of Mr. Fox .                                          p. 97
Granta, a Medley                                                  p. 100
The first kiss of Love                                            p. 107
Childish Recollections                                            p. 109
Answer to some verses from Montgomery                             p. 121
Love's last Adieu                                                 p. 125
Lines addressed to the Rev. J.T. Becher                           p. 128
Reply to a Friend                                                 p. 131
Elegy on Newstead Abbey                                           p. 134


_Note_.--The Title measures 193 X 113. The first signature, C, is on p.
9; M, on p. 81; O (_not_ N), on p. 89; Q, on p. 105; U, on p. 137.
Signature P is omitted on p. 97.

The "ornaments" of the Quarto reappear on pp. [1], 9, 25, 32. The
numbers at the head of the pages are subscribed with a double rule. A
facsimile of the Title-page faces p. x. of vol. i. of the _Poetical
Works_, 1898.

III.


Hours of Idleness,/ A/ Series of Poems,/ Original/ And/ Translated,/ By
George Gordon, Lord Byron,/ A Minor./ Μητ' αρ με μαλ' αινεε μητε τι
νεικει [Greek: Mêt' ar me mal' ainee mête ti neikei ]. / Homer. Iliad,
10./ Virginibus puerisque Canto;/ Horace./ He whistled as he went for
want of thought./ Dryden./ Newark: Printed and sold by S. and J. Ridge;/
Sold also by B. Crosby and Co. Stationer's Court;/ Longman, Hurst, Rees,
and Orme, Paternoster-/Row; F. and C. Rivington, St. Paul's
Church-/Yard; and J. Mawman, In the Poultry,/ London./ 1807./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (Hours/ of/ Idleness.), one leaf, pp. i., ii.; Title, one
leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Preface, pp. [v.]-xiii. (R. _Errata_); Text, pp.
[1]-187. The Imprint (_Printed by S. and F. Ridge, Newark_.) is at the
foot of p. 187.

_Contents_--

On leaving Newstead                                                 p. 1
On a distant view, etc.                                             p. 4
Epitaph on a Friend                                                 p. 7
A Fragment                                                          p. 9
The Tear                                                           p. 10
An occasional Prologue                                             p. 15
On the Death of Mr. Fox                                            p. 17
Stanzas ... with the Poems of Camoens                              p. 20
The first Kiss of Love                                             p. 22
To M----                                                           p. 25
To Woman                                                           p. 27
To M.S.G.                                                          p. 29
To a beautiful Quaker                                              p. 31
To ----                                                            p. 34
To Mary, on receiving her Picture                                  p. 37
Love's last Adieu                                                  p. 39
Damætas                                                            p. 43
To Marion                                                          p. 44
Oscar of Alva                                                      p. 47


TRANSLATIONS AND IMITATIONS.

Adrian's Address, etc.                                             p. 71
Translation                                                        p. 72
Translation from Catullus                                          p. 73
Translation from the Epitaph of Virgil, etc.                       p. 75
Translation from Catullus                                          p. 76
Imitation from Catullus                                            p. 78
Translation from Anacreon. To the Lyre                             p. 79
Translation from Anacreon. Ode 3                                   p. 81
Fragments of School Exercises                                      p. 84
Episode of Nisus and Euryalus                                      p. 86
Translation from the Medea of Euripides                           p. 106


FUGITIVE PIECES.

Thoughts suggested by a College Examination                       p. 113
Answer to some elegant Verses, etc.                               p. 118
Granta, a Medley                                                  p. 121
Lachin Y Gair                                                     p. 129
To Romance                                                        p. 133
Elegy on Newstead Abbey                                           p. 137
Childish Recollections                                            p. 148
The Death of Calmar and Orla                                      p. 169
To E.N.L., Esq.                                                   p. 173
To ----                                                           p. 184

_Note_ (1).--A facsimile of the Title-page (2) faces p. xii. of vol. i.
of the _Poetical Works_, 1898. It has been alleged that large-paper
copies of this edition were issued from the Newark press. It is certain
that large copies (a copy in the British Museum, cut for binding,
measures 220 X 122), printed on paper bearing a water-mark dated 1806,
were thrown upon the market at an early period, but it has not been
ascertained at what date or in what place they were printed. They are
undoubtedly deliberate forgeries. They purport, even in respect of
_errata_, to be identical with the genuine issue of 1807; but they were
not set up from the same type, and it is inconceivable that a second
issue, set up from different type and with slightly different ornaments,
was printed by Ridge for piratical purposes. To cite a few obvious
differences--in the title of the large-paper copies the first A of the
word "TRANSLATED" is printed Λ [Greek: L ], and the Greek ν [Greek: n]
in αινεε [Greek: ainee] and νεικει [Greek: neikei] appears as υ [Greek:
u] (not ν [Greek: n] reversed); in the Errata on the reverse of p.
xiii., [Page] "153 Note" is incorrectly given as "163 Note," and this
slip on the part of the _falsarius_ is more remarkable, as two other
errata in the Errata are carefully reproduced; in the Greek motto on p.
22 the letter ρ [Greek: r] twice appears as ς [Greek: s]; and, finally,
the ornaments on pp. 1 and 187, though intended to be, are not
identical. In the Museum copy a portrait of "Lord Byron, from a sketch
taken on his leaving England," engraved by I. West, and "Published by V.
Hone, Ludgate Hill, 1819," precedes the title-page, and, together with
the binding, affords good, if not conclusive, proof that this copy was
printed before 1820.

See, for a correspondence on these L.P. copies of 1807, the _Athenæum_,
June, 1898, pp. 694, 695.

See, too, for further interesting and conclusive evidence that the
ornament on p. 187 of the L.P. copies was not printed from the Newark
block, _Newark as a Publishing Town_, by T.M. Blagg, 1898, pp. 28-30.

_Note_ (2).--An autograph note, dated May 20th, 1812, signed "Byron," is
inserted on the fly-leaf of a large-paper copy in the Rowfant Library
(_Catalogue_, 1886, p. 144).

IV.

Poems/ Original and Translated,/ By/ George Gordon, Lord Byron./ Μητ'
αρ' με μαλ' αινεε μητε τι νεικει [Greek: Mêt' ar' me mal' ainee mête ti
neikei]. / Homer. Iliad, 10./ He whistled as he went for want of
thought./ Dryden./ Second Edition./ Newark:/ Printed and sold by S. and
J. Ridge;/ Sold also by B. Crosby and Co. Stationer's Court;/ Longman,
Hurst, Rees, and Orme, Paternoster-/Row; F. & C. Rivington, S^t Paul's
Church-/ Yard, and J. Mawman, in the/ Poultry, London./ 1808./ [8º.

_Collation_--

[? a Half-title]; Title, one leaf, pp. ii., iii.; Dedication (To The
Right Honourable/ Frederick,/ Earl of Carlisle,/ Knight of the Garter,/
etc., etc./ The Second Edition/ Of/ These Poems is inscribed,/, By/ His
Obliged Ward,/ And/ Affectionate Kinsman,/ The Author.), pp. iv., v.;
Cont, pp. [vi.]-viii. (R. _Errata_); Text, pp. [1]-174. The Imprint
(_Printed by S. and J. Ridge, Newark-upon-Trent_) is at the foot of p.
174.

_Contents_--

On leaving Newstead Abbey                                           p. 1
Epitaph on a Friend                                                 p. 5
A fragment                                                          p. 7
The Tear                                                            p. 8
An occasional Prologue                                             p. 13
On the death of Mr. Fox                                            p. 15
Stanzas ... with the Poems of Camoens                              p. 18
To M.                                                              p. 20
To Woman                                                           p. 22
To M.S.G.                                                          p. 24
Song                                                               p. 26
To ----                                                            p. 30
To Mary, on receiving her picture                                  p. 33
Damætas                                                            p. 36
To Marion                                                          p. 38
Oscar of Alva                                                      p. 41
To the Duke of D.                                                  p. 62


TRANSLATIONS AND IMITATIONS.

Adrian's address, etc.                                             p. 71
Translation                                                        p. 72
Translation from Catullus                                          p. 73
Translation of the Epitaph, etc.                                   p. 75
Translation from Catullus                                          p. 76
Imitated from Catullus                                             p. 78
Translation from Anacreon. To his Lyre                             p. 79
Translation from Anacreon. Ode 3                                   p. 81
Fragments of School Exercises                                      p. 84
Episode of Nisus and Euryalus                                      p. 86
Translation from the Medea of Euripides                           p. 105


FUGITIVE PIECES.

Thoughts suggested by a College Examination                       p. 111
To the Earl of ----                                               p. 116
Granta, a Medley                                                  p. 123
Lachin y Gair                                                     p. 131
To Romance                                                        p. 135
Elegy on Newstead Abbey                                           p. 140
The death of Calmar and Orla                                      p. 151
To E.N.L., Esq.                                                   p. 160
To ----                                                           p. 165
Stanzas                                                           p. 168
Lines written beneath an Elm, in the Churchyard of                p. 172
Harrow on the Hill


_Note_.--The Front. is a lithograph of Harrow-on-the-Hill, with
quotation--

    "Ida! blest spot, where Science holds her reign!
    How joyous once I join'd thy youthful train!"

A facsimile of the Title-page faces p. xii. of vol. i. of the _Poetical
Works_, 1898.

V.

Imitations and Translations/ From the / Ancient and Modern Classics,/
Together with/ Original Poems/ Never Before Published./ Collected by/
J.C. Hobhouse, B.A./ of Trinity College, Cambridge./ "Nos hæc novimus
esse nihil."/ London:/ Printed for Longman, Hurst, Rees, and Orme,/
Paternoster-Row./ 1809./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title with Imprint (T. Davison, _Whitefriars,/ London_.), pp. i.,
ii.; Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Preface, pp. v.-xi.; Cont., pp.
xiii.-xv. (R. "Errata."); Text, pp. 1-255. The Imprint, as above, is in
the centre of p. [256].

_Note_.--Lord Byron contributed nine poems (signed L.B.; see Preface, p.
xi., to this volume) to this volume, viz.: (i.) _To a Youthful Friend_
("Few years have past," etc.), p. 185; (ii.) _Inscription on the
Monument of a Favourite Dog_, p. 190; (iii.) _To----_ ("Well! thou art
happy," etc.), p. 192; (iv.) _The Farewell To a Lady_ ("When man
expell'd," etc.), p. 195; (v.) _A Love Song to ----_ ("Remind me not,"
etc.), p. 197; (vi.) _Stanzas To the Same_ ("There was a time," etc.),
p. 200; (vii.) _To the Same_ ("And wilt thou weep," etc.), p. 202;
(viii.) _Song_ ("Fill the goblet again," etc.), p. 204; (ix.) _Stanzas
to ---- on leaving England_ ("'Tis done," etc.), p. 227.

VI.

Hours of Idleness;/ A/ Series of Poems,/ Original and Translated,/ By
George Gordon, Lord Byron,/ A Minor./ Μητ' αρ' με μαλ' αινεε μητε τι
νεικει [Greek: Mêt' ar' me mal' ainee mête ti neikei ] ./ Homer. Iliad,
10./ He whistled as he went for want of thought./ Dryden./ Second
Edition./ Paris:/ Published by Galignani,/ At the French, English,
Italian, German, and Spanish/ Library, No. 18, Rue Vivienne./ 1819./
[12º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf; Title, one leaf; Advt.; Dedication; Cont.; Text,
pp. 1-149 + "Critique ... _Ed. Rev_., No. 22," etc., pp. [150]-158.

_Note_.--A reproduction of _Poems Original and Translated_, Newark,
1808.

VII.

Hours of Idleness:/ A Series of Poems,/ Original and Translated./ By/
Lord Byron./ Μητ' αρ' με μαλ' αινεε μητε τι νεικει [Greek: Mêt' ar' me
mal' ainee mête ti neikei ] ./ Homer. Iliad, 10./ He whistled as he went
for want of thought./ Dryden./ London:/ Printed for Sherwin and Co. 24,
Paternoster Row./ 1820./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, pp. i., ii.; Title, pp. iii., iv.; Dedication, pp. v., vi.;
Cont., pp. vii., viii.; Text, pp. 1-160. The Imprint (_Sherwin and Co.,
Printers,/ Paternoster Row./_) is at the foot of p. 160.

_Note_.--A reproduction of _Poems Original and Translated_, Newark,
1808. The Front. (a sketch of Harrow-on-the-Hill) is engraved by
Eastgate from a painting by H. Halsted, Esq. It is a reproduction
(re-touched) of the Front. to the Newark Edition of 1808.

There were two issues of this edition (A and B). In A (Printed for
Sherwin and Co. 24 Paternoster Row) the Front. is without letters; the
past tenses and participles are printed "bloom'd," "mail-cover'd," etc.;
and on p. 160 the Imprint, as above, is at the foot of p. 160. In B
(Printed for W.T. Sherwin, etc.) the Front. is subscribed with the name
of painter and engraver; the past tenses are printed "bloomed," etc., in
full; and the Imprint (_Sherwin, Printer,/ Paternoster Row./_) is at the
foot of p. 160.

VIII.

Hours of Idleness;/ etc./ Third Edition./ Paris: Published by
Galignani,/ etc./ 1820./ [12º.

_Collation_--

This edition is identical with that of 1819, No. vi. p. 252. The Cont.
are printed at the end of the volume.

IX.

Hours of Idleness,/ A Series/ Of Poems,/ Original and Translated./ By a
Noble Author./ Virginibus puerisque Canto./ Horace./ He whistled as he
went for want of thought./ Dryden./ London:/ Benbow, Printer and
Publisher, Castle Street,/ Leicester Square. 1822./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Title, pp. i., ii.; Preface, pp. iii.-viii. + Cont. + Text, pp. 9-183.

_Note_.--A reissue of _Hours of Idleness_, Newark, 1807.

X.

Hours of Idleness:/ A/ Series of Poems,/ Original and Translated./ By
George Gordon, Lord Byron./ A Minor./ Paris:/ Published by A. and W.
Galignani,/ At the French, English, Italian, German, and Spanish
Library, No. 18, Rue Vivienne./ 1822./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _Printed by A. Belin_), one leaf; Title, one leaf; Cont.;
Text (including Second Half-title and Dedication), pp. 1-152 +
_Critique_, etc., pp. [153]-168.

_Note_.--A reissue of the Newark edition of 1808, but a distinct edition
from those published by Galignani in 1819, 1820.

XI.

Hours of Idleness,/ A/ Series of Poems,/ Original and Translated./ By
Lord Byron./ Virginibus puerisque canto.--Horace./ He whistled as he
went, for want of thought.--Dryden./ A New Edition./ Glasgow.--Printed by
J. Starke./ 1825./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf; Preface, pp. i.-iii. (R. Cont.); Text, pp. 1-84.

_Note_.--This edition, a reissue of _Hours of Idleness_, Newark, 1807,
was bound in a paper wrapper with ornamental border, uniform with
"_English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers_--price sixpence."

XII.

Fugitive Pieces/ and/ Reminiscences/ of/ Lord Byron:/ Containing an entire
new Edition of/ The Hebrew Melodies,/ With the Addition of/ Several
never before Published;/ The whole illustrated with/ Critical,
Historical, Theatrical, Political, and Theological/ Remarks, Notes,
Anecdotes, Interesting Conversations,/ And Observations, made by that
Illustrious Poet;/ Together with his Lordship's Autograph;/ also some/
Original Poetry, Letters and Recollections/ of/ Lady Caroline Lamb./ By
I. Nathan,/ Author of an Essay on the History and Theory of Music,/ The
Hebrew Melodies, etc., etc./ "Pascitur in vivis Livor, post Fata
quiescit:"/ "Tune (_sic_) suus, ex merito, quemque tuetur Honos." Ovid./
London:/ Printed for Whittaker, Treacher, and Co./ Ave Maria Lane./
1829./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xxxvi. + 196. The Imprint (_Plummer and Brewis, Printers, Love Lane,
Eastcheap_.) is at the foot of p. 191.

_Note_.--The Fugitive Pieces include the two selections from _Parisina_
included in _Hebrew Melodies_ No. i., and three "original pieces of Lord
Byron, which have never before appeared in print;" viz. "I speak not--I
trace not," etc., "In the valley of waters," and "They say that hope is
happiness."


_Poems_.

Poems./ By Lord Byron./ Second Edition/ London:/ Printed for John
Murray, Albemarle-Street;/ By W. Bulmer and Co. Cleveland-Row, St.
James's,/ 1816./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title, one leaf, pp. i., ii.; Title, one leaf, iii., iv.; Advt.,
pp. v., vi.; Cont., pp. vii., viii.; Text, pp. 9-39 + Notes, p. [40].
The Imprint (_London: Printed by W. Bulmer and Co./ Cleveland-row, St.
James's./_) is at the foot of p. [40].

_Contents_--

To ---- ("When all around," etc.)                                   p. 9
Bright be the place                                                p. 13
When we two parted                                                 p. 14
Stanzas for Music ("There's not a joy," etc.)                      p. 16
Stanzas for Music ("There be none," etc.)                          p. 19
Fare Thee Well                                                     p. 21
Ode (We do not curse," etc.)                                       p. 25
From the French                                                    p. 31
On the Star, etc.                                                  p. 34
Napoleon's Farewell                                                p. 37
To Samuel Rogers, Esq.                                             p. 39
Notes                                                              p. 40

_Note_.--The motto from Coleridge's _Christabel_ ("Alas! they had been
friends in youth") (14 lines) is on p. 20.


_Poems on His Domestic Circumstances_.

I.

Poems/ on His/ Domestic/ Circumstances./ I. Fare Thee Well!/ II. A
Sketch From Private Life./ By Lord Byron./ With the/ Star of the Legion
of Honour,/ And other Poems./ London:/ Printed for W. Hone, 55, Fleet
Street./ 1816./ Price One Shilling./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Text, pp. 5-31 + Note ("The first two Poems
were last produced.--The other/ five follow in the order wherein they
were written."/ April, 1816.), p. [32]. The Imprint (_Hay and Turner,
Printers, Newcastle Street, Strand_.) is at the foot of p. [40].

_Contents_--

Fare Thee Well                                                      p. 5
A Sketch, etc.                                                      p. 9
Ode ("Oh, shame to thee," etc.)                                    p. 15
Fare Well to France                                                p. 20
Madame Lavalette                                                   p. 22
Waterloo                                                           p. 24
On the Star, etc.                                                  p. 29

_Note_.--The Half-title is missing in the Museum copy. The Note prefixed
to "Waterloo" in the _Morning Chronicle_ (March 15, 1816) is reprinted,
together with the heading, "Said to be done into English Verse by R.
S****, P.L. P.R. Master of the Royal Spanish Inqn.--etc., etc., etc."

II.

Poems/ on His/ Domestic Circumstances,/ etc./ With The/ Star of the
Legion of Honour,/ And Four Other Poems./ Second Edition./ London:/
Printed for W. Hone, 55, Fleet Street,/ And Sold by J.M. Richardson, No.
23, Cornhill;/ J. Blacklock, Royal Exchange; G. Hebert, 36,/ Poultry;
Simpkin and Marshall,/ Stationers'/ Court; W. Reynolds, 137, Oxford
Street; and by/ All other Booksellers./ 1816./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Gen. Half-title (New/ Poems,/ By/ Lord Byron./) (R. _Hay & Turner,
Printers, Newcastle-Street, Strand_.), pp. 1, 2; Title, one leaf, pp. 3,
4; Text, pp. 5-31. The Note and Imprint, as above, are on p. [32].

III.

Poems,/ etc./ By Lord Byron./ With the/ Star of the Legion of Honour,/
etc., etc./ Sixth Edition./ Containing Eight Poems./ London:/ Printed
for W. Hone, 55, Fleet Street,/ etc., etc. 1816./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title (Imprint as above), pp. 1, 2; Text, pp. 3-31. The Note (altered to
"The other Six follow," etc.) and the Imprint, as above, are on p. [32].

_Note_.--The additional poem is the _Adieu to Malta_ on pp. 12-14. The
lines _Fare Thee Well_, which are printed in the First and Second
Editions in stanzas, are in the Sixth Edition printed continuously.

IV.

Poems,/ etc./ By Lord Byron./ With His/ Memoirs and Portrait./ Eighth
Edition./ Containing/ Nine Poems./ Fare Thee Well!/ A Sketch From
Private Life./ On the Star of "The Legion of Honour."/ Adieu to Malta./
The/ Curse of Minerva./ Waterloo./ And Three Others./ London:/ Printed
for W. Hone, 55, Fleet Street,/ etc./ 1816./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title (R. Imprint as above), pp. 1, 2; Memoirs, etc., pp. 3-6; Text, pp.
7-32.

_Note_.--The additional poem is the mutilated version of _The Curse of
Minerva_ (111 lines). The Front. is a lithograph of "Lord Byron," after
F. Sieurac.

V.

Poems/ etc./ By Lord Byron,/ etc./ Fifteenth Edition./ Containing/ Nine
Poems,/ etc./ London:/ Printed for W. Hone, 55, Fleet Street,/ etc./
1816./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title (R. Imprint as above), pp. 1, 2; Memoirs, etc., pp. 3-8 + Text,
pp. 8-40.

_Note_.--The Text of the Fifteenth Edition is identical with the Text of
the Sixth Edition (pp. 3-[32]), including Note and Imprint on p. [32].
_The Curse of Minerva_ is on pp. 33-40. The Imprint, as above, is
repeated on the foot of p. 40.

VI. Lord Byron's/ Poems,/ on His Own/ Domestic Circumstances./ Fare Thee
Well./ Dublin:/ Printed by W. Espy, 59, Dame-Street./ 1816./ [8º.

_Collation_--Half-title (Poems, etc./ Entered at Stationers'-Hall./),
one leaf, pp. 1, 2; Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Preface, pp. 5, 6; Text,
pp. 7-15.

_Note_.--The edition contains _Fare Thee Well_, and _A Sketch_, etc.,
without the other poems published by Hone.

VII.

Poems/ on His/ Domestic Circumstances,/ etc. etc./ By/ Lord Byron./
Second Edition./

 1. Fare Thee Well
 2. A Sketch from Private Life
 3. On the Star of "The Legion of Honour"
 4. Ode
 5. Waterloo
 6. Madame Lavalette
 7. Farewell to France
 8. Adieu to Malta
 9. The Curse of Minerva
10. Farewell to England
11. To my Daughter, etc
12. To the Lily of France.
13. Ode to the Island of St. Helena.
14. To ----.
15. Bright be the Place to thy Soul!
16. Stanzas for Music.
17. To ----.
18. Stanzas for Music.
19. To ----.
20. On Reading Lord Byron's Farewell to England.

To which is Prefixed,/ Memoirs of His Life./ Bristol:/ _Printed for W.
Sheppard, Exchange_,/ And may be had of all the Booksellers./ 1816./
[12º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. i., ii.; Memoirs, etc., pp. iii.-vi.; On Reading
Lord Byron's Farewell to England, pp. i.-iii. (R. Cont.); Text, pp.
1-50. The Imprint (_Mary Bryan, Printer,(51)Corn-Street, Bristol_.) is
at the foot of p. 50.

_Note_.--This edition contains the nine poems published by Hone (1816),
four forgeries, six of the _Poems_ published by Murray in 1816, and,
with a separate pagination, the lines _On Reading Lord Byron's Farewell
to England_ ("------- Still my bosom's indignation").

VIII.

Poems on His Domestic Circumstances, etc. Boston. 1816. [24º.

[Catalogue of the Boston Athenæum Library.]

IX.

Poems,/ etc./ By Lord Byron,/ etc./ Twenty-Third Edition./ Containing/
Nine Poems,/ etc./ London:/ Printed for W. Hone,/ 55, Fleet Street, and
67, Old Bailey,/ (_Three Doors from Ludgate Hill_,)/ And Sold By J.M.
Richardson,/ etc./ 1817/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 32.

X.

Poems,/ on His/ Domestic Circumstances,/ By/ The Right Honourable/ Lord
Byron:/ To which are added,/ Several Choice Pieces from His Lordship's
Works./ "Lord BIRON.--By heaven I do love; and it hath taught me/ to
rhyme, and to be melancholy; and here is part of my rhyme,/ and here my
melancholy."/ SHAKESPEARE'S LOVE'S LABOUR LOST./ London:/ Printed for J.
Limbird, 355, Strand, (East End/ of Exeter 'Change),/ By W. Sears, 45,
Gutter Lane, Cheapside./ 1823/ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. vi. + 48. The Imprint (_Printed by W. Sears, 45, Gutter Lane,
Cheapside, London_.) is at the foot of p. 48.

_Note_.--The collection contains twenty-four poems, including the
forgeries, _To my Daughter_, etc.; _Farewell to England_; _Ode_ ("Oh,
shame to thee," etc.); and _Madame Lavalette_.

XI.

Miscellaneous Poems,/ Including those on His/ Domestic Circumstances./
By Lord Byron./ To which are prefixed/ Memoirs of the Author, and a
Tribute/ To his Memory/ By Sir Walter Scott./ London:/ Printed for John
Bumpus, 85, Newgate Street;/ And R. Griffin, & Co., Glasgow./ 1824/

_Collation_--

Pp. xx. + 21-72. The Imprint (_Printed by A. Hancock, Middle Row Place,
Holborn_.) is at the foot of p. 72.

_Note_.--The collection numbers twenty-five poems, including the
forgeries, _Ode_ ("Oh, shame to thee," etc.); _Madame Lavalette_;
_Farewell to England_; _To my Daughter_, etc.; _Ode to--S^t Helena_;
_To the Lily of France_; _The Enigma_ [H.]; and three (genuine) stanzas
from the lines, "Well, thou art happy," here entitled _Song to Inez_;
and the lines _To Jessy_.

XII.

Miscellaneous Poems/ on His Domestic and Other/ Circum-stances./ By Lord
Byron./ London:/ Printed By and for William Cole,/ 10 Newgate-Street./
1825./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 54. The Imprint (_Printed by William Cole, 10, Newgate Street_.) is
at the foot of p. 54.

_Note_.--The edition contains twenty-nine pieces, viz. the twenty-five
poems published by John Bumpus in 1824 (No. xl.), together with _The
Isles of Greece_; _Were my Bosom_, etc.; _Herod's Lament_, etc.; and
_Lord Byron's Latest Verses_ ("On this day I complete my thirty-sixth
year").


_Hints from Horace_.

_Note_.--Two sets of proofs of a portion of _Hints from Horace_,
formerly the property of R.C. Dallas, are preserved in the British
Museum (_Eg_. 2029). Proof A consists of 100 lines of the English
translation (lines 173-272); Proof B, pp. [87]-128, consists of 272
lines of the English translation (lines 1-272) and (on opposite pages)
188 lines of the original Latin. These proof-sheets, which must have
followed proofs of the Fifth Edition of _English Bards_, _etc_., are
preceded by a Half-title, _Hints from Horace_ (Gothic characters), and
by the following subsidiary title:--

Hints from Horace:/ Being a/ Partial Imitation, in English Verse, of the
Epistle,/ "Ad Pisones de Arte Poetica;"/ And intended as a Sequel to/
English Bards and Scotch Reviewers./ [Gothic characters.] "Ergo fungar
vice Cotis, acutum/ Reddere quæ ferrum valet, exsors ipsa secandi."/
Hor. De Arte Poet. 304-5./ "Rhymes are difficult things; they are
stubborn things, sir."/ Fielding's Amelia, Vol. III./ Book and Chap. V./
Athens, Franciscan Convent,/ March 12, 1811./

The publication of _Hints from Horace_ had been entrusted by Dallas to
Cawthorn in July-August, 1811. It may be gathered from various sources
(_Letters_, 1898, ii. 24, 54, 56) that Byron was at work on the proofs
as late as September 4; that by October 11 he had resolved to defer the
publication of the _Hints_; and that, accordingly on October 13, 1811,
"they stood still." It was not, however, till after the appearance of
_Childe Harold's_, _etc_. (May-June, 1812) that Byron determined to
suppress the already printed Fifth Edition of _English Bards_, and at
the same time to abandon the publication of his two other Satires. At
this time, says Dallas (_Recollections of the Life of Lord Byron_, 1898,
p. 241), "the _Hints from Horace_ was far advanced." In his
_Recollections, etc_. (pp. 104-113), he gives, by way of a "fair
specimen," 156 "lines of the still-unpublished poem; and, as these
extracts are taken from the first 211 lines, and his text corresponds
with proof B (see Poetical Works, 1898, i. 390, variants ii., iii.), it
may be inferred that Dallas transcribed them from his fragmentary
proof-sheets, and that the press was stopped at line 272. In 1830, in
his _Notices of the Life of Lord Byron_ (vol. i. pp. 263-269), Moore
printed 165 lines of the "Paraphrase;" but his selections are drawn from
lines 1-458, and it is evident that he had access to an original MS.
(_MS. M._), which is now in Mr. Murray's possession. The full text,
which follows the same MS., was first published in vol. v. pp. 273-327
of the six-volume edition of 1831 (_vide ante_, No. xliii. of "Collected
Editions").


_The Irish Avatar_.

Byron wrote the _Irish Avatar_ at Ravenna, September 16, 1821. On the
17th he sent a copy of the verses to Moore, then resident at Paris; and
on September 20 he desired Moore to get "twenty copies of the whole
carefully and privately printed off." A copy is in the possession of Mr.
H. Buxton Forman, C.B., and I am indebted to his kindness for the
following description: "The pamphlet consists of four 8vo leaves, viz.
half-title ('The Irish Avatar,' in bold capitals, with blank verse), pp.
[1], [2] + Text, pp. 3-8. The poem begins on the third page with a
dropped head, 'The Irish Avatar' again, and the first four verses. Pp.
4-7 contain six verses each, and p. 8 the remaining four, making up
thirty-two in all. The date at the end of p. 8 is 'September 16, 1821.'
There is no title-page proper; a headline, 'The Irish Avatar,' occurs on
pp. 4-8, which pages are numbered in Arabic figures in the outside
corners, and the thirty-two stanzas are also numbered in Arabic figures.
The poem is printed on a half-sheet of a peculiar fine-ribbed paper."
Twenty stanzas of _The Irish Avatar_ were printed by Medwin in
_Conversations of Lord Byron_, 1824, pp. 216-220, and in a second
edition, 1824, pp. 332-338. In a "new edition" of the _Conversations,
etc._, 1824, pp. 264-270, the entire poem, numbering thirty-two stanzas,
was published for the first time in England (see _Athenæum_, July 27,
1901). _The Irish Avatar_ was first published by Murray in 1831 (Works,
vi. 419-425).


_The Island_.

I.

The Island,/ or/ Christian and His Comrades./ By the/ Right Hon. Lord
Byron./ London, 1823:/ Printed for John Hunt,/ 22, Old Bond Street./
[8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _London: Printed by C.H. Riynell, Broad-Street,
Golden-Square_), pp. 1, 2, Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Author's Advt.,
p. 6; Text, pp. 7-79 + Appendix, pp. 81-94. The Imprint, as above, is at
the foot of p. 94.

_Note_.--A Second and a Third Edition, identical with the First, were
published by John Hunt in 1823. _The Island_ forms part (pp. 193-244) of
a collection of Miscellaneous Poems, _Hebrew Melodies, The Deformed
Transformed_, etc., printed and published by W. Dugdale, 23, Russell
Court, Drury Lane, in 1825.

II.

The Island;/ or/ Christian and His Comrades./ By The Right Hon. Lord
Byron./ Paris:/ Published by A. and W. Galignani,/ At the French,
English, Italian, German, and Spanish Library,/ No. 18, Rue Vivienne./
1823/ [12º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _Paris: Printed by A. Belin_), one leaf; Title, one leaf;
Second Half-title, pp. 1, 2; Author's Advt., pp. 3, 4; Text + App., pp.
5-95.

III.

_The Island, or Christian and His Comrades_. New York. 1823. [12º.

[Cat. of Books in Bates Hall of Pub. Library of Boston.]


_Translations of The Island_.

_German_.

_Die Insel_, ober Christian u. seine Kameraden. Aus d. Engl. (v. F.L.
Breuer). Mit gegenübersteh. Originaltext. Leipzig, Brockhaus. 1827. [8º.

[Kayser, 1834.]


_Italian_.

_L'Isola_, poema di lord Byron, traduzione di Morrone. Napoli,
tipographia di De Muro, 1840. [8º.

[_Bibliographia Italiana_, Oct., 1840.]

_Polish_.

Wyspa czyli Chrystyan i jego towarzysze ...Przekład Adama Pajgerta. pp.
62, _druk. "Czasu": Kraków_, 1859. [8º.

_Swedish_.

Ön/ Eller/.. Christian och Hans Stallbröder./ Af/ Lord Byron./
Öfversättning. [Af/ Talis Qualis.] Stockholm,/ J.L. Brudins Förlag./
[1856.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 88.

_Note_.--No. 8 of "Byron's Poetiska Berättelser."


_The Lament of Tasso_.

I.

The/ Lament of Tasso./ By Lord Byron./ London:/ John Murray,
Albemarle-Street./ 1817./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Note (on MSS., etc.), pp. 5, 6; Text, pp.
7-19 + p. [20], Advt. of Poems. The Imprint (_T. Davison,
Lombard-Street,/ Whitefriars, London./_) is at the foot of p. [20].

_Note_.--The Half-title (? missing) is not in the Museum copy.

II.

The/ Lament of Tasso./ By Lord Byron./ Second Edition./ London:/ John
Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1817/./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Advt., pp. 5, 6; Text, pp. 7-18.

III.

The/ Lament of Tasso./ etc./ Third Edition,/ etc./ 1817./ [8º.

_Collation_--

_Vide supra_, No. i.

IV.

The/ Lament of Tasso,/ etc./ Fourth Edition,/ etc./ 1817./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (The Lament,/ etc./ Fourth Edition./ 1s. 6d.) (_R.T. Davison,
Lombard-Street, Whitefriars, London_.), pp. 1, 2, etc. _Vide supra_, No.
i.

_Note_.--The Imprint (_T. Davison, Lombard-Street,/ Whitefriars,
London./_) is at the foot of p. [20]. Twelve pp. of "Books Printed for
John Murray," dated "August, 1817," are bound up with the Fourth
Edition.

V.

The Lament,/ etc./ Sixth Edition./ 1818./ [8º.

_Collation_--_Vide supra_, No. iv. _Note_.--Four pp. of Advts., dated
"Albemarle-Street, London, January, 1818," are bound up with the Sixth
Edition.


_Translations of The Lament of Tasso_.


Italian_.

I.

Lamento/ del/ Tasso/ di Lord Byron/ Recato in italiano/ Da Michele
Leoni/ Pisa/ Presso Niccolò Capurro/ co' caratteri di F. Didot/ 1818/
[4º.

_Collation_--

Pp. ix. + _1-27_ + Nota dell' Autore, p. [28].

_Note_.--The Front, is "Tasso in the Hospital of Sant' Anna," drawn by
C. Meritoni, and engraved by Lasinio Figlio. The Italian translation is
printed on opposite pages to the English Text.

II.

La/ Magion del Terrore/ ... La Fantasia e il Disinganno/ ed altri
metrici componimenti/ di Gaetano Polidori/ colle sue traduzioni/ Del
Lamento del Tasso/ di Lord Byron/ ... Londra 1843./ Impresso da J.
Wilson e W. Ward nella pri-/vata stamperia dell' autore al numero 15 di/
Park Village East, Regent's Park./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 112-133.

III.

Guglielmo Godio/ II Lamento di Tasso/ Versione da Byron/ [Six other
pieces.] Torino/ Tipografia di Vincenzo Bona/Via Ospedale, 3 e Lagrange,
7/ 1873./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 21 + 23-47, _Estri Lontani_, etc.


_Lara_.

I.

Lara,/ A Tale./ Jacqueline,/ A Tale./ London:/ Printed for J. Murray,
Albemarle-Street,/ _By T. Davison, Whitefriars./_ 1814./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (Poems), one leaf; Title, one leaf; Advt.; Cont. (R. Note.
Canto I., page 3, line 1, _The Serfs_, etc.); Second Half-title; Text,
pp. 3-128 (_Lara_, pp. 1-93; _Jacqueline_, pp. 95-128) + "Books Printed
for John Murray," etc., pp. [129]-[132]. The Imprint (_T. Davison,
Lombard-street,/ Whitefriars, London._/) is at the foot of p. [132].

_Note_.--This edition was issued in blue-paper boards with green back,
the title-label being Lara/ Jacqueline/ 7s. 6d./ The pages measure 170 x
105.

II.

Lara,/ A Tale./ By Lord Byron./ Fourth Edition./ London:/ Printed for
John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1814./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (Lara); Imprint (_T. Davison, Lombard Street,/
Fleet-street_.), one leaf; Title, one leaf; Second Half-title; Text, pp.
8-70. The Imprint (_T. Davison, Lombard-street,/ Whitefriars, London_./)
is in the centre of p. [72]. In other copies the Text ends at p. 70, and
a note on Section xxiv., Canto II. pp. 71-74, concludes the volume. The
Imprint is not repeated.

III.

_Lara_. Boston. 1814. [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. iv. + 8-98.

IV.

_Lara_. New York. 1814. [24º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 136.

V.

Lara,/ A Tale./ By Lord Byron./ Fifth Edition./ London:/ John Murray,
Albemarle-Street./ 1817./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _T. Davison, Lombard-street, Whitefriars, London_.);
Title, one leaf; Text, pp. 1-74 + Advt. of "Poems By the Right Hon. Lord
Byron" (R. _T. Davison, Lombard-street,/ Whitefriars, London_./), pp.
[75], [76].

_Note_.--The additional pages (pp. 71-74) contain a note on "The event
in section 24, Canto 2d, suggested by the death, or rather burial, of
the Duke of Gandia."

_Note_.--"Lara./ A Tale./ By Lord Byron."/forms part (pp. 135-174) of a
volume "Printed for Thomas Wilson, Oxford Street. 1825. 12º." The
Imprint (_Printed by W. Dugdale_, etc.) is at the foot of p. 174.

VI.

Lara,/ a Tale by/ Lord Byron:/ Illustrated by C.B. Birch,/ Art-Union of
London./ MDCCCLXXIX./ [fol.

_Collation_--

Text, pp. 1-12. The Imprint (_Harrison and Sons, Printers in Ordinary to
Her Majesty, S. Martin's Lane_.) is at the foot of p. 12. The Text is
followed by twenty plates.


_Translations of Lara_.


_Bohemian_.

_Lara_ ... Přeložil Č. Ibla. [In "Poesie Světová."] _v Praze_, 1885.
[8º.


_German_.

_Lara_. Übers. v. W. Schäffer u. A Strodtmann. 1886. Leipzig, Bibl.
Institut. [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 91.

_Note_.--No. 88 of "Meyer's Volksbücher."


_Italian_.

I.

Il Lara/ di Lord Byron/ Tradotto dal signor/ Girolamo C^o Bazoldo,/
Maggiore di S.M. Britannica re d'Annover./ con giunta/ di tre altre
traduzioni dall' inglese, una dal tedesco,/ e tre canzoni dell' autore./
[Title-vignette, Cupid with harp.] Parigi./ Dai Torchi di Pillet
Maggiore,/ In via des Grands-Augustins, N'o. 7./ 1828./ [24º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 1-83 + _Il Pensieroso_, etc., pp. 85-138 + Indice, p. [139].

_Note_.--This edition was issued in green-paper covers.

II.

_Lara_. Traduzione di Andrea Maffei, Milano, Hoepli, 1882. [64º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

_Polish_.

_Lara_, poemat w 2 pieśniach, przekład Jul. Korsaka. pp. 70 _druk. J.
Zawadzkiego: Wilno_, 1833. [8º.


_Servian_.

Лара лорда Бајрона. Србски од Ац. Поповиђа. [Cyrillic: Lara lorda
Bajrona. Srbski od Ats. Popovidja.] pp. 72. Д. Хипц: у Новот-Саду,
[Cyrillic: D. Khipts: u Novot-Sadu,] 1860. 12º.


_Spanish_.

_Lara_, novela española. Por lord Byron, traducida al castellano, Paris.
1828. [18º.

[_B. de la France_, May 17, 1828.]


_Swedish_.

Lara/ Af/ Lord Byron./ Stockholm,/ Tryckt Hos Joh. Beckman./ 1869./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 5-64.

_Note_.--"Öfversättning Af Tails Qualis"--a pseudonym of Carl Wilhelm
August Strandberg.


_Manfred_.

I.

Manfred,/ A/ Dramatic Poem./ By Lord Byron./ London:/ John Murray,
Albemarle-Street./ 1817./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (Manfred) (R. _T. Davison, Lombard-Street, Whitefriars,
London_), pp. 1, 2; Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Dramatis Personæ, pp. 5,
6; Text, pp. 7-75; Notes, pp. [79]-80. The Imprint (_T. Davison,
Lombard-Street,/ Whitefriars, London./_) is at the foot of p. 80.

_Note_.--The First Edition was issued with another title-page (B):
Manfred,/ A/ Dramatic Poem./ "There are more things in heaven and earth,
Horatio,/ "Than are dreamt of in your philosophy." / By Lord Byron./
London:/ John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1817./ 8º.

There is no half-title in the Museum copy of this alternative First
Edition.

II.

Manfred,/ etc./ Second Edition,/ etc./ 1817./ [8º.

_Note_.--The Second Edition is identical with the alternative form (B)
of the First Edition. There is no Imprint on p. 80. An Advt. of "Poems
by the Right Hon. Lord Byron" is on p. [82].

III.

Manfred,/ A/ Dramatic Poem./ "There are more things in heaven and earth,
Horatio,/ Than are dreamt of in your philosophy."/ By Lord Byron./
Philadelphia:/ Published by M. Thomas./ J. Maxwell, Printer./ 1817./
[12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 72.

_Note_.--_Manfred_ was also published at New York in 1817, 24º, pp. 70.

IV.

Manfred./ A Dramatic Poem./ By Lord Byron./ "There are more things,"
etc. [Motto, two lines]./ London:/ Printed and Published by W. Dugdale,/
_23, Russell Court, Drury Lane_./ 1824./ [12º.

_Collation_--

pp. 55 + "Notes to Manfred," p. [56]. The Imprint (_Printed by W.
Dugdale, Russell Court, Drury Lane, London_) is at the foot of p. [56].

_Note_.--Manfred./ A Dramatic Poem./ By Lord Byron./forms part (pp.
175-[216]) of a volume Printed for Thomas Wilson, Oxford Street./ 1825.
12º. The Imprint (_Printed by W. Dugdale_, etc.), as above, is at the
foot of p. [216].

V.

Manfred,/ A/ Dramatic Poem./ "There are more things in heaven and
earth,/ Horatio,/ "Than are dreamt of in your philosophy."/ By Lord
Byron./ Brussels:/ Printed at the British Press./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Dramatis Personæ, pp. 5, 6; Text, pp. 7-72;
Notes, pp. [73], 74; Observations, pp. [75]-81.

VI.

Manfred./ A Choral Tragedy,/ In Three Acts,/ By/ Lord Byron./ Thomas
Hailes Lacy,/ 89, Strand, London./ [1863.] [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 1-41 + "Costumes," p. [42]. The Imprint (_Printed by Thomas Scott,
Warwick Court, Holborn_.) is at the foot of p. 41.

_Note_.--Vol. 60 of Lacy's "Acting Edition Plays." Pp. 2-6 contain the
playbill of Manfred "As Performed at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane
(under the Management of Messrs. Edmund Falconer and F.B. Chatterton),
on Saturday, October 10th, 1863."

VII.

Manfred./ Lord Byron./ [Title-vignette, "Hear me, hear me--Astarte."]
New and Complete Edition.--Price one Penny./ London. J. Dicks, 313
Strand; all Booksellers./ [1883, etc.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 161-173.

_Note_.--No. 59 of "Dicks' Standard Plays."


_Translations of Manfred_.

_Bohemian_.

_Manfred_ ... Přelozil Jos. V. Frič. _Praze_, 1882.


_Danish_.

I.

Manfred,/ af/ Lord Byron./ Oversat/ af/ P.F. Wulff./ There are more
things, etc. [Motto, two lines.]/ Hamlet./ Kjøbenhavn, 1820./ Forlagt af
Universitets-Boghandler Brummer./ Trykt i der Poppske Bogtrykkerie./
[12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 107 + Rettelse, p. [108].

II.

Manfred./ Et Dramatisk Digt/ af/ Byron./ Oversat/ af/ Edvard Lembcke./
Kjøbenhavn 1843./ I Commission hos C.A. Reikel./ Trykt hos Bianco Luno./
[8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 109.


_Dutch_.

I.

Manfred./ Een Dramatisch Gedicht/ Naar/ Lord Byron,/ Door/ Johan Rudolph
Steinmetz./ Amsterdam,/ H.J. Van Kesteren./ 1857./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xv. + 59 + "Aanteekenigen," pp. [60]-[63] + "Verbeteringen," p.
[64].

II.

Byron's/ Manfred./ Een Dramatisch Gedicht./ Metrische Vertaling./
(Toegewijd AAN Mr. C. Vosmaer)/ Van/ W. Gosler./ Heusden.-H. Wuijster./
1882./ [8º.

_Collation_--Pp. vii. + 78.

_Note_.--The Front, is a photograph of "Ernst Possart in de rol van
Manfred" (Verg: _lllustrirte Zeitung_ van 12 Nov. 1881).


_French_.

I.

Manfred/ Poëme dramatique/ Par/ Lord Byron,/ Traduit/ Par madame la
comtesse de Lalaing/ Née comtesse de Maldeghem./ Horatio, il est dans le
ciel et sur la terre/ plus de choses que n'en peut concevoir/ votre
philosophie./ Hamlet./ Seconde édition./ Bruxelles./ Imprimerie de J.
Stienon,/ Faubourg de Louvain, 19./ 1852/ [8º.

_Collation_--Pp. 61 + "Notes," p. [63].

II.

Manfred/ Poème dramatique de Byron/ Adaptation nouvelle, en vers/ de/
Émile Moreau/ Paris/ Paul Ollendorff, éditeur/ 28 _bis_, rue de
Richelieu, 28 _bis_/ 1887/ Tous droits réservés/ [8º.

_Collation_--Pp. vii. + 28. The Imprint (_Paris,--Typ. G. Chamervi, 19,
Rue des Saints Pêres--20832_) is at the foot of p. 28.

III.

Lord Byron/ Manfred/ Poème dramatique en 3 actes/ Traduction en vers/
Par/ C. Trèbla/ Toulouse/ Edouard Privat, éditeur, rue des Tourneurs/
1888/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xiii. + 15-89 + Errata, p. [91]. The Imprint (_Montauban, Imp. et
Lith. Ed. Forestiè, rue du Vieux-Palais, 23_) is in the centre of p.
[90].


_German_.

I.

Manfred./ A Tragedy/ By/ Lord Byron./ Leipzig:/ F.A. Brockhaus./ 1819./

Manfred./ Trauerspiel von Lord Byron./ Teutsch/ von/ Adolf Wagner./
Leipzig:/ F.A. Brockhaus./ 1819./

_Collation_--

English Title, as above, p. 2; German Title, as above, pp. 3, 4;
Half-title (R. Dramatis Personæ), pp. 5, 6; _Personen_, p. 7; English
and German Texts, pp. 8-209; Anmerkungen, pp. 211-239. The Imprint
(_Druck und papier von Friedrick Vieweg_/ _In Braunschweig_/) is in the
centre of p. 240.

_Note_.--I am indebted to the kindness of Mr. Leonard L. Mackall, of
Berlin, for the substance of the following note on this work:--

"Pages 213-233 of the Anmerkungen" are devoted to an essay on the play
as a whole. This essay is evidently the "Appendix to an English Work,"
to which Byron refers in the letter accompanying the suppressed
Dedication to _Marino Faliero_. "In the Appendix to an English Work,
lately translated into German, and published at Leipzig, a judgment of
yours upon English poetry is quoted as follows: 'That in English poetry
great genius, universal power, a feeling of profundity, with sufficient
tenderness and force are to be found, but that altogether these do not
constitute poets,'" etc., etc. (see _Poetical Works_, 1901, v. 340, 341,
and _Letters_, 1900, v. 100-103). The originals of the Dedication and
Letters were conveyed to Goethe by John Murray the third, in 1830 (?
1831) (see _Goethe-Jahrbuch_, 1899, xx. pp. 31-35, where the
"Dedication" is printed in full for the first time), and are preserved
at Weimar in the "red portfolio" (cf. _Eckermann_, March 26, 1826), in
which Goethe kept all his papers connected with Byron. The "judgments"
quoted by Byron through "an Italian abstract" from Wagner's Appendix
(pp. 217-218) there read _inaccurately_ as follows: "In der Englischen
Poesie," sagt Goethe, "man findet durchaus einen grossen, tüchtigen,
weltgeübten Verstand, ein tiefes, zartes, Gemüth, ein vortreffliches
Wollen, ein leidenschaftliches Wirken ... das alles zuzammengenommen
macht noch keinen Poeten ... nach dieser Ansicht zeigen die meisten
Englischen Gedichte einen düstern Ueberdruss des Lebens." These
sentences, which should be read in the light of the context, will be
found in Goethe's _Dichtung und Wahrheit_, Th. iii. Buch. 13 (1814, now
Wirke, Weimar ed. xxviii. 213, 214), the book (_Aus meinem Leben,
Dichtung und Wahrheit_), which is held up to ridicule in the _Edinburgh
Review_, June, 1816, vol. xxvi. pp. 304-317.

II.

_Manfred_, übersetzt von Thdr. Armin, Göttingen, Kübler, 1836. [8º.

[Kayser, 1841.]

III.

Byron's Manfred./ Einleitung, Uebersetzung und/ Anmerkungen./ Ein
Beitrag/ zur Kritik der gegenwärtigen deutschen dramatischen/ Kunst und
Poesie./ von / Posgarn./ [_i.e._ G.F.W. Suckow] Breslau,/ im Verlage
bei Josef Mar und Komp./ 1839./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 212.

IV.

_Manfred_, Ein dramat. Gedicht übers. v. O.S. Seeman. Berlin, Weidle,
1843. [8º

[Kayser, 1848.]

V.

Lord Byron's/ Manfred./ Deutsch/ von/ Hermann von Kösen./ "Mehr Dinge
giebt's im Himmel und auf Erden/ Als eure Weisheit sich wohl träumen
lässt."/ (Hamlet.)/ Leipzig,/Voigt & Günther./ 1858./ [16º

_Collation_--

Half-title, Title, and "Zueignung," 8 pp.; Text, pp. 1-86. The Imprint
(_Druck von Giesecke & Devrient_) is at the foot of p. 86.

VI.

Byron's/ Manfred./ Erklärt und übersetzt/ von/ L. Freytag./ Berlin./
Verlag von Gebrüder Pætel./ 1872./ [16º

_Collation_--

Pp. 158. The Imprint (_Druck von G. Bernstein in Berlin_) is at the foot
of p. 158.

VII.

_Manfred_, dramat. Gedicht v. Lord Byron. Frei übers. v. Adf. Seubert.
[16º.

[Kayser, 1877.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 47.

_Note_.--No. 586 of the Universal-Bibliothek, Leipzig, 1871-76.

VIII.

Manfred./ Dramatische Dichtung in drei Abtheilungen/ von/ Lord Byron./
Musik von Robert Schumann./ Jeder Nachdruck dieses Textbuches, auch von
Seiten der Theater-directionen für/ ihre Aufführungen, ist verboten./
Leipzig,/ Druck und Verlag von Breitkopf und Härtel./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 36.

_Note_.--No. 66 of Serie III., Breitkopf und Härtel's _Textbibliothek_,
1879-90.

IX.

_Manfred_. Ein dramatisches Gedicht. Freie Uebersetzung von Thierry
Preyer. Frankfurt, Neumann, 1883. [4º.

[Kayser, 1883.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 59.


_Hungarian_.

I.

Byron Lord'/ Élete's Munkái/ Irta/ Petrichevich Horváth Lázár./ Második
Rész./ Pesten./ Nyomtatta Landerer és Heckenast./ 1842./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xi. + 134 + Jegyzések Manfredhez, pp. [135], [136] + Sajtó-hibák, p.
[137].

II.

Manfred./ Drámai Költemény 3 Felvonásban./ Irta:/ Lord Byron György./
Angolból forditotta:/ D^r. Kludik Imre./ Byron és a Világfájdalom./
Irta: D^r. Kludik Imre./ Ára: 40 kr./ Második Kiadás./ Szolnok, 1884./
Nyomatott Bakos Istvánnál./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Manfred, pp. 1-65 + Byron és a Világfájdalom, pp. 69-112.

III.

Manfred/ Lord Byron Drámai Költeménye/ Forditotta/ Ábrányi Emil./
Budapest 1891/ Singer és Wolfher Könyvkereskedése./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 98.


_Italian_.

I.

_Manfredo_. Traduzione di Marcello Mazzoni. Milano, P.M. Visaj. 1832.
[8º.

[Library of Congress, Washington, 1880.]


_Collation_--

Pp. 91.

II.

Tragedie/ di/ Silvio Pellico/ Francesca da Rimini/ [etc., five lines]
Manfredo,/ Poema drammatico di Lord Byron,/ (versione in prosa)./
Firenze./ Felice le Monnier./ 1859./ [8º.

_Collation_--Manfredo, etc., pp. 437-473.

III.

_Manfredo_: poema drammatico. Traduzione di Andrea Maffei. Firenze, Le
Monnier, 1870. [16º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

_Collation_--

Pp. xi. + 100


_Polish_.

I.

_Manfred_, poemat dramatyczny, przekład Edm. Stan. Bojanowskiego. _W.G.
Korn: Wrocław_, 1835. [12º.

II.

_Manfred_, poemat ... Przekład wolny na wiersz polski przez Michała
Chodźke ... Z4 obrazkami, wyrysował Kossak, etc. pp. 89. _w drukarni L,
Martinet: Paryż_, [1859]. [8º. [_Published also by Schmidt at Halle_.]


_Romaic_.

O Μαμφρεδ / Δραματικον Ποιημα / του / Λορδου Βυρωνος. / Μεταφρασις /
Εππικου Γκρην. / ὁ οὐρανὸς, Ὁράτἰ, ἔχειπλείονακ' ἡ γν / παῤ ὅσα οἱ
φιλόσοφοι φαντάζεσθε [Greek: Mamphred / Dramatikon Poiêma / tou / Lordou
Burônos. / Metaphrasis / Eppikou Gkrên. / ho ou)rano\s, HOra/ti),
e)/cheiplei/onak)ê(gn / par) ho/sa ohi philo/sophoi phanta/zesthe ] /
Shakspere. / Εν Πατραις / τυπογραφειον και Βιβλιοπωλειον Ευσταθιου Π.
Χριστοδουλου. / Παρὰ τὴν ὁδὸν Ἑρμοῠ. [Greek: En Patrais / tupographeion
kai Bibliopôleion Eustathiou P. Christodoulou. / Para\ tê\n hodo\n
HErmou= ] ./ 1864 [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 79 + Παροραματα [Greek: Paroramata], p. [80].


_Roumanian_.

_Stoenescu_ (Th.M.) Teatru ... Manfred, dupe Lord Byron.
_Editura "Revisteĭ Literare:" Bucurescĭ_, 1896. [8º.

_Collation--

_Manfred_, pp. 173-228.

_Russian_.

I.

Манфредъ. Драматическая поема въ трехъ дѢйствіяхъ Переводъ М. Вронченко.
[Cyrillic: Manphred. Dramatitseskaya poema v" trekh" dyĭstviyakh
Perevod" M. Vronchenko.]

II.

Манфредъ ... Переводъ А. Бородина [Cyrillic: Manphred ... Perevod A.
Borodina.] ["Пантеонъ [Cyrillic: Panteon"]," 1841. No. 2.]

III.

Манфредъ ... Перев. Е. Зарина. [Cyrillic: Manphred" ... Perev. E.
Zarina] ["Библіотека для Чтенія. [Cyrillic: Biblioteka dlya Chteniya]"
С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: S.-Peterburg"], 1858, No. 8.]

IV.

Манфредъ ... Переводъ Д. Минаева [Cyrillic: Manphred ... Perebod" D.
Minaeva.] ["Русское Слово [Cyrillic: Russkoe Slovo]," 1863. No. 4.]


_Spanish_.

I.

_Manfredo, drama en tres actos_. Por lord Byron. Imp. de Decourchant à
Paris. A Paris, rue du Temple, n. 69. 1829. [18º

[_Bibl. de la France_, October 17, 1829.]

II.

Manfredo,/ Poema dramático/ de/ Lord Byron./ Traducido en verso
directamente del inglés al castellano/ Por/ D. José Alcalá Galiano/ y
Fernandez de las Peñas./ Madrid:/ Imprenta de A. Vicente, Preciados,
74./ 1861./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xiii. + 85.

III.

Lord Byron./ Manfredo/ y/ Oscar de Alva/ Version castellana/ de Ángel R.
Chaves./ Madrid,/ Imprenta de Eduardo Martinez,/ Calle del príncipe,
número, 25./ 1876./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xix. + Manfredo, 1-54 + Oscar de Alva, pp. 55-78 + Indice, p. [79].

_Marino Faliero_.

I.

Marino Faliero,/ Doge of Venice./ An Historical Tragedy,/ In Five Acts./
With Notes./ The Prophecy of Dante,/ A Poem./ By Lord Byron./ London:
John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1821./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _London:/ Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars_) pp.
i., ii.; Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Cont., pp. v., vi.; Half-title,
with Motto ("_Dux_ inquieti turbidus Adriæ."/ Horace./), pp. vii.,
viii.; Preface, pp. ix.-xxi.; Text, pp. 1-261. The Imprint, as above, is
in the centre of p. [262].

_Contents_--

Marino Faliero                                                      p. 1
Notes                                                             p. 169
Appendix                                                          p. 173
Prophecy of Dante                                                 p. 209
Notes                                                             p. 257

II.

Marino Faliero, etc./ Second Edition, etc./ 1821./ [8º.

_Collation_--

_Vide supra_, No. i. Note that in some copies of the First Edition lines
500-507, act v. sc. 1, do not appear. In the Second Edition and in other
copies of the First Edition they have been inserted. (See _Poetical
Works_, 1901, iv. 447.)

_Note_.--Another edition (pp. xxi. + 261), in small octavo, was issued
by John Murray in 1823.

III.

_Marino Faliero, Doge of Venice_. 179 pp. Philadelphia, M. Carey and
Sons. 1821. [8º. [Library of Congress, Washington, 1880.]

IV.

_Marino Faliero, doge of Venice_, an historical tragedy in five acts,
with notes. By the right hon. lord Byron. Impr. de Belin à Paris--A
Paris chez Galignani. [12º. [_Bibl. de la France_, June 29, 1821.]

V.

Marino Faliero,/ Doge of Venice:/ An Historical Tragedy,/ In Five Acts./
By/ Lord Byron./ "Dux inquieti turbidus Adriæ."--Horace./ London:/ John
Murray, Albemarle Street./ Sold also by/ Tilt and Bogue, Fleet Stree
nburgh, Oliver and Boyd: Dublin, John Cumming./ 1842./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Title (R. _London:/ Printed by H. Spottiswoode,/ New-Street-Square_./);
Text, pp. 3-162. The Imprint, as above, is at the foot of p. 162.

VI.

Marino Faliero./ By/ Lord Byron./ [Title-Vignette, "The Gory Head rolls
down the Giant's steps!"]/ New and Complete Edition.--Price one Penny./
London J. Dicks 313 Strand; All Booksellers./ [1883, etc.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 461-492.

_Note_.--No. 153 of "Dicks' Standard Plays."


_Translations of Marino Faliero_.


_German_.

I.

Marino Faliero/ Doge von Venedig./ Geschichtliche Tragödie/ von/ Lord
Byron./ Freie Übersetzung/ von/ Thierry Preyer./ Frankfurt am Main./
Alfred Neumann'sche Buchhandlung./ 1883./ [4º.

_Collation_--Title, one leaf; Personen; Vorrede, 8 pp. + Text, pp.
1-147. The Imprint (_C. Naumann's Druckerei, Frankfurt a. M._) is in the
centre of p. [148].

II.

Lord Byron's/ Marino Faliero./ Für das herzoglich Sachsen-Meiningen'sche
Hoftheater/ übersetzt und bearbeitet/ von A. Fitger./ Oldenburg./
Schulzesche Hof-Buchhandlung und Hof-Buchdruckerei./ (A. Schwartz.)/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title (R. _Alle Rechte Vorbehalten_); Vorwort (R. "Personen"); Text, pp.
1-84.


_Mazeppa_.

I.

Mazeppa,/ A Poem./ By Lord Byron./ London:/ John Murray,
Albemarle-Street./ 1819./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _London:/ Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars_.);
Title, one leaf; Half-title (Mazeppa), pp. 1, 2; Advt. (quotation from
Voltaire, _Hist, de Charles XII._, pp. 196, 216), pp. 3, 4; Text, pp.
5-69. The Imprint, as above, is in the centre of p. [70] + "Lord Byron's
Poems," etc., p. 71.

_Contents_--

Mazeppa                                                             p. 5
Ode ("Oh Venice! Venice!")                                         p. 47
A Fragment (Augustus Darvell)                                      p. 57

II.

Mazeppa, A Poem./ By Lord Byron./ Second Edition./ Paris:/ Published by
Galignani,/ At the French, English, Italian, German, and Spanish/
Library, Nº 18, Rue Vivienne./ 1819 [12º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _Printed by A. Belin_), pp. 1, 2; Title, one leaf, pp. 3,
4; Second Half-title, pp. 5, 6; Advt., pp. 7, 8; Text, pp. 9-69.

_Contents_--

Mazeppa                                                             p. 9
Ode ("Oh Venice!" etc.)                                            p. 47
A Fragment                                                         p. 57

III.

_Mazeppa_, a poem [with fragments]. Boston. 1819. [24º.

[Cat. of Books in Bates Hall of Pub. Lib. of Boston, 1866.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 56.

IV.

_Mazeppa, a Poem_. Paris, Galignani, 1822. [12º.

[Quérard, 1827.]

V.

Mazeppa,/ A Poem./ By Lord Byron./ London:/ Printed and Published by W.
Dugdale,/ _52 Russell Court, Drury Lane_, 1824./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. ii. + 5-35. The Imprint (_Printed by W. Dugdale, Russell Court,
Drury Lane, London_.) is at the foot of p. 35.

VI.

_Mazeppa. a Poem_. Mit Worterklärung u. einer Lebenskizze des Dichters,
von H.M. Melford. Braunschweig, Vieweg. 1834. [12º.

[Kayser, 1841.]

VII.

Mazeppa,/ or the/ Wild Horse/ of the/ Ukraine,/ A Poem, by/ Lord Byron./
London:/ T. Goode, 30, Aylesbury-st.,/ Clerkenwell./ [1854?] [32º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 48.

_Note_.--The Front, (lithograph of Lord Byron) is on p. 1. The Title is
printed on the wrapper (black glazed paper) in gold letters. The volume
measures 60 X 40.


_Translations of Mazeppa_.

_Danish_.

Mazeppa./ AF / Lord Byron./ Öfversättning. [Af Talis Qualis.]
Stockholm,/Alb. Bonniers Förlag./ [1853.] [8º.

Part of "Byron's Poetiska Berättelser."


_German_.

I.

_Mazeppa. Ein Gedicht_. Aus d. Engl. treu übertragen v. Th. Hell. Nebst
beigedr. Urschrift. Leipzig, Hinrichs. 1820. [8º.

[Kayser, 1834.]

II.

_Mazeppa_, übers. im Versmass des Originals v. D^r. jur. Everhard
Brauns. Herausg. von D^r. jur. Engelbrecht, Göttingen, Kübler. 1836.
[8º.

[Kayser, 1841.]

III.

Nachgelassenes/ von/ Ferdinand Freiligrath./ Mazeppa,/ nach Lord Byron./
der Eggesterstein,/ Erzählung./ Stuttgart./ G.J. Göschen'sche
Verlagshandlung./ 1883./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 88.

_Hungarian_.

Byron Lord'/ Élete's munkái./ Irta/ Petrichevich Horváth Lázár./
Harmadik Rész./ Pesten./ Nyomtatta Landerer és Heckenast. 1842./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf; Half-title, one leaf; Dedication; Figyelmezletés
(Advt.); Second Half-title; Text (Mazeppa), pp. _1_-[80] + Oda, etc.,
pp. [81]-154 + Sajtó-hibák, p. [155].


_Italian_.

I.

_Il Mazeppa_. Versione di Ant. Arioti. Palermo, Lo Bianco. 1847. [16º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

II.

Mazeppa./ Traduzione/ da/ Georgio Byron./ Di/ I. Virzì./ Palermo,/Luigi
Pedone Lauriel/ Editore/ 1876./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 63.

III.

_Mazeppa_. Traduzione di Andrea Maffei. Milano, Hoepli. 1886. [64º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

_Polish_.

I.

_Mazepa_, poemat. Przekład wolny na wiersz polski przez Michała Chodźkę.
pp. 39. _Schmidt: w Hali_, 1860. [8º.

II.

(Together with Lamartine's _Death of Jonathan_.)

_Mazepa_, poemat, przekład wolny na wiersze polskie przez Michała
Chodźkę, wydanie ozdobione rycinami, _etc._ pp. 66. _Księg. polska:
Paryź_ [1860]. [8º.

_Russian_.

I.

Выборъ изъ сочиненій лорда Байрона. М. Каченовскаго. [Cyrillic: Viebor"
iz" sochineniye lorda Bairona. M. Kachenovskago.] 1821.

_Collation_--

_Mazepa_, pp. 69-107.

_Note_.--In Prose.

II.

Мазепа. Изъ сочиненій лорда Байрона. А. Воейкова [Cyrillic: Mazepa. Iz"
sochineniye lorda Bairona. A. Boeikova] "Новости литературы [Cyrillic:
Novosti literatyry]," 1824. кн. [Cyrillic: kn.] x. pp. 9-33.

_Note_.--In Prose.

III.

Мазепа ... пер. Д. Михайловскаго [Cyrillic: Mazepa ...per. D.
Mikhailovskago.] [" Современнихъ [Cyrillic: Sovremennikh]," 1858. No.
5.]

IV.

Мазепа ... Перев. И. Гогніева. [Cyrillic: Mazepa ... Perev. I.
Gognieva.] ["Драматическій Сборникъ [Cyrillic: Dramaticheskiye
Sbornik"]." С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: S.-Peterburg"], 1860, кн.
[Cyrillic: kn.] 4.]


_Spanish_.


_Mazeppa_, novela, por L.B. traducida al castellano. Paris, 1830. [18º.

[_Moniteur_, etc., 1845.]


_Monody, etc_.

I.

Monody/ On the Death of/ The Right Honourable/ R.B. Sheridan,/ Written
at the Request of a Friend,/ To be spoke at/ Drury Lane Theatre./
London: Printed for John Murray, Albemarle Street./ 1816./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (Monody./ [Price One Shilling.]/ Entered at Stationers' Hall)
(_R. London: Printed by C. Roworth, Bell-yard, Temple-bar_.), pp. 1, 2;
Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Text, pp. 5-11 + pp. [13]-[15], Advts. of
Books published by John Murray. The Imprint, as above, is at the foot of
p. [15].

II.

Monody/ on the Death of/ The Right Honourable/ R.B. Sheridan./ Spoken
at/ Drury Lane Theatre./ By Lord Byron./ New Edition./ London:/ Printed
for John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1817./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title as above (R. _T. Davison, Lombard-street, Whitefriars,
London_.), pp. 1, 2; Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Text, pp. 5-11 + List of
the Poems, etc., p. [12]. The Imprint (_T. Davison, Lombard-Street_,/
_Whitefriars, London_./) is at the foot of p. [12].

III.

Monody,/ etc./ New Edition,/ etc./ 1818./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _London:/ Printed by T. Davison, Whitefriars_.), pp. 1,
2; Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Text, pp. 5-11 + "Lord Byron's Poems,"
etc., p. [12]. The Imprint, as above, is at the foot of p. [12].

_Note_.--Four pp. of Advts., dated "Albemarle-Street, London, May,
1818," are bound up with this edition.


_An Ode to the Framers of the Frame Bill_.

A Political/ Ode/ By/ Lord Byron/ Hitherto Unknown as His Production./
London/ John Pearson 46 Pall Mall./ 1880./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. [One hundred copies privately printed.]), pp. 1, 2;
Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Note, pp. 5, 6; [Copy of Lord Byron's Letter
... March 1, 1812], pp. 7, 8; Text, pp. [9], [10], 11.


_Ode From the French_.


_Translation_.


_French_.

Traduction de l'Ode/ de/ Lord Byron,/ Sur/ La bataille de Waterloo./ Par
Aristide Guilbert./ Londres:/ Hunt et Clark,/ 38, Tavistock Street./
MDCCCXXVI./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. vii. + 9-28. The Imprint (_De l'Imprimerie de Thomas Davison_,/ 10,
Duke Street, Smithfield, London./) is at the foot of p. 28.

_Contents_--

Preface                                                            p. v.
Ode                                                                 p. 9
Notes                                                              p. 17


_Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte_.

I.

Ode/ To/ Napoleon Buonaparte./ "Expende Annibalem:--quot libras in duce
summo/ Invenies?"---- / Juvenal, Sat. X./ The Second Edition./ London:/
Printed for John Murray, Albemarle-Street,/ By W. Bulmer and Co.
Cleveland-Row,/St James'./ 1814/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (Ode, etc./ Entered at Stationers' Hall./), pp. 1, 2; Title,
one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Note from Gibbon's _Decl. and Fall_ (vol. 6, p.
220), pp. 5, 6; Text (xv. stanzas), pp. 7-14 + Advt. of books "By the
Right Hon. Lord Byron," p. [15]. The Imprint (_Printed by W. Bulmer and
Co_./ _Cleveland-Row, St James's_./) is at the foot of p. [15].

_Note_.--The First Edition of the _Ode_ is in the Rowfant Library
Catalogue, 1886, p. 145.

II.

_An Ode to Napoleon Bonaparte_. From the 3d Lond. ed. Philadelphia, E.
Earle. 1814. [8º.

[Catalogue of Library of Congress, 1880.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 11.

_Note_.--The _Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte_ was also published at Boston,
1814, 8º, pp. 13; and at New York, 1814, 8º, pp. 13.

III.

_Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte_. Sixth Edition. London. 1814. [8º.

[Cat. of Manchester Free Library, 1864.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 17.

IV.

_Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte_. Ninth Edition. London, M. 1814. [8º.

[Library of the University, St. Andrews, N.B.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 17.

V.

Ode/ To/ Napoleon Buonaparte./ By Lord Byron./ etc./ Twelfth Edition./
London:/ Printed for John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1816./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (Ode, etc.) (_R.T. Davison, Lombard-street,/ Whitefriars,
London_./), pp. 1, 2; Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Note, pp. 5, 6; Second
Half-title, pp. 7, 8; Text (xvi. stanzas), pp. 9-17 + Advt. of books "By
the Right Hon. Lord Byron," p. [19]. The Imprint, as above, is at the
foot of p. [19].

VI.

Ode,/ etc./ Thirteenth Edition./ London:/ John Murray,
Albemarle-Street./ 1818./ [8º.

_Collation_--

_Vide supra_, No. i.


_Translation of the Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte_.


_Spanish_.


_Odas a Napoleon_. Por Lord Byron. Imp. de Decourchant, à Paris. 1829. A
Paris, rue du Temple, n. 69. [18º.

[_Bibl. de la France_, October 17, 1829.]


_Parisina_.

[For First Edition of _Parisina_, _vide infra_, _The Siege of Corinth_,
No. i.]


_Translations_.


_Danish_.

Parisina./ Af/ Lord Byron./ Öfversättning. [Af Talis Qualis.] Stockholm,
J.W. Brudins Förlag. [1854.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 36. No. 4 of "Byron's Poetiska Berättelser."


_French_.

Adolphe Krafft/ Parisina/ Poème/ de Lord Byron/ et fragment de/ Nicolas
de Ferrare/ Drame/ Tiré des documents historiques/ Avec commentates et
notices./ Paris/ Ernest Leroux, éditeur/ 28, rue Bonaparte, 28/ 1900
Tous droits réservés./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xiv. + 55 + Errata, p. [57] + Table des Matières, p. [59].

_Note_.--The Text of _Parisina_ is on pp. 8-26.


_German_.

Gedichte/ von/ Jacob Vinc. Cirkel./ Mit übersetzungen/ von W. Scott's
Feld von Waterloo und Byrons/ Parisina etc./ Münster,/ in Commission
der Coppenrathschen Buch-und Kunsthandlung./ 1825./ [8º.

_Collation_--Pp. 159. The Imprint (_Münster, gedruckt mit
Coppenrathschen Schriften_) is on p. [160].

_Note_.--The Text of _Parisina, etc._, is on pp. 127-156.


_Italian_.

I.

Parisina/ Poema/ di/ Lord Byron/ Traduzione italiana in versi./ Milano/
Da Placido Maria Visaj/ Stampatore-Librajo nei Tre Re/ 1821./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 27.

II.

_Parisina_: poema tradotto da Andrea Maffei. Milano, Gnocchi. 1853.
[16º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 40.

III.

_Parisina_. Traduzione di Carlo Dall'Oro. Mantova, Negretti. 1854. [8º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

IV.

_Parisina_, Traduzione in versi sciolti di Paolo Pappalardo. Palermo.
1855. [8º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

V.

_Parisina_. Traduzione di Ant. Canepa. Geneva, Artisti tip. 1864. [16º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 24.


_Russian_.

Паризина ... Переводъ В. Вердеревскаго. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic:
Paritsina ... Perevod V. Verderevskago. S.-Peterburg"], 1827


_Spanish_.

_Parisina_, novela. For L.B. Imp. de Decourchant, à Paris. 1830. [18º.

[_Bibl. de la France_, October 17, 1829.]


_The Prisoner of Chillon_.

I.

The/ Prisoner of Chillon,/ And/ Other Poems./ By Lord Byron./ London:/
Printed for John Murray, Albemarle-Street./ 1816./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (The/ Prisoner of Chillon,/ etc./) (R. Advt. of Third Canto
of Childe Harold, and Imprint, _T. Davison, Lombard-street,/
Whitefriars, London_./), one leaf; Title, one leaf; Cont.; ext, pp.
1-60.

_Contents_--

Sonnet on Chillon                                                   p. 1
The Prisoner of Chillon                                             p. 3
Poems--
Sonnet                                                             p. 23
Stanzas to ----                                                    p. 24
Darkness                                                           p. 27
Churchill's Grave                                                  p. 32
The Dream                                                          p. 35
The Incantation                                                    p. 46
Prometheus                                                         p. 50
Notes                                                              p. 55

_Note_.--On p. 3 the Text is headed "The Prisoner of Chillon. A Fable."

II.

The/ Prisoner of Chillon./ A Poem/ By Lord Byron./ Lausanne./ Hignou &
Company. Book-sellers./ 1818./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. 1, 2; Text, pp. 8-29.

_Note_.--The Front, is a lithograph of "Chillon." The seven poems are
not included in this edition.

III.

The/ Prisoner/ of/ Chillon,/ By Lord Byron,/ London:/ Printed by W.
Chubb, Fetter Lane./ 1824./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 35. The Imprint (_W.P. Chubb, Printer, Fetter Lane, London_.) is at
the foot of p. 35.

IV.

The/ Prisoner of Chillon,/ By Lord Byron./ [n.d.? 1825.] [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 1-18.

_Note_.--This edition, which is without a separate Title-page and bears
no Imprint, is bound up with _The Bride of Abydos_, etc., Printed for
Thomas Wilson, Oxford Street. 1825.

V.

The/ Prisoner/ of/ Chillon./ By Lord Byron./ Geneva./ Published by
Barbezat and Delarue,/ Booksellers, 177, Rue du Rhône./ 1830/ [16º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _Printed by Barbezat and Dalarue_.), pp. 1, 2; Title, one
leaf, pp. 3, 4; Sonnet on Chillon, pp. 5, 6; Text, pp. 7-32.

_Note_.--The volume with the above title is bound in pink paper cover
with title-vignette (helmet, spear, and wreath of bay-leaves), and dated
M.DCCC'XVIII.

VI.

The/ Prisoner of Chillon/ By/ Lord Byron/ Le prisonnier de Chillon/ Par/
Lord Byron/ précédé d'une/ Notice historique sur le château de Chillon/
Par/ D. Martignier/ Lausanne/ Librairie Martignier et Chavannes/ 1857/
[8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _Lausanne.--Printed by Corbaz and Rouiller sen_.), pp. 1,
2; Title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Notice, etc., pp. 5-7; Hist. de Chillon,
pp. 8-21; Text and Notes, pp. 25-46. The seven poems are not included in
this edition.

VII.

The/ Prisoner/ of/ Chillon Poem/ By/ Lord Byron./ Illuminated by/ W. &
G. Audsley./ Architects./ 1865 [4º.

_Collation_--

Illuminated Half-title; Title; 17 pp. of Text with illuminated borders,
etc. + p. 18 (Chromo-lithographed/ By/ W.R. Tymms./ Printed & Published
by/ Day & Son,/ [Limited],/ London)./

VIII.

Byron's/ Prisoner of Chillon./ With Notes for Teachers and Scholars./
London:/ T.J. Allman, 463, Oxford Street./ [1874.] [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 32.

_Note_.--No. 8 of "Allman's English Classics for Elementary Schools."

IX.

Byron's/ Prisoner of Chillon./ With Life, Notes,/ Grammatical &
Miscellaneous Questions,/ etc., etc./ By R.S. Davies,/ Head Master of
Holy Trinity Schools, Hull./ Hull: A. Brown, Scholastic Publisher./
London: Simpkin, Marshall, & Co./ Leeds: Arnold; Bean & Son./
Darlington: The Education Depot./ Price Twopence./ [1877-] [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 24.

_Note_.--Part of "Brown's Series of English Classics."

X.

The/ Prisoner of Chillon./ By/ Lord Byron./ With Prefatory and
Explanatory Notes./ [Monogram, with Motto, _Lucem Libris Disseminamus_.]
London: Blackie & Son, 49 & 50 Old Bailey, E.C./ Glasgow, Edinburgh, and
Dublin./ 1879./ [6º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 32.

_Note_.--Part of "Blackie's School Classics."

XI.

Byron's/ Prisoner of Chillon:/ With Life and Notes./ For Pupil Teachers
and the Upper Standards in/ Schools./ Manchester: J.B. Ledsham, 31,
Corporation Street;/ London: Simpkin, Marshall & Co./ [1879.] [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 35.

_Note_.--Part of the "World School Series."

XII.

The/ Prisoner of Chillon/ By/ Lord Byron/ And Part of/ The 3rd Canto of
Child [_sic_] Harold/ With a Short Description of the Castle/ And a
Notice of the Chief Historical Events/ and Legends connected with its
History/ Selected from authentic sources by an English resident./ Fourth
Edition/ Vevey/ Loertscher & Son, Editors/ 1880/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 59. The Text of _The Prisoner of Chillon_ is on pp. 43-53.

XIII.

_The Prisoner of Chillon. A Fable_. Erklärt v. F. Fischer. Berlin,
Weidmann. 1884. [8º.

[Kayser, 1887.]

XIV.

_The Prisoner of Chillon_, with introduction and explanatory notes by
Th. C. Cann, Firenze, Bencini, 1885. [16º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

XV.

_Byron's Prisoner of Chillon_ and Part of Mazeppa. With Life and Notes.
London and Edinburgh. 1894.

[Kölbing, p. 257.]

_Note_.--Part of "Chambers' Reprints of English Classics."

XVI.

_The Prisoner of Chillon, by Lord Byron_. Special Subject. London.
Stewart & Co., The Holborn Viaduct Steps, E.C. Edinburgh and Glasgow:
Menzies & Co.

[Kölbing, p. 257.]

XVII.

The/ Prisoner of Chillon/ By/ Lord Byron/ With Notes/ Explanatory,
Analytical, and Grammatical/ Embracing/ Figures of Speech, and Metre/ By
the/ Rev. Henry Evans, D.D./ Commissioner of National Education/ Dublin/
Blackie & Son, Limited, 89 Talbot Street/ London and Glasgow/ 1896/
[16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 36.

_Note_--Part of "English Classics for Intermediate Schools and
Colleges."

XVIII.

Byron./ The Prisoner of Chillon./ A Fable./ With Life, Introduction,
Notes, etc./ Dublin:/ Fallon & Co., 16 Lower Sackville Street./
[Copyright. All Rights Reserved.] [1896.] [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 36.

_Note_.--Part of "School and College Series. Edited by Rev. T.A. Finlay,
M.A., F.R.U.I. Price Sixpence, Net."

XIX. The/ Prisoner of Chillon/ And/ Other Poems/ By/ Lord Byron/ In
kritischen Texten/ Mit/ Einleitung und Anmerkungen/ Herausgegeben/ von
Eugen Kölbing/ Weimar/ Verlag von Emil Felber/ 1896/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. ix. + 450.


_Translations of The Prisoner of Chillon_.


_Dutch_.

_De Gevangene van Chillon_; in: Gedichten van K.L. Ledeganck' met eene
Levensschets des Dichters door J.F.J. Heremans. Gent, 1856.

[Kölbing, p. 265.]


_French_.

I.

_Le Prisonnier de Chillon_, Poème de Lord Byron librement traduit en
vers blancs, précédé d'une notice historique et descriptive du château
de Chillon. Vevey. G. Blanchoud, libraire-éditeur.

[Kölbing, p. 264.]

II.

Bonnivard/ A/ Chillon/ _Souviens-toi du temps d'autrefois_./ (Deut.
xxxii. 7.)/ Drame historique/ En un acte et trois tableaux/ Suivi d'une
notice historique et du poème de lord Byron, intitulé: Le Prisonnier de
Chillon/ Par un Huguenot/ Genève/ Imprimerie Wyss et Duchêne, rue
Verdaine/ 1892/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 96. There is a prose translation of _The Prisoner of Chillon_, pp.
74-85.

_Note_.--The Front, is a lithograph of "Chillon."


_German_.

I. _Lord Byron's Gefangener von Chillon_ (am Genfer See). Aus dem
Englischen metrisch übertragen von G. Kreyenberg. Lausanne, 1861.

[Kölbing, p. 261.]

II.

Der/ Gefangene von Chillon./ Dichtung/ von/ Lord Byron./ In deutscher
Uebersetzung mit historischer Einleitung / von / M. von der Marwitz./
Vevey & Lausanne,/ Richard Lesser./ [1865.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xi. + 16.

_Note_.--The Front, is a "Photog. de R. Lesser & Cie., Vevey," of four
female figures supporting a mirror reflecting the dungeon of Chillon.

III.

_Der Gefangene von Chillon_. Eine Fabel von Georg Gordon Lord Byron.
Wortgreteu nach H.R. Mecklenburgs Gründsatzen in deutsche Prosa
übersetzt und eingehend erläutert von D'. phil. R.T. Berlin, 1886.

[Kölbing, p. 262.]

IV.

Der/ Gefangene von Chillon./ Von/ Lord Byron./ Uebersetzt von J.G.
Hagmann./ S'. Gallen & Leipzig/ Verlag von Busch & Co./ [1892.] [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 29.

_Note_.--The Front, is a lithograph of "Chillon."


_Italian_.

I.

_Il prigionero di Chillon_, poema romantico trad. in prosa italiana. In
_Indicatore Livornese_, N. 44, del II Gennaio del 1830.

[_Saggio di Bibliografie_, Milano, Levino Robecchi, 1887.]

II.

_Il prigionero di Chillon_: Traduzione di Andrea Maffei, Milano,
Gnocchi, 1853. [16º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]


_Russian_.

Шильонскій Узникъ, нозма лорда Байрона. Переводъ съ англійскаго В.
Жуковскаго. [Cyrillic: Shilonskiye Uznik", nozma lorda Bairona. Perevod"
s" angliyeskago V. Zhykovskago.] pp. i.-viii. 1-24. С.-Петербургъ
[Cyrillic: S.-Peterburg"], 1822. 8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. i.-viii. + 1-24.

_Spanish_.

_El preso de Chillon_, novela. For lord Byron, traduccion castellana.
Imp. de Decourchant, à Paris. 1829. [18º.

[_Bibl. de la France_, Oct. 17, 1829.]


_Swedish_.

Fangen PA Chillon,/ En Dikt/ Af/ Lord Byron./ Öfversättning./ [Af/ Talis
Qualis.]/ Stockholm,/ Albert Bonniers Förlag./ [1853, etc.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 30.

_Note_.--No. 3 of "Byron's Poetiska Berättelser."


_The Prophecy of Dante_.

_Note.--The Prophecy of Dante_ was first published in the same volume
with _Marino Faliero_, 1821. See No. i. (p. 275).

I.

_The Prophecy of Dante_. Philadelphia. 1821. [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 48.

II.

_The Prophecy of Dante_. Paris, Galignani, 1821. [12º.

[Quérard, 1827.]

III.

The/ Prophecy of Dante./ A Poem./ By Lord Byron./ "'Tis the sunset of
life gives me mystical lore,/ "And coming events cast their shadows
before." / Campbell./ London:/ Printed and Published by W. Dugdale,/ 23,
Russell Court, Drury Lane./ 1825/ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. vi. + 7-32. The Imprint _(W. Dugdale, Printer, 23, Russell Court,
Drury Lane.)_ is at the foot of p. 32.

IV.

The/ Prophecy of Dante./ (Cantos I., 11.)/ By/ Lord Byron./ With
Critical and Explanatory Notes,/ By L. W. Potts,/ Lecturer on History at
the Birkbeck Institute, London./ London:/ Blackie & Son, 49 & 50 Old
Bailey, E.C./ Glasgow, Edinburgh, and Dublin./ 1879./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 32. The Imprint (_Glasgow: W.G. Blackie and Co., Printers,
Villafield_.) is at the foot of p. 32.

_Note_.--Part of "Blackie's School Manuals."


_Translations of The Prophecy of Dante_.


_French_.

Oeuvres de Dante Alighieri. La Divine Comédie, Traduction A. Brizeux. La
Vie Nouvelle, Traduction E.J. Delécluze. Paris, Charpentier,
libraire-éditeur. 29, rue de Seine. 1842. [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. lxxxviii. + 403 + "Table," p. [404].

_Note_.--The translation of La Prophétie du Dante (par M. Benjamin
Laroche) (see "Avis de L'Éditeur," p. i.) is on pp. 385-403.


_Italian_.

I.

_Profezia di Dante Alighieri_, scritta da lord Byron, e tradotta
dell'inglesc. Impr. de Clò, à Paris. Paris, chez Barrois aîné, 1821.
[8º.

[_Bibl. de la France_, October 26, 1821.]

II.

La Profezia di Dante. Di Lord Byron. Tradotta in terza rima da L. Da
Ponte. Nuova-Jorca: Publicata da R.E.W.A. Bartow, 250 Pearl-St. Gray &
Bunce, Stampatori. 1821. [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 72.

_Note_.--The Italian is printed over against the English. There is a
double Dedication (pp. 3-7), "A Madamgella Giulia Livingston," and "A
Lord Byron."

III.

_La Profezia di Dante_: poema, reso in versi italiani da Giov. Giovio,
Milano, Bernardoni, 1856. [8º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

IV.

_La Profezia di Dante_: poema accommodate all'indole del verso italiano
da Melchiorre Missirini, publicato da Fr. Longhena, Milano Guglielmini,
1858. [8º.

[Pagliaini, 1901.]

_Spanish_.

La Profecia del Dante./ Poema escrito y dedicado/ à la/ Condesa
Guiccioli/ En 1819,/ Por lord Byron,/ al visitar en Ravena la tumba de
aquel./ Traducido del Frances/ Por/ Antonio Maria Vizcayno,/ y dedicado
a su bien amigo/ El Sr. Lic. D. Jose Agustin de Escudero./ Magistrado
del supremo tribunal de guerra y marina./ Mexico: 1850./ Imprenta de
J.M. Lara, calle de la Palma núm. 4./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, etc., 6 pp. + Text, pp. 28.


_Sardanapalus_.

I.

Sardanapalus,/ A Tragedy./ The Two Foscari,/ A Tragedy./ Cain,/ A
Mystery./ By Lord Byron./ London:/ John Murray, Albemarle-Street./
1821./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. viii. + 439. Half-title (R. _London: Printed by Thomas Davison,
Whitefriars_.), pp. i., ii.; Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Cont., pp.
v., vi.; Preface, pp. vii., viii.; Text, pp. 1-439. The Imprint, as
above, is on p. [440].

_Contents_--

Sardanapalus, A Tragedy                                             p. 1
Notes                                                             p. 171
The Two Foscari, A Tragedy                                        p. 175
Appendix                                                          p. 305
Cain, A Mystery                                                   p. 331

II.

_Sardanapalus, a Tragedy_; _The Two Foscari, a Tragedy_; _Cain, a
Mystery_. Boston. 1822. [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 309.

III.

Sardanapalus:/ A Tragedy./ By/ Lord Byron./ London:/ John Murray,
Albemarle Street,/ 1829./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. 1, 2; Half-title, one leaf, pp. 3, 4; Dedication,
pp. 5, 6; Author's Note, pp. 7, 8; Dramatis Personæ, _n.p._; Text, pp.
9-134.

_Note_.--The Dedication to "The illustrious Goëthe," which was omitted
from the edition of 1821 (No. i.), is inserted.

IV.

_Sardanapalus_: A Tragedy by Lord George Gordon Byron. Arnsberg, Ritter.
1849. [16º.

[Kayser, 1854.]

_Note_.--Part of "Sammlung Englischer Schauspiele der neuesten Zeit."

V.

Sardanapalus,/ King of Assyria./ A Tragedy./ In Five Acts./ By/ Lord
Byron./ Adapted for Representation by/ Charles Kean./ Thomas Hailes
Lacy,/ Wellington Street, Strand,/ London./ [1853.] [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 56.

_Note_.--No. 155 of "Lacy's Acting Edition of Plays."

VI.

Lord Byron's/ Historical Tragedy/ of/ Sardanapalus./ Arranged for
Representation,/ In Three [_sic_] Acts,/ By Charles Calvert./
Manchester: John Heywood, 141 and 143, Deansgate./ [1877?] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. vii. + 56.

_Note_.--A list of "Opinions of the Press" (see _Poetical Works_, 1901,
v. 9) is printed on p. 56 and on the inner leaf of the paper cover.

VII.

Sardanapalus./ By/ Lord Byron./ [Title-vignette, "Myrrha, Embrace me:
yet once more--yet once more."] New and Complete Edition.--Price One
Penny./ London: J. Dicks, 313, Strand: All Booksellers./ [1883, etc.]
[12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 495-524.

_Note_.--No. 50 of "Dicks' Standard Plays."


_Translations of Sardanapalus_.


_Bohemian_.

_Sardanapal_ ... Přeložil František Krsek. ("Sborník světové poesie."
svaz. 3.) pp. 204. _Otto: v Praze_, 1891. [8º.

_French_.

_Sardanapale_,/ Tragédie,/ Imitée de Lord Byron,/ par L. Alvin,/ Et
représentée pour la première fois sur le Théatre Royal/ de Bruxelles, Le
11 Janvier 1834./ Bruxelles,/ Gambier, libraire, rue des Éperonniers Nº
16./ et chez tous les libraires de royaume./ 1834./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. xviii. + 122.


_German_.

I.

_Sardanapal_./ Trauerspiel in fünf Akten. Aus dem Engl. übers. von Emma
Herz. Posen, Merzbach. 1854. [16º.

[Kayser, 1860.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 214.

II.

Sardanapal./ Trauerspiel in fünf Aufzügen/ von/ Lord Byron./
Bühnenbearbeitung/ Nach der Uebersetzung von Adolf Böttger/ mit einem/
"Vorspiel"/ von/ Max Zerbst./ Jena 1888./ Friedr. Mauke's Verlag./ (A.
Schenk.)/ [1888.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 117.

III.

Lord Byron's/ Sardanapal/ Eine Tragödie/ frei übertragen und für die
Bühne bearbeitet/ von/ Josef Kainz/ Berlin W/ F. Fontane & Co./ 1897/

_Collation_--

Pp. 214.


_Italian_.

Sardanapalo/ Tragedia in 5 atti/ di/ G. Byron/ Milano/ Edoardo Sonzogno,
editore/ 14.--Via Pasquirolo.--14./ 1884./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 91.

_Note_.--No. 77 of the "Biblioteca Universale."

_Polish_.

_Sardanapal_, tragedya, przekład Fryderyka Krauzégo. pp. 132. _wyd.
red._ "_Biblioteki Warszawskiéj_": _Warszawa_, 1872. [8º.


_Romaic_.

Σαρδαναπαλος, / Τραγῳδια του Λορδου Βυρῳνος / Μεταφρασθεισα
ἐκ τοῦ Ἀγγλικοῦ, ο / υιος της Δουλης / και / Ευγενια / υπο /
Χρηστου Α. Παρμενιδου. Εν Αθηναις, / εκ του τυπογραφειου
Ερμου.
[Greek:
Sardanapalos, / Tragô|dia tou Lordou Burô|nos / Metaphrastheisa
e)k tou A)gglikou, o / uios tês Doulês / kai / Eugenia / upo /
Chrêstou A. Parmenidou. En Athênais, / ek tou tupographeiou
Ermou. ]
( κατὰ τὴν ὁδὸν Περικλέους, ἐν τῇ οἰκίᾳ Ν. Μυκονίου.)
[Greek: ( kata\ tê\n hodo\n Perikle/ous, e)n tê~| oi)ki/a| N. Mukoni/ou.)]

_Collation_--

Pp. η [Greek: ê ] + 400 + Πιναξ των Περιεχομενων [Greek: Pinax tôn
Periechomenôn ], p. [401].

_Note_.--The translation of _Sardanapalus_ is on pp. 1-150; the
translation of _The Dream_ ( Το Ἐνυπνιον. Εκ των του Βυρωνος [Greek: To
E)nupnion. Ek tôn tou Burônos ] ), on pp. 171-184.


_Russian_.

I.

Сарданапалъ ... Переводъ Е. Зорина. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Sardanapal"
... Perevod" E. Zorina.] S.-Peterburg"], 1860. 8º.

II.

Сарданапалъ ... пер. О.Н. Чюминой. "Артистъ," 1890, кн. 9 и 10.
[Cyrillic: Sardanapal" ... Per. O.N. Chyuminoie. "Artist", 1890, kn. 9 i
10.]," 1890.


_Swedish_.

Sardanapalus./ Sorgespel I Fem Akter/ Af/ Byron./ Försvenskadt och För
Scenen Behandladt/ Af/ Nils Arfvidsson./ Första gängen uppfördt à Kongl.
Stora Theatern den 17 Nov. 1864./ Stockholm, 1864./ P.A. Norstedt &
Söner,/ Kongl. Boktryckare./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 154 + Rättelser, p. [155].


_The Siege of Corinth_.

The/ Siege of Corinth./ A Poem./ Parisina./ A Poem./ London:/ Printed
for John Murray. Albemarle-Street./ 1816/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _T. Davison, Lombard street,/ Whitefriars, London_.);
Title, one leaf; Second Half-title, with Motto ("Guns," etc.), pp. 1, 2;
Dedication, pp. 3, 4; Advt., pp. 5, 6; Text, pp. 7-89 + Notes, p. [91]
(R. Imprint as above).

_Note_.--_The Siege of Corinth_ is on pp. 7-57; _Parisina_, pp. 59-[91].

_Note_.--A Second and a Third Edition were issued in 1816. The Museum
copy of the First Edition is without the Half-title.

II.

The/ Siege of Corinth:/ A Poem./ Parisina:/ A Poem./ By Lord Byron./
New-York:/ Printed and Published by Van Winkle & Wiley,/ No. 3
Wall-Street./ 1816./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 94.

III.

The/ Siege of Corinth./ A Poem./ By Lord Byron./ "Guns, Trumpets,
Blunderbusses, Drums, and Thunder."/ London:/ Printed and Published by
W. Dugdale,/ _23, Russell Court, Drury Lane_./ 1824./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 44. The Imprint (_Printed by W. Dugdale; Russell-Court, Drury
Lane_.) is at the foot of p. 44.

IV.

_The Siege of Corinth_. Für den Schul. u. Privatgebrauch abgedr. nach
der Pariser Ausg. (1835, Galignani.) Lüneburg, Engel. 1854. [8º.

[Kayser, 1860.]

_Collation_--

Pp. 51.

V.

Lines from the Poets/ With Notes/ For use in Elementary and Secondary
Schools/ Adapted to the requirements of the New Code and the/ Oxford and
Cambridge Local Examinations/ No. 4/ Byron's 'Siege of Corinth'/ London/
National Society's Depository/ Broad Sanctuary, Westminster/ 1879/ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 62.

VI.

Byron's/ Siege of Corinth./ Mit/ Einleitung und Anmerkungen/
Herausgegeben/ von/ Eugen Kölbing./ Berlin./ Verlag von Emil Felber./
1893./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. lx. + 155. The Imprint (_Druck von G. Uschmann in Weimar_.) is at
the foot of p. 155.

VII.

The Siege of Corinth. Mit Anmerkgn. zum Schulgebrauch hrsg. v. K.
Bandow. [12º.

[Kayser, 1891.]

_Note_.--Part of "English Authors." Bielefeld, Velhagen & Klasing.
1885-1890.


_Translations of The Siege of Corinth_.


_Dutch_.

Het/ Beleg van Corinthe,/ Uit Het Engelsch van/ Lord Byron./ Door/ Mr.
I. Van Lennep./ [Title-vignette, phantom appearing to Alp.] Te Amsterdam
bij/ P. Meijer Warnars./ 1831./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 59. The Imprint (_Gedrukt Bij C.A. Spin._) is at the foot of p. 59.


_French_.

_Le Siége de Corinthe_, par lord Byron; traduit de l'anglais par Ch.
Mancel. Impr. de Guîraudet, à Paris. A Paris, chez Delaunay; chez Pillet
aîné. 1820. [12º.

[_Bibl. de la France_, September 16, 1820.]


_German_.

I.

_Die Belagerung von Korinth_. [Deutsch. v.] A. Wollheim. Hamburg.
Lübbers & Schubert. (?) 1817. [12º.

[_Centralblatt_, 1890, vii. 472.]

II.

_Die Belagerung von Korinth_. Mit gegeniibergedrucktem Originaltext.
Leipzig, Brockhaus. 1820. [8º.

[_Centralblatt_, 1900, vii. 458.]

_Note_.--_Britische Dichterproben_, ii. I.

III.

_Die Belagerung von Korinth_. [Deutsch. v.] G.E. Schumann. Hamburg,
Nestler & Melle. 1827. [8º.

[_Centralblatt_, 1890, vii. 471.]


_Italian_.

_L'Assedio di Corinto_, di Giorgio lord Byron, Versione di Vincenzo
Padovan. Venezia, coi tipi del Gondoliere, 1838. [8º.

[_Bibliografia Italiana_, March, 1838.]


_Spanish_.

El Sitio/ de/ Corinto./ Por/ Lord Byron./ Traducido del Francés Al
Castellano./ [Title-vignette, Athene with owl.] Paris, Libreria
americana,/ Calle del Temple, Nº 9./ 1828./ [16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 85.


_Swedish_.

Belägringen Af Korinth./ Af/ Lord Byron./ Öfversättning./ [Af/ Talis
Qualis./ Stockholm,/ Albert Bonniers Förlag./] [1854.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 60.

_Note_.--No. 2 of "Byron's Poetiska Berättelser."


_The Two Foscari_.

I.

[_Note_.--For the First Edition of _The Two Foscari_, _vide ante_,
_Sardanapalus_, No. i.]

_The Two Foscari_. New York. 1822. [24º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 114.

II.

_The Two Foscari_, an historical tragedy. By the right hon. lord Byron.
Impr. de Belin, à Paris. A Paris chez Galignani, 1822. [12º.

[_Bibl. de la France_, March 9. 1822.]

III.

The Two Foscari./ By/ Lord Byron./ [Title-vignette, Death of Jacopo
Foscari--"Touch it not, Dungeon Miscreants!----"] New and Complete
Edition.--Price One Penny./ London: J. Dicks, 313, Strand. All
Booksellers./ [1883, etc.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 525-546.

_Note_.--No. 73 of "Dicks' Standard Plays."


_Translations of The Two Foscari_.


_Russian_.

Двое Фоскари ... пер. Е. Зарина. [Cyrillic: Dvoye Foskari ... per. E.
Zarina.] [" Библіотека для Чтенія [Cyrillic: Biblioteka dlya Chteniya],"
1861. No. 11.]


_Spanish_.

Los dos Fóscaris. Drama histórico en cinco actos y en verso por D.
Manuel Çañete, representado en el teatro de la Cruz, a beneficio de D.
Juan Lombia, en el mes de noviembre de 1846.

_Collation_--

Pp. 24.

_Note_.--Part of "Biblioteca Dramatica,"/ etc./ Madrid, 1846./ Imprenta
de Don Vicente de Lalama, Editor,/ Calle del Duque de Alba, n. 13./ 4º.


_The Vision of Judgment_.

_Note_.--For the First Edition of _The Vision of Judgment_, see _The
Liberal_, 1822, No. I., pp. 3-39.

I.

_Vision of Judgment_. Paris, Galignani, 1822. [12º.

[Quérard, 1827.]

II.

The/ Two Visions;/ or,/ Byron v. Southey./ Containing/ The Vision of
Judgment,/ By Dr. Southey, L.L.D./ Poet-Laureate and Esquire; Republican
and Royalist:/ Also Another/ Vision of Judgment,/ By Lord Byron./
London: Printed and Published by W. Dugdale, 19, Tower/ Street, Seven
Dials./ 1822./

_Collation_--

Pp. 72.

_Note_.--The Text of Lord Byron's _Vision of Judgment_ is on pp. 35-72.

_The Waltz_.

I.

Waltz:/ An Apostrophic Hymn./ By/ Horace Hornem, Esq./ "Qualis in Eurotæ
ripis, aut per juga Cynthi/ Exercet DIANA choros."--Ovid./ London:
Printed by S. Gosnell, Little Queen Street, Holborn,/ For Sherwood,
Neely, and Jones, Paternoster Row./ 1813./ (_Price Three Shillings_.)/
[4º.

_Collation_--

Title, one leaf, pp. [1], [2]; To the Publisher, pp. 3-6; Text, pp.
7-27. The Imprint (_S. Gosnell, Printer, Little Queen Street, London_.)
is at the foot of p. 27.

_Note_.--The pages of the Text measure 280 X 220.

II.

Waltz:/ An/ Apostrophic Hymn./ By/ Horace Hornem, Esq./ (_The Author of
Don Juan_.)/ Qualis in Eurotæ ripis, aut per juga Cynthi/ Exercet DIANA
choros./ Virgil./ Such on _Eurotas_' banks, or Cynthia's height,/
_Diana_ seems; and so she charms the sight,/ When in the dance the
graceful goddess leads/ The Quire of Nymphs, and overtops their heads./
Dryden's Virgil./ London:/ Benbow, Printer and Publisher, Castle
Street,/ Leicester Square./ 1821./ [12º.

_Collation_--

Pp. v. + (Text) 7-36.

_Contents_--

To the Publisher                                                 p. iii.
The Waltz                                                           p. 7
Notes                                                              p. 19
To Jessy [attrib. to Lord Byron]                                   p. 27
"My Boat is on the shore" [attrib. to Lord Byron]                  p. 29
Lines ... to Mr. Hobhouse [attrib. to Lord Byron]                  p. 30
On the Star of "The Legion of Honour"                              p. 31
Adieu to Malta                                                     p. 34

_Note_.--The two last poems are not attributed to Lord Byron.


_Werner_.

I.

Werner,/ A Tragedy./ By Lord Byron./ London:/ John Murray,
Albemarle-Street./ 1823-/ [8º.

_Collation_--

Half-title (R. _London:/ Printed by Thomas Davison, Whitefriars_.), pp.
i., ii.; Title, one leaf, pp. iii., iv.; Dedication, one leaf ("To/ The
Illustrious Goëthe,/ By One of His Humblest Admirers,/ This Tragedy is
dedicated./"), pp. v., vi.; Preface, pp. vii., viii.; Text, pp. 1-188.
The Imprint, as above, is at the foot of p. 188.

II.

_Werner, a Tragedy_. Paris, Galignani. 1823. [12º.

[Quérard, 1827.]

III.

Werner./ A Tragedy/ In Five Acts./ By Lord Byron./ With the Stage
Business, Casts of Characters,/ Costumes, Relative Positions, etc./ New
York:/ M. Douglas, 11 Spruce Street./ And for Sale by all Booksellers./
1848./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. v. + 6-75.

_Note_.--No. lxviii. of "Modern Standard Drama." Edited by John W.S.
Hows.

IV.

The/ British Drama./ Illustrated./ Vol. III./ London:/ Published by John
Dicks, 313, Strand./ 1865./ [8º.

_Note_.--The Text of "Werner./ A Tragedy, In Five Acts.--By Lord
Byron./" is on pp. 767-789.

V.

Werner./ By Lord Byron./ [Title-vignette [_Sieg._]--"Liar and Fiend! But
you shall not be slain."--[_Act_ v. _Scene_ 1.]/] New and Complete
Edition.--Price One Penny./ London: J. Dicks, 313, Strand; All
Booksellers./ [1883, etc.] [8º.

_Collation_--

Pp. 767-789.

_Note_.--No. 3 of "Dicks' Standard Plays."

VI.

Werner/ or/ The Inheritance/ A Tragedy/ By/ Lord Byron/ London/ George
Routledge And Sons/ Broadway, Ludgate Hill/ Glasgow and New York/ 1887/
[16º.

_Collation_--

Pp. ix. + 10-256. The Imprint (_Ballantyne Press: Edinburgh and
London_.) is at the foot of p. 256.

_Translations of Werner_.

_Russian_.

I.

Вернеръ ... пер. Неизвѣстнаго. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Verner" ... per.
Neizviestnago.] S.-Peterburg"], 1829.

II.

Донъ-Жуанъ иа островѣ пирата. Перев. Д. Мина Москва [Cyrillic:
Don"-Djuan" ia ostrov" pirata. Perev. D. Mina Moskva], 1881.


_The Liberal_.

The/ Liberal./ Verse and Prose From The/ South./ Volume the First./
London, 1822:/ Printed by and for John Hunt,/ 22, Old Bond Street./ [8º.

_Collation_--

Vol. I.: pp. xii. + 3-399 + Cont., p. [401] (R. "Errata," p. [402]). The
Imprint (_London_:/ _C.H. Reynell, Printer,/ 45, Broad-Street,
Golden-Square_.) is at the foot of p. [402].

Vol. II.: [The/ Liberal,/ etc./ Volume The Second./ London, 1823:/
Printed for John Hunt,/ 22, Old Bond Street./], pp. viii. + 1-377 +
Cont. of No. iv., p. [379]. The Imprint (_London:/ Printed by C.H.
Reynell, Broad Street, Golden-Square_.) is at the foot of p. [380].

_Contents_ [Lord Byron's contributions]--

Vol. I.: _The Liberal_, No. 1. The Vision of Judgment. By Quevedo
Redivivus. Suggested by the Composition so entitled by the Author of
"Wat Tyler." "A Daniel come to judgment! yea, a Daniel! I thank thee,
Jew, for teaching me that word." Pp. 8-39; Letter to the Editor of "My
Grandmother's Review," pp. 41-50; Epigrams on Lord Castlereagh, p. 164.

_The Liberal_, No. II. Heaven and Earth, A Mystery, Founded on the
Following Passage in Genesis, Chap. vi.: "And it came to pass ... that
the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they
took them wives of all which they chose." "And woman wailing for her
demon lover."--Coleridge. Part I., etc., pp. 165-206. From the French
("Ægle, beauty and poet," etc.), p. 396; Martial.--Lib. I. Epig. I
(Translation), p. 398; New Duet ("Why how now, saucy Tom?"), _ibid._

Vol. II.: _The Liberal_, No. III. _The Blues, A Literary Eclogue_,
"Nimium ne crede colori."--VIRGIL. O trust not, ye beautiful creatures,
to hue, Though your _hair_ were as _red_ as your stockings are _blue_.
Eclogue the First, etc., pp. 1-21.

_The Liberal_, No. IV. Morgante Maggiore di Messer Luigi Pulci, pp.
193-249.

_Note_.--The text of the original Italian is printed after the English
translation.

_Dedication of Don Juan_.

The following note was attached to the "Dedication" which was prefixed
to the First Canto in 1833 (_Works_, 1833, xv. 101):--

"Note(1). [This 'Dedication' was suppressed in 1819, with Lord Byron's
reluctant consent; but, shortly after his death, its existence became
notorious, in consequence of an article in the _Westminster Review_,
generally ascribed to Sir John Hobhouse, and for several years the
verses have been selling in the streets as a broadside. It could
therefore serve no purpose to exclude them on the present occasion.]"
See, too, _Poetical Works_, 1903, vi. 3.

I am indebted to the kindness of Mr. H. Buxton Forman, C.B., for the
following description of one of these "broadsides," now in his
possession:--

"Single sheet foolscap 8vo, consisting of Half-title, 'Dedication/
to/Don Juan,/' with Imprint on verso ('London:/ printed by C. and W.
Reynell, Broad Street,/ Golden Square'); Title-page, 'Dedication/ to/
Don Juan./ by/ Lord Byron./ London:/ Published by Effingham
Wilson,/Royal Exchange./ 1833./' On the verso of this is a note--

"'[_Why the following Dedication did not appear with the two first
published Cantos of the Poem cannot be explained--unless the connection
between_ Mr. MURRAY _and_ Mr. SOUTHEY _sufficiently explains it_.]'

"The first page of the Text (p. 5, but not numbered) contains the
dropped head 'Don Juan./ Dedication.' and one stanza. Pp. 6-10 contain
two stanzas each, and p. 11 one. The headline 'Don Juan' runs from p. 6
to p. 11, and the stanzas are numbered in Roman capital figures. P. 12
is blank, and is followed by a Half-title, 'Notes,' with a blank verso.
The Notes occupy pp. 15 and 16, of which 15 is not numbered, but has a
dropped head, 'Notes.' Page 16 is numbered, and has the headline
'Notes.'"

[Illustration: Diadem Hill (Annesley Park), Where Lord Byron Parted From
Mary Chaworth.]




NOTES.


_Note_ (1).--ON GENUINE AND SPURIOUS ISSUES OF "ENGLISH BARDS, AND
SCOTCH REVIEWERS."

Among the first who called attention to the "inextricable tangle" of the
several editions of _English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers_ was Mr.
Leicester Warren, better known as Lord de Tabley, who communicated some
notes in 1877 to _Notes and Queries_ (Series V. vol. vii. pp. 145,
etc.); but it was reserved to the late Mr. Dykes Campbell, Mr. Bertram
Dobell, and other correspondents to the _Athenæum_ (May 5 to July 7,
1894), to point out that the problem was still farther complicated by
the existence of spurious issues of at least three out of the five or
six distinct editions of the Satire.

All editions, genuine or spurious, claim as their publisher "James
Cawthorn, British Library, No. 24 Cockspur Street," but different
printers were employed. The First Edition bears the imprint of "T.
Collins, Printer, No. 1, Harvey's Buildings, Strand;" the Second
Edition, that of "Deans and Co. Hart Street, Covent Garden;" the Third
Edition, that of "T. Collins," etc.; the Fourth Edition of 1810, that of
"T. Collins," etc.; the Fourth Edition of 1811 ("James Cawthorn and
Sharpe and Hailes"), that of "Cox, Son, and Baylis, Great Queen Street,
London." No printer's name was attached to the suppressed Fifth Edition
of 1812.

Genuine First Editions have the water-mark, "E. and P. 1804," or "E. and
P. 1805," or, possibly, no water-mark at all. A copy of the spurious
First Edition, in Mr. Murray's possession, has the water-mark, "S. and
C. Wise, 1812." In addition to at least eleven variants in punctuation,
the spurious copy prints (p. 5, line 47) "Wizzard" (p. 20 _n_.),
"M_e_deira," and, in the same note, "Anna d'Afert;" whereas the genuine
copies print correctly "Wizard," "Madeira," and "Anna d'Arfet."

A genuine copy of the Second Edition, which belonged to the late Mr.
Dykes Campbell, bears the water-mark "Budgen and Willmot, 1808." On p.
80, line 1007, "Abedeen" is misprinted for "Aberdeen;" and the same
misprint occurs in a copy of the Second Edition in the British Museum.
In all probability there was no spurious issue of the Second Edition.

Of the Third Edition (1810), copies bearing the water-mark, "E.&P.
1804," or "G.&R.T.," may be regarded as genuine--rare exceptions among a
host of forgeries which either lack a water-mark altogether or bear
water-marks of a later period. Mr. Gilbert R. Redgrave, in an article
(_The Library_, December 1, 1899, Series II. vol. i. pp. 18-25), notes
two distinct and divergent forgeries bearing the water-mark "Pine, and
Thomas, 1812." Forgery A prints "myse" for "muse" (line 4), "rove" for
"rave" (line 384), etc.; while forgery B, in a footnote to p. 30, prints
"Bowle'ss" for "Bowles's," and, at the end of p. 85, "we" for "me," and
"farther" for "further." Other copies bear the water-marks, "Allnutt,
1816," "Smith & Allnutt, 1816," "Ivy Mills, 1817," and "I.&R. Ansell,
1818." A copy of a spurious issue of the Third Edition in the British
Museum prints "crawl" for "scrawl" (line 47), and "p. 73" for "p. 85."

It has been surmised, but conclusive proof is not forthcoming, that a
so-called Fourth Edition of 1810 (1050 lines), which purports to have
been published by James Cawthorn, and bears the imprint, "_Printed by J.
Collins, Harvey's Buildings, Strand, London_," is a spurious issue. It
is practically a reprint of the Third Edition; but in some copies there
are misprints not to be found in other piracies--_e.g._ "crouds" for
"crowds" (line 269), and "alter" for "altar"(line 285).

Copies of the Fourth Edition of 1810, which may possibly be genuine,
bear a water-mark, "G.&R.T.," or are on plain paper. Copies which are
manifestly forgeries bear the water-marks, "J.X. 1810" and "W.
Pickering, 1816."

A second Fourth Edition (1052 lines), published by "James Cawthorn and
Sharp & Hailes, 1811," and printed by "Cox, Son, & Baylis," was
certainly recognized by Byron as a genuine Fourth Edition, and must have
passed through his hands, or been subject to his emendation, before it
was sent to press. Copies of this edition bear his MS. emendations of
1811-1812, and marginal notes of 1816. Genuine copies (_e.g._ Leigh
Hunt's copy, now in the Forster Collection at the South Kensington
Museum) are printed on paper bearing a water-mark, "J. Whatman, 1805."
There was, however, another issue of the Fourth Edition of 1811, printed
on plain paper. Mr. Redgrave notes certain minute differences between
these two issues. In the edition on plain paper there is a hyphen to
"Cockspur-Street" on the title-page, and the word "Street" is followed
by a comma instead of a semicolon. Again, in the plain-paper copies
"Lambe" is spelt with an _e_, and in the water-mark copies the word is
correctly spelt "Lamb." In the plain-paper copies the misprint
"Postcript" for "Postscript" is repeated, and in the copies bearing a
water-mark the word is correctly spelt "Postscript." There are other
differences in the advertisements at the end of the volume.

A spurious Fourth Edition in Mr. Murray's possession, which has been
enriched with a series of prints of persons and places, bears the
water-marks, "1811," "1814." Each page has been inserted into a folio
sheet bearing the water-mark, "J. Whatman, 1816." A full-sized octavo,
in small print (B.M. 11645 P. 15), which purports to be the Fourth
Edition of 1811, is probably spurious. It is the survival of a distinct
issue from other genuine or spurious copies of the Fourth Edition.

The spurious issues of the Third and Fourth Editions, whether they were
printed in Ireland or were secretly thrown upon the market by James
Cawthorn after Byron had definitely selected Murray as his publisher,
were designed for the general reader and not for the collector. The
issue of a spurious First Edition after the improved and enlarged
editions of 1809-11 were published, must have been designed for the
Byron enthusiast, if not the collector of First Editions.

The Grangerized Fourth Editions prepared by Mr. W.M. Tartt and Mr. Evans
in 1819, 1820, and a Third, by John Murray at about the same period,
and, more remarkable still, a copy of the Fourth Edition of 1811,
prefaced by a specially printed "List of Names mentioned in the _English
Bards, and Scotch Reviewers_" interleaved with the additions made in the
Fifth Edition (B.M.), point to the existence of a circle of worshippers
who were prepared to treat Byron's _Juvenilia_ as seriously as the
minute critics of the present generation. They seem to have been
sufficiently numerous to make piracy, if not forgery, profitable.

_Note_ (2).--CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN THE FIRST EDITION AS NUMBERED AND
THE PRESENT ISSUE AS NUMBERED.

 First Edition (696 lines).        Fifth (Present) Edition
                                        (1070 lines).

            1-26              =            103-128

           27-246             =            143-362

    247-262 in Edition 2.     =   Hobhouse's lines, omitted

           263-372            =            418-528

           373-470            =            540-637

           471-522            =            707-758

           523-526            =            761-764

           527-586            =            799-858

           587-654            =            881-948

           655-667            =            961-972

           668-696            =           981-1010

  Second, Third, Fourth (a)        Fifth (Present) Edition
   Editions (1050 lines).              (1070 lines).

            1-96              =             1-96

           97-521             =            103-527

           522-740            =            540-758

          741-1050            =           761-1070

  Fourth (b) Edition (1052         Fifth (Present) Edition
           lines).                      (1070 lines).

            1-96              =             1-96

           97-521             =            103-528

          522-1052            =           540-1070


_Additions in the Second, Third, and Fourth (a) Editions_.

[The lines are numbered as in the Second, Third, and Fourth Editions.]

1-96      Still must I hear ... as you read.                   96
123-136   Thus saith the Preacher ... to grovelling Stott.     14
357-411   But if some new-born whim ... lumbering back again.  55
620-688   Or, hail at once ... virtue must apply.              69
745-778   When some brisk youth ... thy pay for coats.         34
839-860   And here let Shee ... and God-like men.              22
929-940   Yet what avails ... blazes, and expires.             12
953-960   There Clarke, still ... libel on mankind.             8
991-1050  Then, hapless Britain, ... unjustly, none declare    60
                                                             ----
                                                              370

696-16 (Hobhouse's lines) = 680 + 370 = 1050.

_Addition in Fourth Edition_ (1811).

741-742   Through Crusca's bards ... columns still.             2

1050 + 2 = 1052.

_Additions in the Fifth (Present) Edition_.

97-102   'But hold!' exclaims ... shine with Pye.               6
528-539  Then, prosper, Jeffrey ... inspires thy pen.          12
                                                              ---
                                                               18

1052 + 18 = 1070.

_Emendations of the Text of the Fourth Edition (b) included in the text
of the Fifth and Present Editions_.

Fourth                                                           Fifth
Edition.                                                        Edition.
Line.                                                            Line.

  28 _And men through life her willing slaves obey_.
     Obeyed by all who nought beside obey.                            28

  30 _Unfolds her motley store to suit the time_.
     Bedecks her cap with bells of every clime.                       30

  32 _When Justice halts, and Right begins to fail_.
     And weigh their Justice in a golden scale.                       32

  71 _Fear not to lie, 'twill seem a lucky hit_.
     Fear not to lie,'twill seem a _sharper_ hit.                     71

 173 _Low may they sink to merited contempt_,
 174 _And scorn remunerate the mean attempt_.
     Still for stern Mammon may they toil in vain!                   179
     And sadly gaze on Gold they cannot gain.                        180

 257 _How well the subject suits his noble mind_!
 258 _"A fellow feeling makes us wondrous kind_."
     So well the subject suits his noble mind,                       263
     He brays, the Laureate of the long-eared kind.                  264

 303 _In many marble-covered volumes view_
 304 _Hayley, in vain attempting something new_:
 305 _Whether he spin his comedies in rhyme_,
 306 _Or scrawl, as Wood and Barclay walk, 'gainst time_.
     Behold--Ye Tarts!--one moment spare the text!                   309
     HAYLEY'S last work, and worst--until his next;                  310
     Whether he spin poor couplets into plays,                       311
     Or damn the dead with purgatorial praise.                       312

 323 _And shows, dissolved in thine own melting tears_.
     And shows, still whimpering thro' threescore of years.          329

 327 _Whether in sighing winds thou seek'st relief_
 328 _Or consolation in a yellow leaf_.
     Whether thou sing'st with equal ease and grief,                 333
     The fall of empires or a yellow leaf.                           334

 385 _Fresh fish from Helicon! Who'll buy! Who'll buy_?
     Fresh fish from Hippocrene! who'll buy? who'll buy?             391

 387 _Too much in turtle Bristol's sons delight_,
 388 _Too much o'er bowls of Rack prolong the night_.
     Your turtle-feeder's verse must needs be flat,                  393
     Though Bristol bloat him with the verdant fat.                  394

 502 _First in the ranks illustrious shall be seen_.
     First in the oat-fed phalanx shall be seen.                     508

 511 _As he himself was damned, shall try to damn_.
     Damned like the Devil--Devil-like will damn.                    517

 532 _And grateful to the founder of the feast_,
 533 _Declare his landlord can translate, at least_,
     And, grateful for the dainties on his plate,                    550
     Declare his landlord can at least translate.                    551

 552 _While Kenny's World just suffered to proceed_,
 553 _Proclaims the audience very kind indeed_.
     While KENNY's "World"--ah! where is KENNY's wit?--              570
     Tires the sad gallery, lulls the listless Pit.                  571

 563 _Let Comedy resume her throne again_.
     Let Comedy assume her throne again.                             581

 569 _Where_ GARRICK _trod, and_ KEMBLE _lives to tread_.
     Where GARRICK trod, and SIDDONS lives to tread                  587

 614 _Raise not your scythe, Suppressors of our Vice_.
     Whet not your scythe, Suppressors of our Vice.                  632

 625 _The Arbiter of pleasure and of play_.
     Our arbiter of pleasure and of play.                            643

 661 _And, kinder still, a_ PAGET _for your wife_.
     And, kinder still, two PAGETS for your wife.                    679

 728 _Want your defence, let Pity be your screen_.
     Want is your plea, let Pity be your screen.                     746

 742 _Some stragglers skirmish round their columns still_.
     Some stragglers skirmish round the columns still.               760

 815 _The spoiler came; and all thy promise fair_
 816 _Has sought the grave, to sleep for ever there_.
     The Spoiler swept that soaring Lyre away,                       834
     Which else had sounded an immortal lay.                         835

 891 _The native genius with their feeling given_.
     The native genius with their being given.                       909

 903 _Let MOORE be lewd; let STRANGFORD steal from Moore_.
     Let MOORE still sigh; let STRANGFORD steal from MOORE.          921

 922 _For outlawed SHERWOOD'S tales of ROBIN HOOD_.
     For SHERWOOD'S outlaw tales of ROBIN HOOD.                      940

 946 _And even spurns the great Seatonian prize_.
     Even from the tempting ore of Seaton's prize.                   964

 965 _So sunk in dullness and so lost in shame_,
 966 _That SMYTHE and HODGSON scarce redeem thy fame_.
     So lost to Phoebus, that nor Hodgson's verse                    983
     Can make thee better, nor poor Hewson's worse.                  984

 969 _On her green banks a greener wreath is wove_.
     On her green banks a greener wreath she wove.                   987

 972 _And modern Britons justly praise their Sires_.
     And modern Britons glory in their Sires.                        990

 984 _Earth's chief Dictatress, Ocean's mighty Queen_.
     Earth's chief Dictatress, Ocean's lovely Queen.                1002

1005 _But should I back return, no lettered rage_
1006 _Shall drag my common-place book on the stage_:
1007 _Let vain VALENTIA rival luckless CARR_,
1008 _And equal him whose work he sought to mar_.
     But should I back return, no tempting press                    1023
     Shall drag my Journal from the desk's recess;                  1024
     Let coxcombs, printing as they come from far,                  1025
     Snatch his own wreath of Ridicule from Carr.                   1026

1016 _I leave topography to classic GELL._
     I leave topography to rapid GELL.                              1034

1018 _To stun mankind with Poesy or Prose_.
     To stun the public ear--at least with Prose.                   1036

1049 _Thus much I've dared to do; how far my lay_.
     Thus much I've dared: if my incondite lay.                     1067



_Note_ (3).--THE ANNOTATED COPIES OF THE FOURTH EDITION OF 1811.

Two annotated copies of the genuine Fourth Edition of _English Bards,
etc._ [1811], with MS. corrections in Byron's handwriting, are
extant--one in Mr. Murray's possession, and a second in the Forster
Library at the South Kensington Museum. The former, which contains the
marginal comments marked "B. 1816," has been assumed to have been
prepared as a press copy for the Fifth Edition; but, as the following
collation reveals, the latter, which belonged to Leigh Hunt, represents
a fuller and later, though not a final revision. The half-title bears
the inscription, "Byron, Dec. 31^st^, 1811. N--d. A^y [_i.e._ Newstead
Abbey] B.

    "_Dum relego--scripsisse pudet--quia plurima cerno--
    Me quoque--qui feci--judice digna lini_--B. J^y 20, 1812."

and the verso the words, "Given me by the author on my birthday, Oct.
19, 1815. Leigh Hunt."

             u
P. 5. ingen(-i-)ous. [The misprint is a note of a genuine copy.]

Lines 173, 174.

    (-Low may they sink to merited contempt-)
    (-And scorn remunerate the mean attempt.-)

    Still for stern Mammon may they toil in vain,
    And sadly gaze on Gold they cannot gain.

[This emendation is not given in the Murray copy.]

Lines 257, 258.

    So
  (-How-) well the subject suits his noble mind!
  (-"A fellow feeling makes us wond'rous kind,"-)
  He brays the Laureat of the long-eared kind!

[The Murray copy, which amends line 258 as above, leaves the "How"
unerased, but the Fifth Edition prints "So."]

Lines 323-328.

  And shows, (-dissolved in thine own tears-).
             still whimpering through threescore years.
  (-Whether in sighing-winds thou seek'st relief,-)
  (-Or consolation in a yellow leaf.-)
  Whether in equal strains thou vent'st thy grief
  O'er falling Empires or a yellow leaf.

[The Murray copy gives no emendation. The Fifth Edition adopts the first
correction, but, for the variant in lines 327, 328, reads--

  Whether thou sing'st with equal ease and grief
  The fall of Empires or a yellow leaf.]

Line 336.      All love thy (-strain-)
                               rhyme

Line 385.      Fresh fish from (-Helicon-)
                               Hippocrene

[The Murray copy adds a note: "The Fifth Edition reads Hippocrene."]

Lines 387, 388.

  (-Too much in turtle Bristol's sons delight,-)
  (-Too much o'er bowls of Rack prolong the night.-)
  Your turtle-feeder's verse must needs be flat,
  Though Bristol bloat him with the verdant fat.

[The Murray copy does not contain this emendation, which was adopted in
the Fifth Edition.

P. 36 _n._ The Hunt copy gives in MS. the note concerning Moore--"I am
informed," etc.--which is printed in the Fifth Edition. There is no
similar annotation in the Murray copy.

Line 502. For (-"ranks illustrious"-) both annotated copies read
"oat-fed phalanx."]

Lines 532, 533.

  And grateful (-to the founder of the feast,-)
  Declare his landlord (-can translate, at least.-)
  And grateful for the dainties on his plate,
  Declare his landlord can at least translate.

[The amended lines, which appeared in the Fifth Edition, are not in the
Murray copy.]

Lines 552, 553.

  While Kenny's World (-just suffered to proceed,-)
  (-Proclaims the audience very kind indeed.-)
  While Kenny's World--ah where is Kenny's wit?
                                     listless
  Tires the sad Gallery--lulls the (-listening-) pit.

[The emendation is given in both annotated copies; but the substitution
of "listless" for "listening," which is adopted in the Fifth Edition,
does not appear in the Murray copy,]

Line 563.       Let Comedy (-re-)sume
                             ass

[The correction is not given in the Murray copy.]

Line 569.       and (-Kemble-) lives to tread.
                      Siddons

[The substitution of "Siddons" for "Kemble," which dates from the Fifth
Edition, is not given in the Murray copy.]

Line 728.

  Want your (-defence-), let Pity be your screen
               plea
  Want is your plea, let Pity be your screen.

Lines 815, 816.

  The spoiler (-came; and all thy promise fair-)
  (-Has sought the grave, to sleep for ever there.-)
  The Spoiler swept that soaring Lyre away,
  Which she had sounded an immortal lay.

[The emendation appears in both the annotated copies.]

L. 903.        Let Moore (-be lewd-)
                         still sigh

[This emendation does not appear in the Murray copy, but the words ["be
lewd"] have been underscored with a pencil, and a X placed against
them.]

Line 946.

  (-And even spurns the great Scatonian prize.-)
  Even from the tempting ore of Seaton's prize.

[This emendation is given in both the annotated copies.]

Lines 965, 966.

  So sunk in dullness (-and so lost in shame-)
  (-That SMYTHE and HODGSON scarce redeem thy fame.-)
  So sunk in dullness that nor Hodgson's verse
  Can make thee better--nor poor Hewson's worse.

[This emendation is not in the Murray copy. The Fifth Edition adopts the
further correction, "So lost to Phoebus" for "So sunk in dullness."]

Line 969.       (-"is-) wove,
                  she wove.

[This correction is not in the Murray copy.]

Line 972.       ----(-justly praise-) their sires.
                ----glory in their sires.

[This emendation is not given in the Murray copy.

The Leigh Hunt copy gives twenty MS. emendations (besides "Death" for
"death," in line 820, and the alteration of "rapid" to "rabid" in the
note on Hewson Clarke, line 962) including the note on Moore. The Murray
copy gives nine MS. emendations, of which six are identical with those
in the Hunt copy. Three emendations are peculiar to the Murray copy--]

(1) Lines 303-306.
          Behold!--ye tarts! etc. (_vide ante_, p. 309).

(2) Line 614.    (-Raise-) not your scythe.
                  Whet not your scythe.

(3) Line 661.     ----"(-a Paget-) for your wife.
                  ----two Pagets for your wife.




APPENDIX TO BIBLIOGRAPHY.


ILLUSTRATIONS OF LORD BYRON'S _POETICAL WORKS_.


_Note_.--The following catalogue of "illustrations of Lord Byron" has
been extracted from pp. 88, 89, 94-96 of "_The Prisoner of Chillon,
etc._ Herausgegeben von Eugen Kölbing, Weimar. 1896."

I.

Compositions in outline from Lord Byron's "Manfred" and "Prisoner of
Chillon," by Frederick Thrupp, sculptor. London, Pub^d by Ackermann and
Co., Strand.

II.

The Pocket Magazine of classic and polite literature. With engravings,
illustrative of Lord Byron's Works. Vols. I., II. London: Printed and
published by John Arliss. 1818.

III.

Forty illustrations of Lord Byron; by George Cruikshank. Published by J.
Robins and Co., Ivy Lane, Paternoster Row. [June 12, 1824.]

IV.

Six vignettes pour les Oeuvres de lord Byron, d'après les tableaux de
MM. Alfred et Tony Johannot, graveés par MM. Koenig, Markl, Maulet,
Pourvoyeur, Mauduit. Paris. Furne, libraire-éditeur. 1832.

V.

The Byron Gallery; a series of historical embellishments to illustrate
the poetical works of Lord Byron. London: published by Smith, Elder and
Co. 65 Cornhill. 1833.

VI.

Finden's Illustrations of the Life and Works of Lord Byron. With
original and selected information on the subjects of the engravings, by
W. Brockedon. Vols. I.-III. London: John Murray, Albemarle Street: sold
also by Charles Tilt, Fleet Street. 1833-1834.

VII.

Oeuvres de Lord Byron, gravures à l'eau-forte, par Réveil, d'après les
dessins de A. Colin. Paris. Audot, éditeur du Musée de peinture. 1833.

VIII.

Historical Illustrations of Lord Byron's Works in a series of etchings
by Réveil, from original paintings by A. Colin. London, Charles Tilt,
86, Fleet Street. 1834.

IX.

Galerie des dames de Byron. Trente-neuf planches. Paris:
Charpentier-éditeur. 1836.

X.

Illustrations of the Works of Lord Byron, consisting of a portrait after
Saunders, a vignette title-page after Stothard, engraved by Blanchard,
two facsimiles of handwriting of Byron, and twenty etchings on steel by
Réveil, from original drawings by A. Colin; to which are added the
select passages in English and French, which form the subject of the
engravings. Adapted to all editions. Paris, Baudry, European Library,
etc. 1837.

XI.

Les dames de Byron; or portraits of the principal female characters in
Lord Byron's poems. Engraved from original paintings by eminent artists.
Under the superintendence of W. and L. Finden. London: Charles Tilt, 86,
Fleet Street. 1837.

XII.

Finden's Beauties of Byron; or, portraits of the principal female
characters in Lord Byron's poems. Engraved from original paintings by
eminent artists. With extracts illustrating each subject. London:
Charles Tilt, Fleet-street, and Thomas Wardle, Philadelphia.

XIII.

Cabinet of Poetry and Romance. Female portraits from the writings of
Byron and Scott. With poetical illustrations by Charles Swain. London:
David Bogue, 86, Fleet Street. 1845.

XIV.

Illustrations to the Works of Lord Byron. The drawings by Chalon,
Leslie, Harding, Herbert, Meadows, Stephanoff, E. Corbould, Fanny
Corbaux, Jenkins, and Westall. Engraved under the superintendence of Mr.
Charles Heath. A. Fullarton & Co., 106, Newgate Street, London, etc.

XV.

The Byron Gallery of highly finished engravings, illustrating Lord
Byron's Works, with selected beauties from his poems. Elucidated by
historical and critical notices, together with a sketch of his life,
containing important and unpublished matter. By Robert B. McGregor, Esq.
New York: published by R. Martin, 46, Anne-street.




CONTENTS OF BIBLIOGRAPHY


COLLECTIONS OF POEMS.

Collected Editions, pp. 89-136.
Collections of Dramas, pp. 168, 169.
Fugitive Pieces and Minor Poems, pp. 246-254.
_The Liberal_, p. 303.
Miscellaneous Poems, pp. 152-159.
Poems, pp. 254, 255.
Poems on His Domestic Circumstances, pp. 255-259.
Selections, pp. 144-149.


SEPARATE POEMS AND DRAMAS.

Age of Bronze, p. 170.
Beppo, pp. 170, 171.
Bride of Abydos, pp. 172, 173.
Cain, pp. 176-178.
Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, pp. 180-194.
Corsair, pp. 201-204.
Curse of Minerva, pp. 207, 208.
Deformed Transformed, p. 208.
Don Juan, pp. 209-220.
English Bards, etc., pp. 225-232.
Fare Thee Well! and A Sketch, etc., pp. 232-234.
Giaour, pp. 234-238.
Heaven and Earth, p. 241.
Hebrew Melodies, pp. 242-244.
Hints from Horace, pp. 259, 260.
Irish Avatar, p. 260.
Island, pp. 260, 261.
Lament of Tasso, pp. 262, 263.
Lara, pp. 263-265.
Manfred, pp. 266-268.
Marino Faliero, pp. 275, 276.
Mazeppa, pp. 276-278.
Monody on the Death of Sheridan, pp. 280, 281.
An Ode to the Trainers of the Frame Bill, pp. 281.
Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte, pp. 282, 283.
Prisoner of Chillon, pp. 285-289.
Prophecy of Dante, pp. 291, 292.
Sardanapalus, pp. 293, 294.
Siege of Corinth, pp. 296-298.
Two Foscari, pp. 299, 300.
Vision of Judgment, p. 300.
Waltz, p. 301.
Werner, pp. 301, 302.


TRANSLATIONS.


_Collections of Poems_.

Collected Editions, pp. 136-144.
Collections of Dramas, p. 169.
Miscellaneous Poems, pp. 159-168.
Selections, pp. 149-152.


_Separate Poems and Dramas_.

Beppo, pp. 171, 172.
Bride of Abydos, pp. 174-176.
Cain, pp. 178-180.
Childe Harold's Pilgrimage, pp. 194-201.
Corsair, pp. 204-206.
Deformed Transformed, p, 208.
Don Juan, pp. 220-225.
Giaour, pp. 238-240.
Heaven and Earth, pp. 241, 242.
Hebrew Melodies, pp. 244-246.
Island, pp. 261, 262.
Lament of Tasso, p. 263.
Lara, pp. 265, 266.
Manfred, pp. 268-274.
Marino Faliero, p. 276.
Mazeppa, pp. 278-280.
Ode from the French, p. 281.
Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte, p. 283.
Parisina, pp. 283-285.
Prisoner of Chillon, pp. 289-291.
Prophecy of Dante, pp. 292, 293.
Sardanapalus, pp. 294-296.
Siege of Corinth, pp. 298, 299.
Two Foscari, p. 300.
Werner, p. 303.




SUMMARY OF BIBLIOGRAPHY.



       I. Poetical Works.           2 v.   Philadelphia. 1813
      II. P. Works.                 2 v.   Boston. 1814.
     III. Works.                    4 v.   London. _Murray_. 1815.
      IV. Works.                    2 v.   London. _M_. 1815.
       V. P. Works.                 3 v.   New York. 1815.
      VI. Works.                    3 v.   Philadelphia. 1816.
     VII. Works.                    5 v.   London. _M_. 1817.
    VIII. Poems.                    1 v.   New York. 1817.
      IV. Works.                    8 v.   London. _M_. 1818-1820.
       X. Works.                    6 v.   Paris. 1818.
      XI. Works.                    13 v.  Leipzig. 1818-1822.
     XII. Works.                    3 v.   London. _M_. 1819.
    XIII. Works.                    6 v.   Paris. 1819.
     XIV. Works.                    6 v.   Zuickau. 1819.
      XV. Works.                    7 v.   Brussels. 1819.
     XVI. Works.                    4 v.   New York. 1820.
    XVII. Works.                    5 v.   London. _M_. 1821.
   XVIII. Works.                    5 v.   Paris. 1821.
     XIX. Works.                    16 v.  Paris. 1822-1824.
      XX. Works.                    4 v.   London. _M_. 1823.
     XXI. Works.                    12 v.  Paris. 1822-1824.
    XXII. Works.                    12 v.  Paris. 1823.
   XXIII. Works.                    3 v. [vols. v., vi., vii.]
                                        London. Knight and Lacy. 1824-1825.
    XXIV. Works.                    8 v.   London. _M_. 1825.
     XXV. Works.                    6 v. [vols. v., vi.]
                                           London. _M_. 1825.
    XXVI. Complete Works.           7 v.   Paris. 1825.
   XXVII. Works.                    8 v.   Philadelphia. 1825.
  XXVIII. Works.                    8 v.   New York. 1825.
    XXIX. Works.                    32 v.  Zuickau. 1825-1827.
     XXX. Works.                    13 v.  Paris. 1826.
    XXXI. Works.                    1 v.   Paris. 1826.
   XXXII. Works.                    1 v.   Frankfort. 1826.
  XXXIII. Works.                    6 v.   London. _M_. 1827.
   XXXIV. Works.                    4 v.   London. _M_. 1828.
    XXXV. Works.                    1 v.   Paris. 1828.
   XXXVI. Works.                    1 v.   Frankfort. 1828.
  XXXVII. Works.                    6 v.   London. _M_. 1829.
 XXXVIII. Works.                    4 v.   London. _M_. 1829.
   XXXIX. Poetic Works.             2 v.   Philadelphia. 1829.
      XL. Works.                    1 v.   Frankfort. 1829.
     XLI. Works.                    4 v.   London. _M_. 1830.
    XLII. Complete Works.           1 v.   Paris. 1830.
   XLIII. Works.                    6 v.   London. _M_. 1831.
    XLIV. Complete Works.           1 v.   Paris. 1831.
     XLV. Works.                    1 v.   Philadelphia. 1831.
    XLVI. Works.                    14 v. (17 volume edition.)
                                           London. _M_. 1832-1833.
   XLVII. Complete Works.           4 v.   Paris. 1832.
  XLVIII. Works. (Verse and Prose.) 1 v.   New York. 1833.
    XLIX. Complete Works.           1 v.   Paris. 1835.
       L. Complete Works.           4 v.   Paris. 1835.
      LI. Works.                    1 v.   London. _M_. 1837.
     LII. Complete Works.           1 v.   Paris. 1837.
    LIII. Works.                    1 v.   London and Leipzig. 1837.
     LIV. Complete Works.           7 v.   Mannheim. 1837.
      LV. Complete Works.           1 v.   Paris. 1839.
     LVI. P. Works.                 8 v.   London. M. 1839.
    LVII. Works.                    5 v.   Leipzig. 1842.
   LVIII. Works.                    4 v.   Philadelphia. 1843.
     LIX. Complete Works.           1 v.   Frankfort. 1846.
      LX. Works. (Verse and Prose.) 1 v.   Hartford. 1847.
     LXI. Works.                    2 v.   Edinburgh. 1850.
    LXII. P. Works.                 1 v.   Philadelphia. 1850.
   LXIII. P. Works.                 1 v.   London.H.G. Bohn. 1851.
    LXIV. P. Works.                 1 v.   Philadelphia. 1851.
     LXV. Complete Works.           1 v.   Frankfort. 1852.
    LXVI. The Illustrated Byron. 1 v.   London. H. Vizetelly, 1854-1855.
   LXVII. P. Works.                 2 v.   Philadelphia. 1853.
  LXVIII. P. Works.                 1 v.   London. C. Daly. 1854.
    LXIX. Works.                    1 v.   Boston. 1854.
     LXX. P. Works.                 6 v.   London. _M_. 1855.
    LXXI. P. Works.                 1 v.   Edinburgh. 1857.
   LXXII. P. Works.                 1 v.   New York. 1857.
  LXXIII. P. Works.                 1 v.   London. _M_. 1857.
   LXXIV. P. Works.                 1 v.   London. _M_. 1859.
    LXXV. P. Works.                 1 v.   Philadelphia. 1859.
   LXXVI. P. Works.                 1 v.   Leipzig. B. Tauchnitz. 1860.
  LXXVII. P. Works.                 3 v.   Leipzig. 1860.
 LXXVIII. P. Works.                 1 v.   Edinburgh. 1861.
   LXXIX. P. Works.                 10 v.  Boston. 1861.
    LXXX. P. Works.                 1 v.   Halifax. 1863.
   LXXXI. P. Works.                 1 v.   Edinburgh. 1868.
  LXXXII. P. Works.               1 v.   London. F. Warne and Co. 1868.
 LXXXIII. P. Works.                 1 v.   London. J. Dicks. 1869.
  LXXXIV. P. Works.                 8 v.   London. _M_. 1870.
   LXXXV. P. Works.                 1 v.   London. E. Moxon. 1870.
  LXXXVI. Complete P. Works.        1 v.   London. G. Routledge. 1874.
 LXXXVII. P. Works.                 1 v.   London. Virtue and Co. 1874.
LXXXVIII. P. Works.                 1 v.   Boston. 1874.
  LXXXIX. P. Works.             1 v.   London. Ward, Lock, and Co. 1878.
      XC. P. Works.                 1 v.   Boston. 1878.
     XCI. P. Works.                 1 v.   London. Ward, etc. 1880.
    XCII. P. Works.                 1 v.   London. F. Warne. 1881.
   XCIII. Complete P. Works.        1 v.   London. G. Routledge. 1883.
    XCIV. P. Works.                 1 v.   Edinburgh. 1881.
     XCV. P. Works.                 12 v.  London. Sultaby and Co. 1885.
    XCVI. P. Works.                 1 v.   New York. 1886.
   XCVII. P. Works.                 1 v.   London. W. Scott. 1886.
  XCVIII. P. Works.                 1 v.   London. 1886.
    XCIX. Life and Works.   2 v.   London, Edinburgh, and Glasgow. 1888.
       C. Complete P. Works.        1 v.   London. G. Routledge. 1890.
      CI. P. Works.                 1 v.   New York. 1890.
     CII. P. Works.          12 v.  London. Griffith, Farran, etc. 1891.
    CIII. P. Works.                 3 v.   London. W. Gibbings. 1892.
     CIV. Works.                    12 v.  Philadelphia. 1892.
      CV. Dramatic and P. Works.    1 v.   Philadelphia. 1898.
     CVI. P. Works.                 4 v.   London. H. Frowde. 1896.
    CVII. P. Works.           1 v.   London. Bliss, Sands, and Co. 1897.
   CVIII. P. Works.                 1 v.   London. W.P. Nimme. 1897.
     CIX. P. Works.                 4 v.   Philadelphia. 1897.
      CX. P. Works.               1 v.   London. G. Henny and Co. _n.d._
     CXI. P. Works.                 1 v.   New York. _n.d._
    CXII. P. Works.                 1 v.   New York. _n.d._
   CXIII. P. Works.                 1 v.   New York. _n.d._


_TRANSLATIONS OF COLLECTED EDITIONS._


_French_

  I. OEuvres Complètes.   15 tomes.   Paris. Ladvocat. 1821.
 II. OEuvres C.           13 t.       P. Dondey-Dupré. 1830.
III. OEuvres C.           4 t.        P. Charpentier. 1836.
 IV. OEuvres.             2 t.        P. Chapelle. 1842.
  V. OEuvres.             3 t.        P. Daussin. 1845.
 VI. OEuvres C.           1 t.        P. Bry aîné. 1856.
VII. OEuvres.             2 t.        Alphonse Lemerre. 1891.


_German_.

   I. Lord Bryon's Poesien.     31 B.      Zwickau. 1821-1828.
  II. L.B.'s sämmttiche Werke.  12 B.      Frankfurt a. M. 1830.
 III. Dichtungen v. L.B.        4 Sammnl.  Stuttgart. 1836-1839.
  IV. L.B.'s s. W.              1 B.       Leipzig. 1839.
   V. L.B.'s s. W.              10 B.      Pforzheim. 1842.
  VI. L.B.'s s. W.              8 B.       Berlin. 1865.
 VII. Dichtungen v. L.B.        8 B.       Hildburghausen. 1865.
VIII. L.B.'s ausgewählte W.     4 B.       Leipzig. [1865-1812.]
  IX. L.B.'s s. W.              3 B.       Leipzig. 1874.
   X. L.B.'s W.                 6 B.       Stuttgart. [1885-1890.]
  XI. L.B.'s p. W.              8 B.       Stuttgart. 1886.
 XII. L.B.'s W.                 6 B.       Berlin. 1888.
XIII. Byron's s. W.             8 B.       1901.


_Modern Greek_.

Τα Απαντα του Βυρωνος [Greek: Ta Apanta tou Byrônos ].
3 V. Εν Αθηναις [Greek: En Athênais]. 1895.


_Italian_.

  I. Opere complete di Lord Byron.    1 t.  Padova. 1842.
 II. Opere.                           1 t.  Napoli. 1853.
III. Opere.                           1 t.  Napoli. 1857.
 IV. Opere.                           1 t.  Napoli. 1886.


_Polish_.

 I. Poezye Lorda Byrona.              Pt. 1.  Petersburg. 1857.
II. Poezye L.B.                       1 v.    Warszawa. 1885.


_Russian_.

I. Сочиненіа Лорда Байропа. 5 т. С-Петербургъ. [Cyrillic: Sochineniya
Lorda Bairona. 5 t. S-Peterburg". ] 1864-66.

II. Байронъ. С-Петербургъ. [Cyrillic: Bairon". S-Peterburg".] 1876.


_Spanish_.

Biblioteca Universal. Coleccion de Los Mejores Autores.
T. lxiii. Madrid. 1880.


_Swedish_.

Byron's Poetiska Berättelser. Stockholm. 1854-1856.



SELECTIONS.

    I. The Beauties of Byron.               London. J. Sudbury. 1823.
   II. The Beauties of B.                   L^n. J. Limbird. 1827.
  III. Life and Select Poems.               L^n. 1828.
   IV. The Beauties of L.B.                 Philadelphia. 1828.
    V. The Beauties of B.                   Paris. 1829.
   VI. Lord B.'s Select Works. 3 v.         Frankfort a. M. 1831-1832.
   VI. Childe Harold's, etc.;
          The Giaour, etc.                  Paris. 1832.
 VIII. L.B.'s Select P.W.                   Paris and Lyons, 1835.
   IX. L.B.'s Select W.                     London and Berlin. 1837.
    X. The Beauties of B.                   L^n. T. Tegg and Son. 1837.
   XI. The Beauties of B.                   L^n. n.d.
  XII. B.'s Select W.                       Paris, 1843.
 XIII. A Selection from L.B.'s P.W.         Marienwerder. 1846.
  XIV. Select P.W.                          L^n. Adam Scott. 1848.
   XV. L.B.'s Select W.                     Oldenburg. 1848.
  XVI. Selections.                          London. _M_. 1854.
 XVII. A Selection. IV. [A.C. Swinburne.]   L^n. Moxon and Co. 1866.
XVIII. Songs by L.B.                        L^n. Virtue and Co. 1872.
  XIX. Selections.                          London. _M_. 1874.
   XX. _Beautés de B_.                      Paris. 1876.
  XXI. Favourite Poems.                     Boston. 1877.
 XXII. Beauties of B.                       Stuttgart. n.d.
XXIII. Poetry of B. (Matthew Arnold.)       L^n. Macmillan and Co, 1881.
 XXIV. Gems from B. IV.                     New York. 1886.
  XXV. Selections from the Poetry of L.B.   New York. 1900.
 XXVI. Poems of Lord Byron.                 L^n. A. and C. Black. 1901.


Translations of Selections


_Armenian_.

Lord B.'s Armenian Exercises and Poetry. Venice. 1886.


_French_.

   I. Choix de Poésies. 2t.              Genève et Paris.      1820.
  II. Les Beautés de L.B.                P.                    1838.
 III. Écrin poétique de lit. angl.       P.                    1841.
  IV. Chefs-d'oeuvre de L.B.             P.                    1847.
   V. Rough Hewing of L.B. In French.    L^n. J.W. Kolckmann.  1869.
  VI. Chefs-d'oeuvre de L.B. 2 t.        P.                    1874.


_German_.

  I. Byron's ausgewählte Dichtungen.     Leipzig.             1838.
 II. Byron-Anthologie.                   Schwerin.            1866.
III. Auswahl aus Byron.                                       1892.


_Italian_.

  I. Poemi di Lord G.B.                  Torino.              1827.
 II. Opere scelte.                       Milano.              1852.
III. A' Mici Arnici.                                          1873.


Miscellaneous Poems.

     I. An Ode. On the Star, etc.          New York. 1816.
    II. Three Poems.                       London. E. Wilson. 1818.
   III. English Bards, etc., etc.          Paris. 1818.
    IV. The Works of the R.H.L.B., cont.   Philadelphia. 1820.
        Eng. Bards, etc., etc.
     V. Poems by the R. H. L. B.           L^n. Jones and Co. 1825.
    VI. The Miscell. Poems.                L^n. Benbow. 1825.
   VII. Don Juan, Complete; Eng. Bards,    L^n. J.F. Dove. 1827.
        etc., etc.
   VII. Don Juan; Hours of Idleness, etc. 2 v.  L^n. J.F. Dove. 1828.
    IX. The Miscell. Works.                L^n. Hunt and Clarke. 1830.
     X. The Corsair--Lara.                 Paris. 1830.
    XI. The Bride, etc. The Corsair,       Paris. 1832.
        etc., etc.
   XII. Manfred--Marino Faliero, etc.      Paris. 1832.
  XIII. Don Juan--The Age of Bronze, etc.  Paris. 1832.
   XIV. Miscellanies. 3 v.                 London. _M_. 1837.
    XV. Tales. 2 v.                        London. _M_. 1837.
   XVI. Lord Byron's Tales.                Halifax. 1845.
  XVII. The Giaour--The Bride, etc.--etc.  L^n. H.G. Clarke and Co. 1848.
 XVIII. Miscellanies. 2 v.                 London. _M_. 1853.
   XIX. Tales and Poems.                   London. _M_. 1853.
    XX. Beppo and Don Juan. 2 v.           London. _M_. 1853.
   XXI. Poems by the R't. Hon. L.B.        L^n. T. Nelson and Sons. 1855.
  XXII. Tales and Poems.                   Leipzig. B. 1857.
 XXIII. Poems.                             L^n. G. Routledge. 1859.
  XXIV. Eastern Tales.                     L^n. D. Bogue. 1859.
   XXV. Byron's Siege, etc., etc.          Madras. 1876.
  XXVI. Poems.                             L^n. G. Routledge. 1880.
 XXVII. Poems of L.B. 2 v.                 L^n. Cassell and Co. 1886.
XXVIII. Byron's Prisoner of Chillon and    Halle. 1886.
        Siege of Corinth.
  XXIX. The Corsair--Lara.                 Boston. 1893.


_TRANSLATIONS OF MISCELLANEOUS POEMS_


_Bohemian_.

Korsár. Lara. V Praze 1885.


_Danish_.

  I. Udvalgte Dramatiske Digte.              København. 1873.
 II. Byron--Manfred, etc.                    København. 1889.
III. Beppo. Dommedagssynet. Af L.B.          København. 1891.


_Dutch_.

  I. Navolgingen van L.B.                    Haarlem. 1848.
 II. Gedichten van L.B.                      Leiden. 1870.


_French_.

  I. Le Corsaire--Mazeppa.                   Paris. 1848.
 II. Le Prisonnier, etc.--etc., etc.         P. 1862.
III. Le Corsaire--etc., etc.                 P. 1868.
 IV. Chefs-D'oeuvre de L.B. 2 v.             P. 1874.
  V. L.B. Les Deux Foscari, etc.             P. 1881.
 VI. Le Corsaire. Lara.                      P. 1892.


_German_.

   I. Gefangener von Chillon u. Parisina.         Breslau. 1821.
  II. Manfred. Die Finsterniss.                   Berlin. 1835.
 III. Der Giaur. Hebraische Gesänge.              1854.
  IV. Kain. Ein Mysterium. Mazeppa.               Leipzig. 1855.
   V. Manfred. Der Gef. v. Chillon. Heb. Ges.     Münster. 1857.
  VI. L.B. Mazeppa, Korsar, u. Beppo.             Leipzig. 1864.
 VII. Die Braut v. Ab. Der Traum.                 Hamburg. 1872.
VIII. Der Gefangene v. Chillon. Mazeppa.          Leipzig. 1871-1876.
  IX. Der Gef. v. Chillon. Parisina.              Halle. 1887.


_Hungarian_.

Byron Lord' Élete's Munkái. Pesten. 1842.


_Icelandic_.

Bandinginn i Chillon og Dramurinn. Kaupmannahöfn, 1866.


_Italian_.

  I. Poemi di Lord G. Byron. 2 v.                 Lugano. 1832.
 II. P. di Giorgio L.B.                           Milano. 1834.
III. P. di Giorgio L.B. 2 v.                      Milano. 1842.
 IV. Poemi e novelle.                             Milano. 1882.
  V. Opere ... di G. Casella. 2 v.                Firenze. 1884.
 VI. Misteri e canti.                             Milano. 1886.
VII. Misteri, novelle e liriche.                  Firenze. 1890.


_Polish_.

   I. Poemata i powieści.                        Warszawa. 1820.
  II. Powieści.                                  Warszawa. 1831.
 III. Paryzyna, Kalmar i Orla.                   Wilno. 1834.
  IV. Poezye Lorda B. W.                         Paryzu. 1835.
   V. Tłomaczenia A.E. Odyńca. W.                Lipsku. 1838.
  VI. Tłomaczenia A.E. Odyńca. W.                Lipsku. 1841.
 VII. Poemata.                                   Warszawa. 1846.
VIII. Pięć Poematów Lorda Birona.                Leszno. 1853.
  IX. Kruzer (Karol) Przekłady, etc. 5 t.        Warszawa. 1876.


_Portuguese_.

Traducçōes Poeticas de F.J. Pinheiro Guimarāes. Rio de Janeiro. 1863.


_Roumanian_.

Din Scrierile Loui L.B. Boukouresti. 1834.


_Spanish_.

  I. Odas A Napoleon.                           Paris. 1830.
 II. Poemas de L.B.                             Barcelona. 1876.
III. Cuatro Poemas de L.B.                      New York. 1877.
 IV. D. Juan El Hijo de Doña Inés.              Barcelona. 1883.


COLLECTIONS OF DRAMAS.

  I. Dramas by Lord Byron.     2 v.             London. _M._ 1837.
 II. Dramas by Lord Byron.     2 v.             London. _M._ 1853.


_TRANSLATIONS OF COLLECTIONS OF DRAMAS_.


_German_.

Lord Byron's Dramatische Werke. Hildburghausen. 1870.


_Italian_.

  I. Marino Faliero e I Due Foscari.                Sayona. 1845.
 II. Tragedie di Giorgio Lord Byron.                Firenze. 1862.


_Spanish_.

Poemas dramáticos de Lord Byron. Madrid. 1886.


POEMS, DRAMAS, AND COLLECTIONS OF POEMS.


THE AGE OF BRONZE.

The Age of Bronze. L^n. John Hunt. 1823.


BEPPO.

  I. Beppo, A Venetian Story. Second Ed.   London. _M._ 1818.
 II. Beppo, etc. Fifth Ed.                 London. _M._ 1818.
III. Beppo.                                Boston. 1818.
 IV. Beppo, etc.                           P.A. and W. Galignani. 1821.


_TRANSLATIONS OF BEPPO_.


_Dutch_.

Vertalingen en Navolgingen, etc. [Beppo Eine Venetiansche
Vertelling, pp. 119-159.] Amsterdam. 1824.


_French_.

Beppo, Poëme de Byron. Trad. p. S. Clogenson. P. Michel Lévy f. 1865.


_Russian_.

Беппо [Cyrillic: Beppo].


_Spanish_.

Beppo, novela veneciana. P. 1830.


_Swedish_.

Beppo, En Venetiansk Historia. Stockholm. 1853, etc.


BRIDE OF ABYDOS.

  I. The Bride of Abydos. A Turkish Tale.        London. _M_. 1813.
 II. The Bride, etc. Second Ed.                  London. _M_. 1813.
III. The Bride, etc. Fourth Ed.                  London. _M_. 1813.
 IV. The Bride, etc. Sixth Ed.                   London. _M_. 1814.
  V. The Bride, etc.                             Philadelphia. 1814.
 VI. The Bride, etc.                             London. 1844.


_TRANSLATIONS OF BRIDE OF ABYDOS_.


_Bohemian_.

Nevĕta z Abydu. V Praze. 1854.


_Bulgarian_.

Абидонска НевѢста. Москва [Cryllic: Abidonska Nevysta. Moskva]. 1850.


_Dutch_.

De Abydeensche Verloofde. Amsterdam. 1826.


_French_.

 I.  Zuleika et Selim.                       P. Plancher. 1816.
II.  La Fiancée d'Abydos.                    Gand, Houdin. 1823.


_German_.

  I.   Die Braut von Abydos.                Frankfort-a-M. 1819.
 II.   Die Braut, etc.                      London. 1843.
III.   Die Braut, etc.                      Halle. 1884.


_Hungarian_.

Az abydoszi ara. B'pest. 1884.


_Italian_.

La fidanzata d'Abido. Milano. 1854.


_Polish_.

Dziewica z Abydos. Warszawa. 1818.


_Russian_.

I. Абидосская Невѣста [Cyrillic: Abidosskaya Neviesta]. 1821.

II. Невѣста Абидосская. С-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Neviesta Abidosskaya.
S-Peterburg"]. 1826. Second edition. С-Петербургъ [Cyrillic:
S-Peterburg"] 1831.

III.
Абидосская Невѣста. Москва. [Cyrillic: Abidosskaya Neviesta. Moskva.] 1859.


_Swedish_.

Bruden Från Abydos. Stockholm, 1853, etc.


CAIN.

   I. Cain; A Mystery.         London. Benbow. 1822.
  II. Cain, etc.               L^n. R. Carlile. 1822.
 III. Cain, etc.               L^n. H. Gray. 1822.
  IV. Cain, A Mystery.         New York. 1822.
   V. Cain, etc.               P.A. and W. Galignani. 1822.
  VI. Cain, etc.               L^n. Benbow. 1824.
 VII. Lord Byron's Cain, etc.  L^n. William Crofts. 1830.
VIII. Cain, etc.               L^n. J. Watson. 1832.
  IX. Cain, etc.               Breslau. 1840.
   X. Cain.                    J. Dicks. 1883, etc.


_TRANSLATIONS OF CAIN_.


_Bohemian_.

Kain. V Praze. 1871.


_French_.

Caïn, Mystère dramatique. P. Servier. 1823.


_German_.

 I. Cain, ein Mysterium.                Berlin. 1831.
II. Cain. Ein Mysterium.                Leipzig. 1871-1876.


_Hebrew_.

קין, שיר-חזיון על-פי כתבי הק ש/מאת/לורד ב רון/תרגם מאנג לית
לעברית/דוד פ ישמן/ווארשא  ר"ס

[Hebrew: Kine, shir-chizayon al-pi kitvey hakodesh me'et Lord Byron
tirgem me'anglit le'ivrit  David Frishman Varsha TR"S ]

_Hungarian_.

 I. Kain.                               Franklin-Társulat. 1895.
II. Kain.                               B'pest. 1898.


_International Language_.

Kain. Mistero de Lord Byron. Nurnbergo. 1896.


_Italian_.

Caino: mistero. Milano. 1852-6.


_Polish_.

Kain. Lwów. 1868.


_Russian_.

I. Каинъ. С-Петербургъ [Cyrillic:  Kain". S-Peterburg"]. 1881.
II. Каинъ. Москва. [Cyrillic:  Kain". Moskva.] 1883.


_CHILDE HAROLD'S PILGRIMAGE_.

      I. Childe Harold's Pilgrimage. A Romaunt.  London. _M._ 1812.
     II. Childe Harold's, etc. Second Ed.        London. _M._ 1812.
    III. Childe Harold's, etc. Third Ed.         London. _M._ 1812.
     IV. Childe Harold's, etc. Fourth Ed.        London. _M._ 1812.
      V. Childe Harold's, etc. Fifth Ed.         London. _M._ 1812.
     VI. Childe Harold's, etc. First Amer. Ed.   Philadelphia. 1812.
    VII. Childe Harold's, etc. Sixth Ed.         London. _M._ 1813.
   VIII. Childe Harold's, etc. Seventh Ed.       London. _M._ 1814.
     IX. Childe Harold's, etc. Eighth Ed.        London. _M._ 1814.
      X. Childe Harold's, etc. Tenth Ed.         London. _M._ 1815.
     XI. Childe Harold's, etc. Canto the Third.  London. _M._ 1816.
    XII. Childe Harold's, etc. Canto the Fourth. London. _M._ 1818.
   XIII. Childe Harold's, etc. Canto the Fourth. New York. 1818.
    XIV. Childe Harold's, etc. Eleventh Ed.      London. _M._ 1819.
     XV. Childe Harold's, etc. 2 v.              London. _M._ 1819.
    XVI. Childe Harold's, etc. 2 v.              Leipzig. 1820.
   XVII. Childe Harold's, etc.                   L^n. W. Dugdale. 1825
  XVIII. Childe Harold's, etc.                   P.A. and W. Galignani.
                                                 1825.
    XIX. Childe Harold's, etc.                   London. W. Dugdale.
                                                 1826.
     XX. Childe Harold's, etc.                   London. T. Colmer.
                                                 1827.
    XXI. Childe Harold's, etc. 2 v.              Paris. 1827.
   XXII. Childe Harold's, etc.                   London. John Duncombe.
                                                 1831.
  XXIII. Childe Harold's, etc.                   Nuremberg and New
                                                 York. 1831.
   XXIV. Childe Harold's, etc.                   London. _M._ 1837.
    XXV. Childe Harold's, etc.                   Mannheim. 1837.
   XXVI. Childe Harold's, etc.                   London. _M._ 1841.
  XXVII. Childe Harold's, etc.                   London. 1842.
 XXVIII. Childe Harold's, etc.                   London. _M._ 1853.
   XXIX. Childe Harold.                          Damburg. 1853.
    XXX. Childe Harold's, etc. 2 v.              Berlin. 1854.
   XXXI. Childe Harold's, etc.                   London. _M._ 1859.
  XXXII. Childe Harold's, etc. New Ed.           London. _M._ 1860.
 XXXIII. Childe Harold's, etc. New Ed.           London. _M._ 1860.
  XXXIV. Childe Harold's, etc.                   Leipzig. 1862.
   XXXV. Childe Harold's, etc.                   London. C. Griffin and
                                                 Co. 1866.
  XXXVI. Childe Harold's, etc.                   Münster. 1867.
XXXVIII. Lord Byron's Childe Harold's, etc.      P. Lib. Ch. Delagrave.
                                                 1882.
  XXXIX. Childe Harold's, etc.                   P. Poussielque f.
                                                 1883.
     XL. Clarendon Press Series. Childe Harold.  Oxford. 1885.
    XLI. Childe Harold's, etc.                   London. Chatto. 1885.
   XLII. Lord Byron. Childe Harold's, etc.       Berlin. 1885.
  XLIII. Cassell's Nat. Lib. Childe Harold's,    L^n., P., N.Y., and
         etc.                                    Melbourne. 1886.
   XLIV. Childe Harold's, etc.                   Boston. 1886.
    XLV. Childe Harold's, etc.                   Philadelphia. 1886.
   XLVI. Childe Harold's, etc.                   Leipzig. 1886.
  XLVII. Childe Harold's, etc.                   Bielefeld. 1885-6.
 XLVIII. Childe Harold's, etc.                   L^n. G. Routledge and
                                                 Sons. 1888.
   XLIX. Childe Harold's, etc.                   Bielefeld. 1891.
      L. Sir J. Lubbock's Hundred Best Books.    L^n. G. Routledge and
         Childe Harold's, etc.                   Sons. 1892.
     LI. Byron's Childe Harold.                  L^n. G. Bell and Sons.
                                                 1893.
    LII. Byron. Childe Harold.                   P. Lib. Hachette et
                                                 Cie. 1893.
   LIII. Childe Harold's, etc.                   New York. 1894.
    LIV. Arnold's Brit. Classics. Childe         L^n. Edw. Arnold.
         Harold's, etc.                          1897.
     LV. Childe Harold.                          L^n. J.M. Dent. 1898.
    LVI. Childe Harold's, etc. Cantos I., II.    L^n. Macmillan and Co.
                                                 1899.
   LVII. Childe Harold's, etc. Cantos III., IV.  L^n. Macmillan and Co.
                                                 1899.
  LVIII. Childe Harold's, etc. 2 v.              New York. 1899.
    LIX. Childe Harold's, etc.                   New York. 1899.
     LX. Childe Harold's, etc.                   New York. 1900.
    LXI. Lord Byron. Childe Harold's, etc.       Glasgow and Dublin.
                                                 1901.
   LXII. Lord Byron. Childe Harold's, etc.       Glasgow and Dublin.
                                                 1901.


_TRANSLATIONS OF CHILDE HAROLD'S PILGRIMAGE_.


_Armenian_.

Childe Harold's, etc. Venice. 1872.


_Bohemian_.

Childe Haroldova pout'. 1890.


_Danish_.

Junker Harolds Pilgrimsfart. Kjøbenhavn. 1880.


_French_.

   I. Le Pélerinage de C.H.                P. Dupont. 1828.
  II. Le Pélerinage de C.H.                P. Ponthieu. 1828.
 III. Le Pélerinage de C. II.              P. Lib. de Ch. Blériot. 1861.
  IV. C.H. Poëme de L.B.                   P.E. Dentu. 1862.
   V. Le Pélerinage de C.H.                Saint-Quentin. 1862.
  VI. Childe Harold.                       P. Amyot. 1870.
 VII. Childe Harold.                       P. Hachette et Cie. 1881.
VIII. Childe Harold's, etc.                P. Poussielque f. 1883.
  IX. Childe Harold.                       P. Delalain f. 1892.
   X. Childe Harold.                       P. Belin f. 1892.


_German_.

   I. Harold, der Verwiesene.              Leipzig. 1835.
  II. Ritter Harold's Pilgerfahrt.         Stuttgart. 1836.
 III. Jungherrn Harold's P.                Stralsund. 1839.
  IV. Erster Gesang des C.H.               Ansbach. 1845.
   V. Byron's Ritter Harold.               Leipzig. 1846.
  VI. Childe Harold's P.                   Frankfurt a. M. 1853.
 VII. Harold's P.                          Köln. 1865.
VIII. Childe Harold's P.                   Hildburghausen. 1868.
  IX. Jung Harold's P.                     Berlin. 1869.
   X. Ritter Harold's P.                   Leipzig. 1871-1876.
  XI. Childe Harold's P.                   1893.


_Hungarian_.

Childe Harold. Genfben. 1857.


_Italian_.

   I. L'Italia, Canto IV. del pellegrinaggio di C.H.      1819.
  II. Il pellegrinaggio del Giovine Aroldo.               Geneva. 1836.
 III. L'Italia, Canto di L. B.                            Milano. 1848.
  IV. Il pell. del giov. A.                               Napoli. 1858.
   V. Il pell. del giov. A.                               Venezia. 1860.
  VI. Byron. Pell. D'Aroldo.                              Milano. 1866.
 VII. Italia C. di Gior. Byron.                           Firenze. 1872.
VIII. Il pell. D'Aroldo.                                  Firenze. 1873.


_Polish_

  I. Poezye ... Wędrówki Czaild Harolda.           Petersburg. 1857.
 II. Pielgrzymka C.H. we                           Lwowie. 1857.
III. Wędrówki C.H. Prz.                            F. Krauze. 1865-1871.
 IV. Wędrówki Rycerza H.                           Warszawa. 1895.
  V. Wędrówki C.H.                                 Krakow. 1896.


_Russian_.

 I. Чайльдъ-Гарольдъ [Cyrillic: Chaĭl'd"-Garol'd"]
II. Чайльдъ-Гарольдъ [Cyrillic: Chaĭl'd"-Garol'd"]


_Swedish_.

Childe Harolds Pilgrimsfärd. Stockholm. 1832.


THE CORSAIR.

   I. The Corsair, A Tale.                       London. _M._ 1814.
  II. The Corsair, etc. Second Ed.               London. _M._ 1814.
 III. The Corsair, etc. Third Ed.                London. _M._ 1814.
  IV. The Corsair, etc. Fourth Ed.               L^n. _M._ 1814.
   V. The Corsair, etc. Fifth Ed.                London. _M._ 1814.
  VI. The Corsair, etc. Sixth Ed.                London. _M._ 1814.
 VII. The Corsair, etc. Seventh Ed.              London. _M._ 1814.
VIII. The Corsair, etc.                          New York. 1814.
  IX. The Corsair, etc. Ninth Ed.                London. _M._ 1815.
   X. The Corsair, etc. Tenth Ed.                London. _M._ 1818.
  XI. The Corsair, etc.                          L^n. W. Dugdale. 1825.
 XII. The Corsair, etc.                          L^n. 1844.
XIII. The Corsair, etc.                          Glasgow. 1867.


_TRANSLATIONS OF THE CORSAIR_.


_German_.

  I. Der Korsar.                                    Berlin. 1816.
 II. Der Korsar.                                    Altona. 1820.
III. Der Korsar.                                    Leipzig. 1852.
 IV. Der Corsar.                                    Mainz. 1852.
  V. Der Korsar.                                    Leipzig. 1871-1876.


_Hungarian_.

A Kalóz. B'pest. 1892.


_Italian_.

  I. Il Corsaro.                                Torino. 1819.
 II. Il Corsaro.                                Milano. 1820.
III. Il Corsaro.                                Milano. 1842.
 IV. Il Corsaro.                                Firenze, 1842.
  V. Il Corsaro.                                Bologna. 1870.
 VI. Il Corsaro.                                V. di C. Rosnati. 1879.


_Russian_.

Морской разбойникъ. С-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Morskoĭ razboĭnik".
S.-Peterburg"]. 1827.


_Spanish_.

 I. El Corsario.                                        Paris. 1827.
II. El Corsario.                                        Valencia. 1832.


_Swedish_.

Corsaren. Stockholm. 1868.


THE CURSE OF MINERVA.

  I. The Curse of Minerva.                      London. [4to.] 1812.
 II. The Curse, etc.                            Philadelphia. [?] 1815.
III. The Curse, etc.                            P. Galignani. 1818.


THE DEFORMED TRANSFORMED.
  I. The Deformed Transformed.          London. J. and H.L. Hunt. 1824.
 II. The Def. Transf.                   P.A. and W. Galignani. 1824.
III. The Def. Transf.                   L^n. J. Dicks. 1883, etc.


_TRANSLATION OF THE DEFORMED TRANSFORMED_


_Hungarian_.

Budapesti Árvizkönyv., etc. Pesten. 1840.


DON JUAN.


_Cantos I., II._

  I. Don Juan.                London. Printed by T. Davison. [4º] 1819.
 II. D. Juan.                 L^n. Pt. by T. Davison. 1819.
III. D. Juan.                 L^n. J. Onwhyn. 1819
 IV. D Juan.                  L^n. Pt. by T. Davison. 1820
  V. D. Juan.                 L^n. Sherwin and Co. 1820
 VI. D. Juan.                 L^n. Pt. by T. Davison. 1822.


_Cantos III., IV., V._

  I. D. Juan.                             L^n. Pt. by T. Davison. 1821.
 II. D. Juan.                             L^n. Sherwin and Co. 1821.
III. D. Juan. Fifth Ed.                   L^n. Pt. by T. Davison, 1822.


_Cantos I-V_

  I. D. Juan.                                L^n. W. Benbow. 1822.
 II. D. Juan.                                L^n. Hodgson and Co. 1822.
III. D. Juan.                                L^n. Peter Griffin. 1823.
 IV. D. Juan.                                L^n. G. Smeeton. 1826.


_Cantos VI., VII., VIII._

  I. D. Juan.                               L^n. John Hunt. [8º] 1823.
 II. D. Juan.                               L^n. W. Dugdale. 1823.
III. D. Juan.                               L^n. John Hunt. [12º] 1823.


_Cantos IX., X., XI._

 I. D. Juan.                                L^n. John Hunt. [8º] 1823.
II. D. Juan.                                L^n. John Hunt. [12º] 1823.


_Cantos XII., XIII., XIV._

  I. D. Juan.                       L^n. John Hunt. [8º] 1823.
 II. D. Juan.                       L^n. John Hunt. [12º] 1823.
III. D. Juan.                       L^n. Pt. for the Booksellers. 1823.
 IV. D. Juan.                       P.A. and W. Galignani. 1824.


_Cantos XV., XVI._

  I. D. Juan.                  L^n. John and H.L. Hunt. [8º]  1824.
 II. D. Juan.                  L^n. John and H.L. Hunt. [12º] 1824.
III. D. Juan.                  L^n. Pt. for the Booksellers. 1824.
 IV. D. Juan.                  L^n. Pt. for John Hunt. 1824.
  V. D. Juan.                  P.A. and V. Galignani. 1824.


_Full Text._

   I. D. Juan. 2 v.                 L^n. Pt. for the Booksellers. 1826.
  II. D. Juan.                      L^n. W. Cla?? 1826.
 III. D. Juan.                      L^n. T. and J. Allman. 1827.
  IV. D. Juan. 2 v.                 L^n. T. Davison. 1828.
   V. D. Juan. 2 v.                 L^n. Pt. for the Booksellers. 1828.
  VI. D. Juan.                      Nuremberg and New York. 1832.
 VII. D. Juan.                      L^n. Scott and Webster. 1833.
VIII. D. Juan.                      L^n. Pt. for the Booksellers. 1835.
  IX. D. Juan. 2 v.                 London. _M._ 1837.
   X. D, Juan.                      Mannheim. 1838.
  XI. D. Juan.                      L^n. H.G. Bohn. 1849.
 XII. D. Juan.                      L^n. and N.Y. 1874.
XIII. D. Juan.                      L^n. Chatto and Windus. 1875.
 XIV. D. Juan.                      L^n. G. Routledge and Sons. 1886.


_TRANSLATIONS OF DON JUAN_.


_Danish_.

 I. D. Juan.                                         Fredericia. 1854.
II. Byron. D. Juan.                                  Kjøbenhavn. 1880.


_French_.

  I. Don Juan. 2 v.                      P.P. Renouard. 1827.
 II. D. Juan. 2 v.                       P. _Lib. centrale_. 1866.
III. D. Juan.                            P. DeGorge-Cadot. 1869.
 IV. D. Juan.                            P. Lemerre. 1878.


_German_.

  I. Don Juan.                                    Essen. 1839.
 II. Byron's D. Juan.                             Bremen. 1845.
III. Byron's D. Juan.                             Leipzig. 1849.
 IV. Byron's D. Juan.                             Hildburghausen. 1867.


_Italian_.

  I. Don Giovanni.                                        Torino. 1853.
 II. D. Giovanni.                                         Milano. 1865.
III. Gior. Byron. Aidea Epis. del don Giov.               Verona. 1875.
 IV. Il D. Juan.                                          Milano. 1876.
  V. D. Giovanni.                                         Milano. 1880.


_Polish_.

  I. Don Żuan.                                          Tarnopol. 1863.
 II. Ustęp z drugiéj pieśni Don Żuana.                  Kraków. 1877.
III. Don Żuan, pieśń trzecia.                           Kraków. 1877.
 IV. Don Żuan, pieśń druga, trzecia i czwarta.          Tarnopol. 1879.
  V. Don Żuan.                                          Warszawa. 1885.


_Roumanian_.

Don Juan dela Lord Byron. Bucurescĭ. 1847.


_Russian_.

I. Донъ-Жуанъ. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Don" Zhuan". S. Peterburg"].
1846.

II. Донъ-Жуанъ. 2 v. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Don" Zhuan". 2 v. S.
Peterburg"]. [1847.]

III. Донъ-Жуанъ. Глава первая. Лейпзигъ [Cyrillic: Don' Zhuan' ... Glava
Pervaya. Leĭpzig]. 1862.

IV. Донъ-Жуанъ. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Don" Zhuan". S. Peterburg"].
1866, 67.

V. Донъ-Жуанъ. 2 v. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Don" Zhuan". 2 v. S.
Peterburg"]. 1889.

VI. Донъ-Жуанъ. 2 т. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Don" Zhuan". 2 t. S.
Peterburg"] 1892.


_Servian_

Дон-Жуанъ. 2 свес. Београд. [Cyrillic: Don" Zhuan" 2 sves. Beograd.]
1888.


_Spanish_.

 I. Don Juan, novela.                                    Paris. 1829.
II. Don Juan.                                            Madrid. 1876.


_Swedish_.

 I. Don Juan.                                         Stockholm. 1838.
II. Don Juan. 2 v.                                    Stockholm. 1857.


ENGLISH BARDS, AND SCOTCH REVIEWERS.

    I. The British Bards, A Satire.      1808.
   II. English Bards, and Scotch         L^n. James Cawthorn. 1809.
       Reviewers. First Ed.
  III. English B., etc. Second Ed.       L^n. J. Cawthorn. 1809.
   IV. English B., etc. Third Ed.        L^n. J. Cawthorn. 1810.
    V. English B., etc. Fourth Ed.       L^n. J. Cawthorn. 1810.
   VI. English B., etc. Fourth Ed.       L^n. J. Cawthorn. 1811.
  VII. English B., etc. Fifth Ed.        [L^n. J. Cawthorn.] 1811.
 VIII. English B., etc. First Amer. Ed.  Philadelphia. 1811.
   IX. English B., etc.                  Charleston. 1811.
    X. English B., etc.                  Boston. 1814.
   XI. English B., etc.                  New York. 1817.
  XII. English B., etc.                  P. Galignani. 1818.
 XIII. English B., etc.                  Brussels. 1819.
  XIV. English B., etc.                  Geneva. 1820.
   XV. English B., etc.                  L^n. Benbow. 1823.
  XVI. English B., etc.                  Glasgow. J. Starke. 1824.
 XVII. English B., etc.                  Glasgow. M'Intosh and Co. 1825.
XVIII. English B., etc.                  L^n. W. Dugdale. 1825.
  XIX. English B., etc.                  L^n. T. Kay. 1827.


FARE THEE WELL! AND A SKETCH FROM PRIVATE LIFE.

   I. Fare Thee Well!                        March 18, 1816.
  II. Fare Thee Well!                        April 4, 1816.
 III. Fare Thee Well! Second Version.        April 7, 1816.
  IV. A Sketch from Private Life.            March 30, 1816.
   V. A Sketch, etc. Another Copy.           April 2, 1816.
  VI. Fare Thee Well!--A Sketch, etc.        L^n. Sherwood, Neely, and
                                             Jones. 1816.
 VII. Fare Thee Well.                        Bristol. 1816.
VIII. Fare Thee Well.                        Edinburgh. 1816.


THE GIAOUR.

   I. The Giaour, A Fragment of a           London. _M._ 1813.
      Turkish Tale.
  II. The Giaour, etc. A new Ed.            London. _M._ 1813.
 III. The Giaour, etc. Third Ed.            London. _M._ 1813.
  IV. The Giaour, etc.                      Boston. 1813
   V. The Giaour, etc. Fifth Ed.            London. _M._ 1813.
  VI. The Giaour, etc. Sixth Ed.            L^n. _M._ 1813.
 VII. The Giaour, etc. Seventh Ed.          London. _M._ 1813.
VIII. The Giaour, etc. Ninth Ed.            London. _M._ 1814.
  IX. The Giaour, etc. Tenth Ed.            London. _M._ 1814.
   X. The Giaour, etc. Eleventh Ed.         London. _M._ 1814.
  XI. The Giaour, etc. Twelfth Ed.          London. _M._ 1814.
 XII. The Giaour, etc. Fourteenth Ed.       London. _M._ 1815.
XIII. The Giaour, etc.                      L^n. W. Dugdale. 1825.
 XIV. The Giaour, etc.                      London. _M._ (Tilt and
                                            Bogue, Edinb.) 1842.
  XV. The Giaour, etc.                      London. 1844.


_TRANSLATIONS OF THE GIAOUR_.


_French_.

Le Giaour. P. J.M.H. Bigeon. 1828.


_German_.

  I. Der Gauer.                                    Berlin. 1819.
 II. Der Gjaur.                                    Leipzig. 1820.
III. Der Gjaur.                                    Leipzig. 1871-1876.


_Italian_.

 I. Il Giaurro.                                 Genova e Parigi. 1817.
II. Il Giaurro.                                 Milano. 1884.


_Polish_.

 I. Giaur.                                               Puławy. 1830.
II. Giaur.                                               Paryż. 1834.


_Romaic_.

I.
Παιηματα Βυρωνος ὁ Γκιαουρ. Ἀθηνησι
[Greek: Paiêmata Burônos ho Gkiaour. A)thênêsi ]
. 1873.

II.
Σακελλαριου Βιβλιοθηκη τ. Λαου ... ὁ Γκιαουρ. Ἐν Ἀθηναις.
[Greek: Sakellariou Bibliothêkê t. Laou ... ho Gkiaour. E)n A)thênais. ]
. 1898.


_Russian_.

I. Дҗяуръ. [Cyrillic: Dzhayur".] 1821.

II. Дҗяуръ. Москва. [Cyrillic: Dzhayur". Moskva.] 1822.

III. Гяуръ. С.-Петербургъ. [Cyrillic: Gayur". S-Peterburg".] 1862.

IV. Гяуръ. С.-Петербургъ. [Cyrillic: Gayur". S-Peterburg".] 1873.

V. Гяуръ Ъайрона. С.-Петербургъ. [Cyrillic: Gayur" Bairona.
S-Peterburg".] 1874.


_Servian_.

Ђаур лорда Ъајрона. у Новом-Саду. [Cyrillic: Djaur lorda Bairona. u
Novom-Sadu.] 1860.


_Spanish_.

El Giaur ó el infiel. Madrid. 1828.


_Swedish_.

Giaurn. Stockholm. 1855.


HEAVEN AND EARTH.

  I. Heaven and Earth, A Mystery.                  L^n. Benbow. 1824.
 II. Heaven and Earth, etc.                        P. Galignani. 1823.
III. Heaven and Earth, etc.                        ? W. Dugdale. 1825.


_TRANSLATIONS OF HEAVEN AND EARTH_.


_French_.

Essai sur Le Génie, etc. P. Ladvocat. 1824.


_Italian_.

Cielo e terra. Milano. 1853.


_Russian_.

Небо и Эемля. т. 1. [Cyrillic: Nebo n Zemlya. t. 1.]


HEBREW MELODIES.

  I. A Selection of Hebrew Melodies.           L^n. I. Nathan. 1815.
 II. Hebrew Melodies.                          London. _M_. 1815.
III. Hebrew Melodies.                          Boston. 1815. 24º.
 IV. Hebrew Melodies.                          Philadelphia. 1815. 16º.
  V. Hebrew Melodies.                          L^n. W. Dugdale. 1823.
 VI. Hebrew Melodies.                          L^n. W. Dugdale. 1825.


_TRANSLATIONS OF HEBREW MELODIES_.


_Bohemian_.

Hebrejské melodie. V Praze. 1890.


_Danish_.

Lord Byron: Jødiske Sange. Christiania. 1889.


_German_.

  I. Hebräische Gesänge.                              Berlin. 1820.
 II. Hebr. Gesän.                                     Laibach. 1833.
III. Germanische Melodien.                            Bonn. 1862.
 IV. Lord Byron's Heb. Gesän.                         Karlsruhe. 1863.
  V. Heb. Gesän.                                      Memmingen. 1866.


_Hebrew_.

Hebrew Melodies of Lord Byron. Leipzig. 1890.


_Italian_.

 I. Melodie Ebraiche.                                  Napoli. 1837.
II. Le Mel. ebree.                                     Ivrea. 1855.


_Russian_.

Еврйскія мелодін. С.-Петерурбъ. [Cyrillic: Evreĭskiya Melodin.
S.-Peterburg".] 1860.


_Swedish_.

Hebreiska Melodier. Helsingfors. 1862.


FUGITIVE PIECES AND MINOR POEMS.

   I. Fugitive Pieces. A Facsimile Reprint  1886.
      of the Supp. Ed. of 1806.
  II. Poems on Various Occasions.           Newark. 1807.
 III. Hours of Idleness.                    Newark. 1807.
  IV. Poems Original and Translated.        Newark. 1808.
   V. Imitations and Translations.          L^n. Longman, etc. 1809.
  VI. Hours, etc.                           P. Galignani. 1819.
 VII. Hours, etc.                           L^n. Sherwin and Co. 1820.
VIII. Hours, etc. Third Ed.                 P. Galignani. 1820.
  IX. Hours, etc.                           L^n. Benbow. 1822.
   X. Hours, etc.                           P.A. and W. Galignani. 1822.
  XI. Hours, etc.                           Glasgow. 1825.
 XII. Fugitive Pieces and Reminiscences of  L^n. Whittaker, Treacher,
      Lord Byron.                           and Co, 1829.


POEMS.


Poems. Second Ed. London. _M_. 1816.


POEMS ON HIS DOMESTIC CIRCUMSTANCES.

   I. Poems on His Domestic Circumstances.     London. W. Hone. 1816.
  II. Poems, etc. Second Ed.                   L^n. W. Hone. 1816.
 III. Poems, etc. Sixth Ed.                    L^n. W. Hone. 1816.
  IV. Poems, etc. Eighth Ed.                   L^n. W. Hone. 1816.
   V. Poems, etc. Fifteenth Ed.                L^n. W. Hone. 1816.
  VI. L.B.'s Poems on His Own, etc.            Dublin. 1816.
 VII. Poems on His Domestic, etc. Second Ed.   Bristol. 1816.
VIII. Poems on His Domestic, etc.              Boston. 1816.
  IX. Poems, etc. Twenty-third Ed.             L^n. W. Hone. 1817.
   X. Poems, etc.                              L^n. J. Limbird. 1823.
  XI. Miscell. Poems, including those on His   L^n. John Bumpus. 1824.
      Domestic, etc.
 XII. Miscell. Poems on His Domestic, etc.     L^n. William Cole. 1825.


HINTS FROM HORACE.


THE IRISH AVATAR.


THE ISLAND.

  I. The Island, or Christian and His     L^n. John Hunt. 1823.
     Comrades.
 II. The Island, etc.                     P.A. and W. Galignani. 1823.
III. The Island, etc.                     New York. 1823.


_TRANSLATIONS OF THE ISLAND_.


_German_.

Die Insel, etc. Leipzig. 1827.


_Italian_.

L' Isola. Napoli. 1840.


_Polish_.

Wyspa czyli Chrystyan i jego towarzysze. Kraków. 1859.


_Swedish_.

Ön Eller Christian, etc. Stockholm. 1856.


THE LAMENT OF TASSO.

  I. The Lament of Tasso.                       London. _M_. 1817.
 II. The Lament, etc. Second Ed.                London. _M_. 1817.
III. The Lament, etc. Third Ed.                 London. _M_. 1817.
 IV. The Lament, etc. Fourth Ed.                London. _M_. 1817.
  V. The Lament, etc. Sixth Ed.                 London. _M_. 1818.


_TRANSLATIONS OF THE LAMENT OF TASSO_.


_Italian_.

  I.   Lamento del Tasso.                      Pisa. 1818.
 II.   La Magion del Terrore.                  Londra. J. Wilson. 1843.
III.   Gugl. Godio. Il Lamento, etc.           Torino. 1873.


LARA.

  I. Lara, A Tale. Jacqueline, A Tale.       London. _M_. 1814.
 II. Lara, etc. Fourth Ed.                   London. _M_. 1814.
III. Lara.                                   Boston. 1814.
 IV. Lara.                                   New York. 1814.
  V. Lara, etc. Fifth Ed.                    London. _M_. 1817.
 VI. Lara, etc.                              Art Union of London. 1879.


_TRANSLATIONS OF LARA_.


_Bohemian_.

Lara. V Praze. 1885.


_German_.

Lara. Leipzig. 1886.


_Italian_.

 I.   Il Lara di L.B.                              Parigi. 1828.
II.   Lara.                                        Milano. 1882.


_Polish_.

Lara. Wilno. 1833.


_Servian_.

Лара лорда Бајрона. у Новом-Саду. [Cyrillic: Lara lorda Bairona. y
Novom-Sady.] 1860.

_Spanish_.

Lara. Paris. 1828.


_Swedish_.

Lara. Stockholm. 1869.


MANFRED.

  I. Manfred.                        London. _M_. 1817.
 II. Manfred. Second Ed.             London. _M_. 1817.
III. Manfred.                        Philadelphia. J. Maxwell. 1817.
 IV. Manfred.                        L^n. W. Dugdale. 1824.
  V. Manfred.                        Brussels. Printed at the British
                                     Press, _n.d._
 VI. Manfred. A Choral Tragedy.      L^n. T.H. Lacy. 1863.
VII. Manfred.                        L^n. J. Dicks. 1883, etc.


_TRANSLATIONS OF MANFRED_.

_Bohemian_.

Manfred. Praze. 1882.


_Danish_.

 I.   Manfred.                                     Kjøbenhavn. 1820.
II.   Manfred.                                     Kjøbenhavn. 1843.


_Dutch_.

 I.   Manfred.                                     Amsterdam. 1857.
II.   Byron's Manfred.                             Heusden. 1882.


_French_.

  I.   Manfred.                               Bruxelles. 1852.
 II.   Manfred.                               P. Paul Ollendorff. 1887.
III.   Lord Byron. Manfred.                   Toulouse. 1888.


_German_.

   I. Manfred. A Tragedy.                          Leipzig. 1819.
      Manfred. Trauerspiel. Teutsch v. A. Wagner.  Leipzig. 1819.

  II. Manfred.                                     Göttingen. 1836.

 III. Byron's Manfred.                             Breslau. 1839.

  IV. Manfred.                                     Berlin. 1843.

   V. Lord Byron's Manfred.                        Leipzig. 1858.

  VI. Byron's Manfred.                             Berlin. 1872.

 VII. Manfred. Leipzig.                            1871-1876.

VIII. Manfred.                                     Leipzig. 1879-1890.

  IX. Manfred.                                     Frankfurt. 1883.


_Hungarian_.

  I. Byron Lord'Élete's Munkái.                        Pesten. 1842.
 II. Manfred.                                          Szolnok. 1884.
III. Manfred.                                          Budapest. 1891.


_Italian_.

  I.   Manfredo.                                       Milano. 1832.
 II.   Tragedie di Silvio Pellico. Manfredo.           Firenze. 1859.
III.   Manfredo.                                       Firenze. 1870.


_Polish_.

 I.   Manfred.                                         Wrocław. 1835.
II.   Manfred.                                         Paryż. 1859.


_Romaic_.

Ο Μαμφρεδ. Εν Πατραις [Greek: O Mamphred. En Patrais]. 1864


_Roumanian_.

Stoenescu (Th. M.) Teatru ... Manfred. Bucurescï. 1896.


_Russian_.

I. Манфредъ [Cyrillic: Manfred"].

II. Манфредъ [Cyrillic: Manfred"].

III. Манфредъ. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Manfred". S-Peterburg"]. 1858.

IV. Манфредъ [Cyrillic: Manfred"].


_Spanish_.

  I.   Manfredo.                               P. De Decourchant. 1829.
 II.   Manfredo.                               Madrid. 1861.
III.   Lord Byron. Manfredo.                   Madrid. 1876.


MARINO FALIERO.

  I. Marino Faliero.                    L^n. _M_. 1821.
 II. Marino Faliero. Second Ed.         L^n. _M_. 1821.
III. Marino Faliero.                    Philadelphia. 1821.
 IV. Marino Faliero.                    P. Galignani. 1821.
  V. Marino Faliero.                    L^n. _M_. [Tilt and Bogue,
                                        Edinb.] 1842.
 VI. Marino Faliero.                    L^n. J. Dicks. 1883, etc.


_TRANSLATIONS OF MARINO FALIERO_.


_German_.

 I.   Marino Faliero.                           Frankfurt am Main. 1883.
II.   Lord Byron's Marino Faliero.              Oldenburg, _n.d._


MAZEPPA.

  I. Mazeppa, A Poem.                           London. _M_. 1819.
 II. Mazeppa, etc. Second Ed.                   P. Galignani. 1819.
III. Mazeppa.                                   Boston. 1819.
 IV. Mazeppa.                                   P. Galignani. 1822.
  V. Mazeppa.                                   L^n. W. Dugdale. 1824.
 VI. Mazeppa.                                   Braunschweig. 1834.
VII. Mazeppa.                                   L^n. T. Goode. 1854.


_TRANSLATIONS OF MAZEPPA_.


_Danish_.

Mazeppa. Stockholm. 1853.


_German_.

  I.   Mazeppa.                                       Leipzig. 1820.
 II.   Mazeppa.                                       Göttingen. 1836.
III.   Mazeppa.                                       Stuttgart. 1883.


_Hungarian_.

Byron Lord' Élete 's munkái. Pesten. 1842.


_Italian_.

  I.   Il Mazeppa.                                       Palermo. 1847.
 II.   Mazeppa.                                          Palermo. 1876.
III.   Mazeppa.                                          Milano. 1886.


_Polish_.

 I.   Mazepa.                                            W. Hali. 1860.
II.   Mazepa.                                            Paryż. 1860.


_Russian_.

I. Выборъ изъ сочненій лорда Байрона [Cyrillic: Vybor" iz" sochneniĭ
lorda Baĭrona]. 1821.

II. Маэепа [Cyrillic: Mazepa].

III. Маэепа [Cyrillic: Mazepa].

IV. Маэепа. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Mazepa. S.-Peterburg"]. 1860.


_Spanish_.

Mazeppa, novela. Paris. 1830.


MONODY ON THE DEATH OF ... SHERIDAN.

  I.   Monody, etc.                                 L^n. _M._ 1816.
 II.   Monody, etc. New Ed.                         L^n. _M._ 1817.
III.   Monody, etc. New Ed.                         L^n. _M._ 1818.


AN ODE TO THE FRAMERS OF THE FRAME BILL.

A Political Ode. L^n. J. Pearson. 1880.


ODE FROM THE FRENCH.

_TRANSLATION_.

_French_.

Traduction de l'Ode. Londres. 1826.


ODE TO NAPOLEON BUONAPARTE.

  I. Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte.          London. _M._ 1814.
 II. An Ode to N.B.                       Philadelphia. E. Earle. 1814.
III. Ode to N.B. Sixth Ed.                London. _M_. 1814.
 IV. Ode to N.B. Ninth Ed.                London. _M_. 1814.
  V. Ode to N.B. Twelfth Ed.              London. _M_. 1816.
 VI. Ode to N.B. Thirteenth Ed.           London. _M_. 1818.


_TRANSLATION OF THE ODE TO NAPOLEON BUONAPARTE_.


_Spanish_.

Odas a Napoleon. P. De Decourchant. 1829.



PARISINA.


_TRANSLATIONS_.


_Danish_.

Parisina. Stockholm. 1854.


_French_.

Parisina. Adolphe Krafft. P. Ernest Leroux. 1900.


_German_.

Parisina. Gedichte von J.V. Cirkel. Münster. 1825.


_Italian_.

  I. Parisina.                                          Milano. 1821.
 II. Parisina.                                          Milano. 1853.
III. Parisina.                                          Mantova. 1854.
 IV. Parisina.                                          Palermo. 1855.
  V. Parisina.                                          Genova. 1864.


_Russian_.

Паризина. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Parizina. S.-Peterburg"]. 1827.


_Spanish_.

Parisina. P. Imp. de Decoutchant. 1830.


THE PRISONER OF CHILLON.

    I. The Prisoner of Chillon.        London. _M_. 1816.
   II. The P. of Chillon.              Lausanne. 1818.
  III. The P. of Chillon.              L^n. W. Chubb. 1824.
   IV. The P. of Chillon.              L^n. ? 1825.
    V. The P. of Chillon.              Geneva. 1830.
   VI. The P. of Chillon.              Lausanne. 1857.
  VII. The P. of Chillon. Illuminated. L^n. W. & G. Audsley. 1865.
 VIII. Byron's P. of Chillon.          L^n. T.J. Allman. 1874.
   IX. Byron's P. of Chillon.    L^n. Simpkin, Marshall, and Co. 1877.
    X. The P. of Chillon.              L^n. Blackie and Son. 1879.
   XI. Byron's P. of Chillon.    L^n. Simpkin, Marshall, and Co. 1879.
  XII. The P. of Chillon.              Vevey. 1880.
 XIII. The P. of Chillon.              Berlin. 1884.
  XIV. The P. of Chillon.              Firenze. 1885.
   XV. Byron's P. of Chillon.          L^n. and Edinb. 1894.
  XVI. The P. of Chillon.              L^n. Stewart and Co. _n.d._
 XVII. The P. of Chillon.        L^n. and Glasg. Blackie and Son. 1896.
XVIII. Byron. The Prisoner of Chillon. Dublin. 1896.
  XIX. The P. of Chillon.              Weimar. 1896.


_TRANSLATIONS OF THE PRISONER OF CHILLON_.


_Dutch_.

De Gevangene van Chillon. Gent. 1856.


_French_.

 I.   Le Prisonnier de Chillon.              Vevey. _n.d._
II.   Bonnivard A Chillon.                   Le P. de Ch. Genève. 1892.


_German_.

  I. Lord Byron's Gefangener von Chillon. Lausanne. 1861.
 II. Der Gefangene von Chillon.           Vevey and Lausanne. 1865.
III. Der Gefangene von Chillon.           Berlin. 1886.
 IV. Der Gefangene von Chillon.           St. Gallen and Leipzig. 1892.


_Italian_.

 I.   Il prigionero di Chillon.                           Milano. 1830.
II.   Il prigionero di Chillon.                           Milano. 1853.


_Russian_.

Шильонскій Узникъ. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Shil'onskiĭ Uznik".
S.-Peterburg"]. 1822.


_Spanish_.

El preso de Chillon. Paris. 1829.


_Swedish_.

Fången På Chillon. Stockholm. 1853.


THE PROPHECY OF DANTE.

  I. The Prophecy of Dante.                Philadelphia. 1821.
 II. The Pr. of Dante.                     P. Galignani. 1821.
III. The Pr. of Dante.                     L^n. W. Dugdale. 1825.
 IV. The Pr. of Dante.                     L^n. Blackie and Son. 1879.


_TRANSLATIONS OF THE PROPHECY OF DANTE_.


_French_.

OEuvres de Dante Alighieri. La Pr. du Dante. P. Charpentier. 1842.


_Italian_.

  I.   Profezia di Dante.                            P. Barrois. 1821.
 II.   La Profezia di Dante.                         Nuova-Jorca. 1821.
III.   La Pr. di Dante.                              Milano. 1856.
 IV.   La Pr. di Dante.                              Milano. 1858.


_Spanish_.

La Profecia del Dante. Mexico. 1850.


SARDANAPALUS.


  I. Sardanapalus, ... The Two Foscari,       London. _M._ 1821.
     ... Cain.
 II. Sardanapalus, The Two Foscari, Cain.     Boston. 1822.
III. Sardanapalus.                            London. _M._ 1829.
 IV. Sardanapalus.                            Arnsberg. 1849.
  V. Sardanapalus.                            L^n. T.H. Lacy. 1853.
 VI. L.B.'s Hist. Tragedy of Sardanapalus.    Manchester. 1877.
VII. Sardanapalus.                            L^n. J. Dicks. 1883, etc.


_TRANSLATIONS OF SARDANAPALUS_.


_Bohemian_.

Sardanapal. V Praze. 1891.


_French_.

Sardanapale. Bruxelles. 1834.


_German_.

  I.   Sardanapal.                                        Posen. 1854.
 II.   Sardanapal.                                        Jena. 1888.
III.   Lord Byron's Sardanapal.                           Berlin. 1897.


_Italian_.

Sardanapalo. Milano. 1884.


_Polish_.

Sardanapal. Warszawa. 1872.


_Romaic_.

Σαρδαναπαλος. Εν Αθεναις [Greek: Sardanapalos. En Athênais]. 1865.

_Russian_.

I. Сарданапалъ. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Sardanapal". S.-Peterburg"].
1860.

II. Сарданапалъ [Cyrillic: Sardanapal"].


_Swedish_.

Sardanapalus, Stockholm. 1864.


THE SIEGE OF CORINTH.

  I. The Siege of Corinth.             London. _M_. 1816.
 II. The Siege, etc.                   New York. 1816.
III. The Siege, etc.                   L^n. W. Dugdale. 1824.
 IV. The Siege, etc.                   Lüneburg. 1854.
  V. The Siege, etc.                   L^n. Nat. Soc. Depository. 1879.
 VI. Byron's Siege of Corinth.         Berlin. 1893.
VII. The Siege, etc.                   Bielefeld. 1885-1890.


_TRANSLATIONS OF THE SIEGE OF CORINTH_.


_Dutch_.

Het Beleg van Corinthe. Amsterdam. 1831.


_French_.

Le Siége de Corinthe. P. Pillet aîné. 1820.


_German_.

  I.   Die Belagerung von Korinth.                       Hamburg. 1817.
 II.   Die Belagerung v. K.                              Leipzig. 1820.
III.   Die Belagerung v. K.                              Hamburg. 1827.


_Italian_.

L'Assedio di Corinto. Venezia. 1838.


_Spanish_.

El Sitio de Corinto. P. Lib. Americana. 1828.


_Swedish_.

Belägringen Af Korinth. Stockholm. 1854.


THE TWO FOSCARI.

  I.   The Two Foscari.                       New York. 1822.
 II.   The Two Foscari.                       P. Galignani. 1822.
III.   The Two Foscari.                       L^n. J. Dicks, etc. 1883.


_TRANSLATIONS OF THE TWO FOSCARI_.


_Russian_.

Двое Фоскари [Cyrillic: Dvoe Foskari].

_Spanish_.

Los dos Fóscaris. Biblioteca Dramatica. Madrid. 1846.


THE VISION OF JUDGMENT.

 I.   Vision of Judgment.                        P. Galignani. 1822.
II.   The Two Visions.                           L^n. W. Dugdale. 1822.


THE WALTZ.

 I.   Waltz: An Apostrophic Hymn.      L^n. Printed by S. Gosnell. 1813.
II.   Waltz, etc.                      L^n. Benbow. 1821.


WERNER.

  I. Werner, A Tragedy.                   London. _M_. 1823.
 II. Werner.                              P. Galignani. 1823.
III. Werner.                              New York. 1848.
 IV. The British Drama (Werner, Vol. iii. L^n. John Dicks. 1865.
     pp. 767-789).
  V. Werner.                              L^n. J. Dicks. 1883, etc.
 VI. Werner.                              L^n. George Routledge. 1887.


_TRANSLATIONS OF WERNER_.


_Russian_.

I. Вернеръ. С.-Петербургъ [Cyrillic: Verner". S.-Peterburg"]. 1829.

II. Донъ-Жуанъ. Москва [Cyrillic: Don"-Zhuan". Moskva]. 1881.


THE LIBERAL.

The Liberal [Vols. I., II.]. L^n. John Hunt. 1822, 1823.

Dedication of Don Juan. L^n. Effingham Wilson. 1833.

[Illustration: The Prison Called Tasso's Cell, in the Hospital of
Santa Anna, at Ferrara.]




INDEX


_The figures in italics refer to the notes only_.


_Abbot, The_, _vi. 440_

Abdalmalek, _iii. 120_

Abdera, _vi. 171_

Abderrahman, Hadgi, _vi. 160_

Abelard, v. 634

Abencerrages, the, a Moorish tribe, v. 558

Abenhamim, _iv. 530_

Aberdeen, "auld toun" of, _v. 609_; _vi. 405_

Aberdeen, George Hamilton Gordon, 4th Earl of, i. _305_, 378, 454; ii.
  170, 204; _An Inquiry into the Principles of Beauty in Grecian
  Architecture_, i. 336

Abernethy, John, vi. 412

Aboukir, battle of, _ii. 459_; _vi. 14_

Abruzzi, the, iv. 288

Abydos to Sestos, Byron's swim from, iii. 13

_Académie des Inscriptions_ (Paris), _v. 603_

Acarnania, ii. 143

Achelous (Aspropotamo) river, ii. 143, 182

Acheron (Kalamas) river, ii. 131, 180-182

Acherusia, Palus, ii. 129, 179

Achilles, _i. 175, 398_; ii. 167, 462; _iii. 180_; v. 488, 526, 535; vi.
  117; his tomb, vi. 204, 211

Achmet II., Sultan, _iii. 454_

Achmet III., Sultan, _vi. 261_

Acre, siege of, _iii. 4_; _vi. 14_

Acroceraunian mountains, ii. 303

Acropolis, Athens, ii. 100, 165; vi. 429

Actium, battle of, ii. 126, 128, 179; iii. II; vi. 269

_Adagia_ Variorum, _v. 396_

Adams, John, a carrier of Southwell, vii. 1

Adams, John, of Pitcairn Island (Alexander Smith of the _Bounty_), v.
  583, _588, 605, 625_

Adams, Mr., iii. 45

Addison, Joseph, his relative Budgell, _i. 449_; _Essay on Wit_, _i. 398_;
  _Reflections on Westminster Abbey_, _ii. 133_; _Cato_, ii. 325; vi. 485;
  _Remarks on Several Parts of Italy_, ii. 384; on Tasso and the
  Venetians, ii. 467; quotes an Arabian tale in _Spectator_, iii. 98;
  his "faint praise," vi. 602; his publisher Tonson, _vii. 57_

_Address intended to be recited at the Caledonian Meeting_, iii. 415

_Address spoken at the Opening of Drury Lane Theatre_, iii. 51

_Address to the Sun in Carthon_, _iii. 26_

_Adieu, The, written under the impression that the Author would soon
  die_, i. _192, 232_, 237; _ii. 458_; _iii. 48_

Adonis, _iv. 115_

Adramyttium, gulf of, _ii. 200_

Adrastus, ii. 519

Adrian (Hadrian), Emperor, i. 20, _462, 493_; ii. 167, _411, 431, 436_,
  440

_Adrian's Address to his Soul when dying_, i. 20

Adriatic, wedding the, ii. 335

Ægean Sea, i. 460; iii. 272

Ægina, i. 457; ii. 362

Ælian, _Var. Hist_., _v. 50_

Ælius, _ii. 437_

Æmilius Paulus, ii. 518

Æneas, i. 153, 156, 157

Æschylus, _Prometheus Vinctus_, i. 14, _430_; _ii. 132_; iv. 48-50, 82,
  _94_; v. 281, _554_; _Eumenides_, v. 281, _296_; _Septum contra
  Thebas, v. 403_; _Persæ, vi. 169_

Æsopus, _ii. 405_

Æsyetes, _iii. 180_

Ætna, ii. 286

Ætolia, ii. 143

Africa, vi. 198

Afshar tribe, _vi. 384_

Agamemnon, vi. 15

_Age of Bronze, The_, ii. _92, 151, 239, 397_; v. 332, 333, _364, 405,
  495_, 535-578, _606_; Introduction to, v. 537

Age of Gold, vi. 284

_Age of Waterloo, The_, _ii. 227_

Agesilaus, king of Sparta, _v. 619_

Agg, John, ii. 213

Agilulf, Duke of Turin, ii. 489

Agincourt, battle of, _ii. 459_

Agis, king of Sparta, iv. 455

Aglietti, Dr. Francesco, ii. 324; _iv. 456, 457_

Agnadello, battle of, _v. 498_

Agostini, Leonard, ii. 490

Agrarian Laws, vi. 407

Agrippa, _ii. 436_; _vi. 139_

Aholibamah, v. 285

Ahriman (Angra Mainyu), the Spirit of Evil, _iv. 112_

Aisha, Lilla, _vi. 160_

Aitken, G.A., his edition of Swift's _Journal of Stella_, _vi. 187_

Aix-la-Chapelle, Congress at, _v. 563_

Ajax, ii. 99, 167; vi. _117_, 204, 339

Akenside, _iii. 452_

Alamanni, _Sat_., _iv. 459_

Alaric, king of the Visigoths, i. 462; ii. 109, 172, _390_, 512

Alban hill, the, ii. 455, 522

Albanese (or Arnaouts), the, ii. _169_, 174

Albania, ii. 123, 173, 174

Albanian (or Arnaout) dialect, specimen of, ii. 183

Albanian war-dance, _vi. 151_

Albano, ii. 454

Albano, Francesco, vi. 502

Albany, Countess of, publishes Alfieri's _Opere Inediti_, _v. 211_

Albany, Duke of (Prince Leopold), _iii. 157_

Albion, its "chalky belt," vi. 419

Albricus Phil., _De Imag. Deor_., _ii. 328_

Albrizzi, Isabella Teotochi, Countess, _Ritratti di Uomini lllustri_,
  ii. 324; iv. _456, 457, 536_, 570

Albrizzi Giuseppino, _iv. 456, 457_

Albuera, battle of, ii. xi, 51, 81

Alcantara, Martin de, _ii. 81_

Alcibiades, his beauty, and charm of his name, v. 485; vi. 547

Alcina, v. 573

Aid. Manut., _De Reatina Urbe Agroque_, _ii. 384_

Aldini, Professor, _i. 308_; _vi. 50_

Alemanni, the, ii. 298

Alesia (Alise in Côte d'Or), siege of, iv. 331

Alexander the Great (Iskander), i. 467; ii. 123, 174, 509; _iii. 180_;
  v. _21, 24_, 542, 565; vi. 226, 378, 562; and Mount Athos, vi. 479

Alexander I. of Russia, i. _468_, 476, _489_; v. 539, _551_, 553, 563,
  564; vii. _27_, 39, 40

Alexander III., Pope, ii. 473

Alexander IV., Pope, _iii. 369_

Alexander, Grand-Duke, _v. 564_

Alexander, George, as "Ulric" in _Werner_, v. 324

Alexandra, Queen, MS. of _The Two Foscari_, _v. 113_

Alexandria (Ramassieh), battle of, _ii. 108_

Alexey, the Tzarovitch, _vi. 417_

Alexis I., _ii. 202_

Alfieri, Vittorio, ii. 324; iii. 503; iv. 325, 327; his pilgrimage to
  Petrarch's tomb, _ii. 353_; his grave in Santa Croce Church, ii. 369,
  491; _Autobiography_, _ii. 369_; _iv. 264_; _Mirra_, iii. 150; _iv.
  367, 368_; v. 5; sonnet on the tomb of Dante, iv. 244; _Abele_, v. 211

Algiers, vi. 56

Alhama, iv. 529-534

Ali Coumourgi, Cumourgi, or Cumurgi, iii. 442, 455

Ali Pasha, the original of Lambro in _Don Juan_, ii. _127_, 129,
  138-140, 146, 148, 174, 180; ii. _199_, 205; _iii. 145 189_; _vi. 195,
  234_; _vii. 53_

Alighieri, Alighiero (Dante's father), _iv. 248_

Alighieri, Beatrice (Dante's daughter), _iv. 254_

Alighieri, Pietro (Dante's son), _iv. 254_

Alison, _History of Europe_, _v. 570, 575_; _vi. 374_

_All is Vanity, saith the Preacher_, iii. 394

"Alia Hu!" concluding words of the Muezzinn's call, ii. 136; iii. 120,
  _481_; Mussulman war-cry, vi. 332

Allacci, L., _Drammaturgia_, vi. xvi.

Allegra, Byron's natural daughter, _i. 208_; v. 469; _vi. 186, 297_

Allen, Edward Heron, _Rubáiyat of Omar Khayyām_, _iii. 109_

Allen, Dr. John, _i. 337_

Allen, Richard, _A Souvenir of Newstead Abbey_, _vi. 497_

Allied Army occupy Paris, iii. 431

Allied Sovereigns, Congress at Verona of, v. 537-539; at Vienna, _v.
  562_

Allingham, _The Weathercock_, _i. 45_

_All's Well that Ends Well_, _vi. 506_

Almachius, or Telemachus, an Eastern monk, ii. 520

Almack's, i. 476; _vi. 431_

_Almanack de Gotha_, _vi. 417_

Almas, Turkish dancing-girls, iii. 251

Almonacid, _ii. 89_

Alp, "the Adrian renegade," iii. 454

Alpheus river, ii. 182

Alphonso I. of Tuscany, _ii. 354_

Alphonso II. of Tuscany, ii. _355_, 356

Alphonso III., ii. 356; iii. 299; iv. 139, _145_

Alphonso X., king of Castile, _Tabulæ Alphonsinæ_, iv. 523

Alpinula, Julia, ii. 256, 299

Alpinus, Julius, ii. 299

Alps, "the Palaces of Nature," ii. 254, 385; iv. 258

Alpuxarras, the, _vi. 30_

Al-Sirat's arch, iii. 109

Altada, a character in _Sardanapalus_, v. 12

Alterkirchen, battle of, ii. 296

Alvirt, L., _Sardanapale Tragédie Imitée de Lord Byron_, v. 2

Alypius, prætor, ii. 520

Amasis, king of Egypt, ii. 519

Amaun, quarter or pardon, iii. 115

Amazons, v. 526

Amber, its perfume, iii. 181

Ambition, ii. 241, 398; v. 488; vi. 78, 392, 456

Ambracia, Gulf of, ii. 128; iii. 11

Ambrosius, Mediolanensis Episcopus, _vi. 168_

Ameer Khan, _i. 468_

Amenhotep III., _v. 497_

America, Byron's eulogy of, iv. 197, 198

American War of Independence, _i. 500_; _ii. 82_; iv. 511, _516_; vi.
  _12_, 508

Amiens Academy, _ii. 6_

Ammonians, the, iv. 259

Amnani, Lilla, _vi. 160_

Ampère, M.J.J., _La Grèce, Rome, et Dante_, _iv. 317_

Amphion, i. 438

Amstel, A. van (Johannes Christiaan Neuman), iv. 5

Amulets, iii. 181

Amurath II., Sultan, _ii. 173_; _iii. 308_

Amycus, king of the Bebryces, _vi. 220_

Anacreon, _Odes_, i. 82, 109, 147, 149, 228; ii. 139, _270_; vi. 26, 171

Anacyndaraxes, Sardanapalus' father, v. 23, _24_

Anah, v. 285

_Analectic Magazine_, iii. 377; _iv._ 198

Anatolia, plains of, _vi. 211_

Anaxarchus, the philosopher, _v. 543_

Anchialus, v. 23

Andernach, ii. 296

Anderson, _British Poets_, _i. 198_; _ii. 236_; _iii. 129, 262, 405_

Anderson, the actor, as "Jacopo Foscari," v. 114

Andreini, Giovanni Battista, _Adam, a Sacred Drama_, _v. 218_

Andrews, Miles Peter, _Better Late than Never_, i. 353

Andromache, v. 577

Andromachus, the senator, _ii. 513_

_And wilt thou weep when I am low_? i. 266

Anent, use of the word, vi. 440

Angas, G.F., _Polynesia_, _v. 599-601_

Angelo, _Reminiscences_, _i. 322, 343_

Angiolina, Dogaressa, iv. 367

Angiolini, Mdlle., i. _347_, 348

Angling, "that solitary vice," vi. 513

Angora, battle of, _iii. 312_

Anhalt Zerbst, Prince of, _vi. 388_

Anholt, _i. 488_

Anio river, Falls of the, ii. _384_, 523

Anlace, a dagger, ii. 57

Anne Boleyn, her remark on the scaffold, _iii. 265_

Anne, Empress of Russia, _vi. 417_

Annesley, hills of, i. 210

Annesley Park and Hall, _iii. 311, 477_; iv. 31, 32, 36, 37

_Annual, The_, _i. 303_

_Annual Anthology_, _iv. 521_

_Annual Biography_, _v. 568_; _vi. 413_

_Annual Biography and Obituary_, _vi. 265_

_Annual Register_, _i. 495, 496_; _iii. 25_; _vii. 72_

Annuitants, alleged longevity of, vi. 100

_Another Simple Ballat_, vii. 61

Anselm, Pope, _i. 493_

Anson, Lady, _vi. 410_

Anson, Sir W., _Voyages_, _iv. 58_; _Memoirs of Augustus Henry, Third
  Duke of Grafton_, _iv. 510_

Anster, _Faust_, iv. 85, _123_; _v. 493_

Anstey, Christopher, _New Bath Guide_, i. 114; vi. 587

_Answer to a Beautiful Poem, written by Montgomery, etc._, i. 107

_Answer to some Elegant Verses sent by a Friend to the Author, etc._, i.
  114

_Answer to ---- 's Professions of Affection_, vii. 40

Anteros, iv. 105

Anthemocritus, the herald, _ii. 431_

_Anthologia Græca_, _i. 490_

Anthony (Antony), ii. 179, _492_; v. 486; vi. 139

_Anthony and Cleopatra_, ii. 179

Anthony Pasquin (Williams), _i. 304_

_Antigallican Monitor_, iii. 535

Antigonus, _v. 487_

_Anti-Jacobin, or Weekly Examiner_, _i. 304_; iii. 304; _vii. 49_

_Anti-Jacobin, Poetry of the_, i. _315, 329_, 368; _ii. 7, 30_; _iv.
  482, 483_

Antilochus, _ii. 99_; _iii. 180_

Antimachus, _i. 404_

Antinomianism, _i. 417_

Antinous, ii. 167

Antipater, Coelius, _Annales_, _ii. 378_

Anti-Paros, island of, _iii. 295_

_Antiquary, The_, _i. 413_; iv. 524; _v. 377_

Antonina, Belisarius' wife, _vi. 139_

Antoninus Pius, _ii. 440, 514_

Aöus (Viosa, or Voioussa) river, ii. 182

Apelles, iv. 270

Apennines, the, ii. 385; iv. 253

Apicius, vi. 562

Apollo Alexicacos, _ii. 446_

Apollo Belvidere, statue of, 446

Apollo Boëdromios, _ii. 446_

Apollodorus, ii. 273

Appian, ii. 179, _509_

Appleton's _Encyclopedia_, _vi. 349_

Aquileia, _iv. 386_

Aquinas, St. Thomas, _De Omnibus Rebus_; _De Quibusdam Aliis_, _ii. 163_

Arabs, their hatred of the Turks, _iii. 163_

Araktchèef, "the corporal of Gatchina," _v. 564_

Aranjuez, insurrection at, ii. 90

Ararat, Mount, _v. 294_

Arbaces, the Mede, _v. 11, 13_; Governor of Media, v. 12

Arcadia, ii. 189

Arcadius, _vi. 8_

Archangels, the, v. 286

Archenholtz, M. de, _Picture of Italy_, _iv. 470_

Archidamus, king of Sparta, _v. 619_

Archilochus, ii. 483

Archimedes, vi. 538

_Archivio Veneto_, _iv. 457_

Ardennes, forest of, ii. 232, 293

Ares, fountain of, _ii. 189_

Aretini, B. Accolti, _Dialogus de Præstantiâ Virorum sui Ævi_, _iv. 309_

Aretino, Lionardo (Leonardo Bruni), _Le Vite di Dante_, ii. 500; iv.
  _253, 275_, 309; _Istoria Fiorentina_, iv. 287

Argentière, Mount, ii. 300

Argonauts, the, _vii. 10_

Argos, _iii. 447_

Argus, Ulysses' dog, _ii. 30_, vi. 149

Argyle Rooms, i. 348

Argyrocastro, ii. 174, 202

Arici, Cesare, _La coltivazione degli Ulivi_; _Il Corallo_; _La
  Pastorizia_, iv. 245

Arimanes, Arimanius, etc., king of the Spirits, iv. 86, 112

Ariosto, Lodovico, ii. 5, _65, 354_; iv. 141, 239, _265, 480_; _v. 615_;
  vi. xviii, 176, 210; _Satira_, ii. 309; _iv. 149_; "The Southern
  Scott," ii. 311; the gondoliers and, ii. _330_, 468; _Orlando
  Furioso_, ii. 359; _iii. 243_; iv. _75, 266_, 283; _v. 573_; his bust,
  ii. 360, 486; Titian's portrait of, _iv. 162_

Aristaenetus, ii. 199

Aristippus, vi. 139

Aristobulus, _v. 24_

Aristogeiton, ii. 228, 291

_Aristomenes_, iv. 566

Aristophanes, _Clouds_, _v. 289_

Aristotle, _i. 398_; _ii. 196_; iv. 253; _v. 13_, vi. 47, 73, 182

Armada, Spanish, ii. 459

Armida and Rinaldo, vi. 34

Arminius, ii. 293

Armstrong, John, laird of Gilnockie, ii. _25_, 295

Armstrong, poet, _iii. 330_

Arnaout, or Albanian dialect, specimen of, ii. 183

Arnaouts (or Albanese), ii. _169_, 174

Arnaud, ii. 502

_Arno Miscellany_, _i. 358_

Arno river, ii. 364; vi. 402

Arnold, Matthew, _ii. 370_; _A Wish_, _iii. 39_, _Poetry of Byron chosen
  and arranged by_, _v. 205, 254_; Motto to _Poems_, _vi. 173_; _A
  Picture of Newstead_, _vi. 496_

Arnold, Dr. Thomas, on _Cain_, _v. 224_

Arnulph, a Lombard, _ii. 390_

Arpenaz, Falls of, _ii. 383_

Arquà, ii. 312, 350; Petrarch's tomb at, ii. 482

Arragonians, the, v. 560

Arrian, _v. 24_; _Alexand. Anabasis_, _v. 543_

Arrowsmith, John, _Tractica Sacra_, _vi. 380_

Arsenalotti, the, _iv. 356, 358_

Arséniew, vi. 306, 332, _353_

Arsenius, Archbishop of Monembasia, _iii. 121, 122_

Art of Happiness, Horace's, vi. 490

Arta, gulf of, _ii. 142, 145_

Artaxerxes Mnemon, v. 3, 4

Artemidorus, _Oneirocritica_, _ii. 488_

Artemis, temples of, i. 467; _ii. 441_

Arthur's Seat, Edinburgh, i. 331, 334

Arundel, Lord, _vi. 496_

Arvad, island-city of, v. 4

_As You Like It_, ii. 293, _399_, iv. 153; _v. 153_, vi. 466

Ascanius, i. 157

Ascham, Roger, _Schoolmaster_, iv. 153

Asdrubal, _v. 606_

Ashburton, Lord, _iv. 513_

Ashpitel, F.S.A., Arthur, _vi. 497_

Askalon, i. 2

Asma Sultana, _vi. 261_

Asmodeus, _i. 56_, iv. 516

Aspasia, v. 5

Asphaltites, lake, ii. 237, 294

Aspropotamo (Aehelous), river, iv. _143_, 182

Assyrians, the, v. 4

Astarte, iv. 115

Astley, Mrs., _vii. 59_

Astley's Theatre, iv. 203; vii. 59

Astoreth, the Phoenician, _iv. 115_

Astrea, the goddess of justice, i. 111

Asturias, the, ii. 89; _v. 558_

Asurbanipal, king of Assyria, v. 4

Asuretiliani, king of Assyria, v. 4

Ataghan, long dagger, iii. 103

Atalantis, vi. 453, _454_

Athanasian Creed, vi. 275

_Atheista Fulminalo_, the old Spanish play, _vi. 4_

_Athenæum_, i. xiii; _ii. 36, 216_; _iv. 32, 36, 513_, v. 324

Athenæus, _Deipnosophistæ_, _v. 11, 24, 103, 107_

_Athenian Society, the_, _i. 336_

Athens, i. 376; its works of Art plundered, i. 454-474; ii. 187-204;
  besieged by the Venetians, ii. 165, _et seq._, treachery of the Greeks
  after capitulation of, v. 556

Athos, Mount, ii. 116; iii. 18; vi. 479

Atkinson, Miss, as "Josephine" in _Werner_, v. 324

_Atlantic Monthly Magazine_, v. 584; vii. 3

Atlas, Mount, ii. 386

Atreus, i. 144

"Attic Bee," vi. 585

Attica, ii. 129; vi. 429

Attila, the Hun, ii. 107, 298; _iii. 306_, iv. 386, 456; v. 158; _vi.
  321_

Atuahalpa, king of Quito, ii. 81

Aubin, Commander Philip, sloop _Betsy_, _vi. 98, 102_

Aubrey, John, _Miscellanies upon Various Subjects_, _iv. 524_, _Letters
  and Lives of Eminent Persons_, _vi. 571_

Auchinleck, Lord, _vii. 35_

Auerstadt, battle of, _v. 550_

_Augustini Cod._, v. 118

_Augustini Cronaca_, v. 190

Augustinian monks, _iv. 120_

Augustinus de Cremâ, _ii. 340_, _Confess., ii. 520_

Augustus, ii. 128, _336, 408_, 488, 509, 518; _v. 542_

Augustus, port of, vi. 179

Aulus Cæcina, ii. 299

Aulus Gellius, ii. 92; _Noct. Attic_., _vi. 379_

Aurelian, ii. 520

Aurelius, column of, _ii. 410_

Aurora Borealis, vi. 479

Austen, Sarah, translation of Ranke's _Popes of Rome_, _v. 520_; _vi.
  208_

Austerlitz, battle of, i. 489, _495_; _ii. 342_; _v. 548_; _vi. 14, 351_

Austria, and Italy, ii. 363; iv. 456, 458; loan to, _v. 573_

Austrians, restore St. Mark's Lions to Venice, _ii. 336_, defeated by
  Dumouriez at Jemappes, _vi. 13_, at battle of Leipsic, vii. 23

Ava, cava, or kava, a Tongan intoxicating drink, v. 600

Avalanches in Switzerland, ii. 385

Avarice, "a good old-gentlemanly vice," vi. 78

Aventicum (Avenches), ii. 256, 298

Avicenna, _iv. 523_

Avogadori di Commun (State advocates), iv. _346_, 361, _399_, 463, 465

Ayesha, Mahomet's favourite wife, _vi. 139_

Ayliffe, _Parergon_, _v. 135_

Ayscough, Samuel, iv. 153

Azâzêl, _v. 291_

Azrael, iii. 171

Azzo V. (d'Este), of Tuscany, _ii. 354_


B

Baal, king of Tyre, v. 4, 18, 19, 36, 70, 95

Babbage, Charles, _ii. 215_

Babel, Tower of, vi. 235

Babylon, iii. 402-404; vi. 235, 236, 348

Bacchus, vi. 129

Bacci, O., _Manuale della Letteratura Italiana_, _iv. 536_

Bacon, Captain Anthony, _ii. 11_

Bacon, Friar (_The Famous Historie of_), his brazen head, vi. 78;
  discovers gunpowder, vi. 340

Bacon, Lady Charlotte Mary (_née_ Harley), "Ianthe," ii. xii, 11

Bacon, Lord, ii. 514; vi. 174, 548; _Advancement of Learning_, _v. 228_;
  _Essays_, _v. 489_; _vi. 259_; _Nat. Hist._, _vi. 518_

Bactria, v. 20

Badajoz, capture of, _i. 496_

Baden, Franz, _v. 564_

Baffin's Bay, _vi. 51_

Bagehot, _Literary Studies_, _i. 303_

"Bagpipe," "pibroch" used for, i. 133

Bailen, _ii. 54_

Bailli, Jean Sylvani, first Mayor of Paris, _iv. 454_

Baillie, Agnes, _vi. 412_

Baillie, Joanna, iv. 339; _vi. 412_; _De Montfort_, _iv. 338_

Baillie, Dr. Matthew, _vi. 21_, 412

Bairâm, the Moslem Easter, iii. 96

Baird, Sir David, _ii. 80_

Bajuzet, cage of, iii. 312

Baker, H. Barton, _The London Stage_, v. 324

Bakewell, T., _The Moorland Bard, etc_.; _A Domestic Guide to Insanity_,
  i. 361

Baldwin and Cradock, _vii. 50_

Balgownie, Brig o', vi. 405

_Ballad. To the Tune of "Sally in our Alley,"_ vii. 58

Ballantyne, _i. 435_, 436

Baltazhi-Mahomet, Grand-Vizier, _v. 564_

Bandelli, _iii. 505_

Banderillos, dart-throwers, ii. 67

Bandusia, fountain of, ii. 524

Bank tokens, _i. 495_

Bankes, William, i. xii, _84, 497_; iv. _162_, 279, 472

Banks, Sir Joseph, ii. 7; v. 582

Bannier, or Baner, Johan, Swedish general, v. 371

Barataria, pirates of, _iii. 296_

Barbarelli, Giorgio (Giorgione), iv. 162

Barbarigo, Doge Agostino, _v. 195_

Barbarigo, Doge Marco, _v. 195_

Barbarossa, Frederic, ii. 336, 390, 473

Barbette, vi. 305

Barbiera, R., _Poesie Veneziane, iv. 457_

Barbo, Pantaleone, _iv. 352_

Barclay, Captain Robert, _i. 321_

Bardela, ii. 523

Barings, the, vi. 456

Barker, Miss, _Lines addressed to a Noble Lord_, _iii. 488_

Barlow, Sir George, _i. 468_

Barnave, Antoine Pierre Joseph, vi. 13

Barnet, Lewis, Sub-Dean of Exeter, _iii. 299_

Baronius, _Ann. Eccles._, ii. 512, _513, 521_

Barossa, battle of, i. 469; ii. 81

Barotti, ii. 487

Barrett, Eaton Stannard ("Polypus"), _All the Talents_, i. 294, _337_

Barrey, Lodowick, _Ram Alley_, _i. 493_

Barrol, M. de Fallette, _iv. 367_

Barrow, Dr. Isaac, vi. 128

Barrow, Sir John, _Memoir of the Life of Peter the Great_, _iv. 209,
  505_, _The Eventful History of the Mutiny of the Bounty, etc._, v.
  584, _588, 592, 594, 596_; a _Q.R._ contributor, vii. 76

Barry, the actor, as "Werner," v. 324

Barry Cornwall. _See_ Procter, B.W.

Barthélémi; _i. 414_; _Anacharsis_, ii. 199

Bartolini, Lorenzo, _vi. 360_

Barton, Catherine (Mrs. Conduit), _vi. 400_

Baruffaldi Giuniore, Abbé G., _La Vita di M.L. Ariosto_, ii. 486

Baschet, Armand, _Les Archives de Vénise_, iv. 327, _364, 399_

Basejo, Pietro, _iv. 382_

Bashkirs, a Turco-Mongolian tribe, v. 565

Basili, Byron's Albanian servant, ii. 175, 176

Baskerville, _vi. 146_

Basle, Treaty of, ii. 90

Basquiña or saya, the outer petticoat, vi. 116

Bastille, the, _vi. 214_

Bathurst, Captain, _Salsette_ frigate, _iii. 13_

Bathurst, Henry, Earl of, _v. 545, 546_

Batteux, M., _i. 402_

Bauer, Juliette, tr. of Klencke's _Alexander von Humboldt_, _vi. 216_

Baussière, Madame, _i. 493_

Bautzen, battle of, _iii. 431_

Baxter, Richard, i. 417

Bayard, _i. 107_; ii. 7; _v. 498_

_Bayart, Chronique de_, _v. 515_

Bayle, Pierre, _Historical and Critical Dictionary_, ii. 502, _519_;
  _iii. 122_; _iv. 523_; v. 202, _208, 226, 235, 250, 306, 634_; _vi.
  571_

Beachey, Captain, _Narrative of a Voyage to the Pacific_, _v. 588, 605_

Beatrice (Portinari), Dante's, iv. 247, 248, 251; vi. 146

Beattie, James H., _Minstrel_, ii. 5, _65, 82, 115, 123, 350_, 479; _v.
  615_; _vi. 78_

Beaufort, Duke of, _Driving_, _vii. 26_

Beauharnais, Eugène, Viceroy of Italy, iv. 458; _vi. 12_

Beaumont and Fletcher; i. _397_, 398, _489_; _The Humorous Lieutenant_,
  _iv. 172_

Beaumont, i. 343, 398

Beaumont, Lady (Margaret Willis), "Lady Bluemount" of _The Blues_, iv.
  569, 570, 585; _vi. 587_

Beaumont, Sir George, founder of the National Gallery, iv. _341_, 570,
  _582_, 585; vii. _63_, 64

_Beauties of England and Wales_, _vi. 496, 497_

Bebryces, the, _vi. 220_

Becher, Lady (Elizabeth O'Neill), _iv. 338_

Becher, Rev. J.T., i. xi, 112, 247, _263_

Becket, Thomas à, _i. 116_; vi. 422, _495_

Beckford, William, _Childe Harold_ on; ii. xi; _Italy with Sketches of
  Spain and Portugal_, _ii. 35, 36, 43, 45_; _Vathek_, ii. 37; iii. _59,
  76, 87, 105, 109, 110, 121, 145, 478_; iv. _45, 89, 113_, 244;
  "Dives," vii. 7

Becque, Henry, _Sardanapale, Opéra en Trois Actes_, v. 2

"Bed of Ware," vi. 272

Beddoes, Dr., _i. 307_

Bede, _Excerptis seu Collectaneis_, _ii. 435_

Bedford, Southey's letter to Mr., _vi. 3_

Bedford, Lucy, Countess of, iv. 239

Bedlam, vi. 435

Beechy, Lieutenant, _vi. 478_

Beethoven, iii. 376

Begum of Oude, iv. 72

Behmen or Boehm, Jacob, vi. 268

Behn, Mrs., _v. 550_

Béjot, M., _ii. 481_

Belcher, Lady, _Mutineers of the Bounty_, _v. 588, 589, 622_

Beleses, Governor of Babylon, _v. 13_

Beleses, a Chaldæan and soothsayer (character in _Sardanapalus_), v. 12

Belgrade, _ii. 153_; iv. 331

Belisarius, vi. 139

Bell, John, i. 357, _358_

Bellerophon, _vi. 255_

Bellingham, murderer of Mr. Perceval, _v. 477_

Belshazzar, iii. 396, 421; vi. 162

Beltramo Bergamasco, iv. 384, 430, 465

Beltane Tree, a Highland festival, i. 142

Belus, v. 25, 31

Belvidere Apollo, the, ii. 446

Bembo, Antonio, iii. 448

Bembo, Bernardo, ii. 495

Ben Nevis, _i. 192_

Benbow, W., iv. 482; v. 203; _vii. 46_

Bende, Niccolo dalle, iv. 464

Bender river, _v. 551_, vi. 362

Benedict XIV., Pope, _ii. 282_

Benengeli, Cid Hamet, i. 299

Bentham, Jeremy, _vi. 267_; _vii. 32_

Bentinck, Lord William, _v. 158_

Bentley, Richard, i. 30; _iii. 209_

Bentotes, or Bendotes (Vendoti), Λεξικὸν Τρίγλοσσον
  [Greek: Lexiko\n Tri/glosson ], ii. 197; iii. 121

Benvenuto Cellini, v. 471, _516, 518, 521_

Benzon, Marina Querini, the heroine of _La Biondina in Gondoleta_, _iv.
  456, 457_

Benzon, Vittore, _Nella_, _iv. 456, 457_

Benzon, Countess, iv. 471

_Beppo_, _i. 362_, ii. 313, _371, 374_, iv. 153-189, 238, _241_, 279,
  _413_, 471, _517, 579_, vi. xvi, xvii, _214, 287_, 390; vii. 51

Béranger, J.P, de, _Chansons Inédites_, _vi. 235, 373_

Berenice, i. 69; _vi. 139_

Beresford, James, _Miseries of Human Life; or, The Last Groans of
  Timothy Testy and Samuel Sensitive_, i. 338

Beresford, Lord, _ii. 51_

Beresina, battle of, _iv. 207_

Bergami, Bartolommeo, vi. 236, _290_

Bergamo, v. 119, 138

Bergk, _i. 19_, ii. 138

Berkeley, D.D., Bishop George, _Principles of Human Knowledge_, vi. 427

Berlan, Francesco, _I due Foscari, Memorie Storicho Critiche_, v. 117,
  119, _121, 122, 133, 134_

Berlin, v. 550

Berlinghieri, Andrea Vacca, ii. 324

Bernadotte, king of Sweden, _v. 553_

Bernard, Edward, _Pedigree of George Gordon, Sixth Lord Byron_, _vi.
  411_

Bernard, W. Bayle, adapts _Marino Faliero_ for the stage, iv. 324

Berners, Sir John Bourchier, Lord, _The Bake of Duke Huon of Burdeux_,
  _v. 496_

Berni, Francesco, iv. 157, 283, 325; vi. xvi

Bernis, Abbé de, iv. 334

Bernstorff, Count, v. 539

Berrí, Duc de, _iii. 435_; _v. 567_

Berry, Miss, _Journal_, iv. 569, 570, 587

Bertrand, General, _iii. 312_; _Campagnes d' Egypte et de Syrie_, _v.
  550_

Bertuccio, Israel, iv. 340, 464

Bestuchef, Count, _vi. 417_

Betham, William, _v. 588_

Bethlen Gabor, king of Hungary, _v. 349, 352_

_Betsy_, wreck of the sloop, _vi. 98, 102_

Bettinelli, ii. 496

Betty, William Henry West, "the young Roscius," i. 342

Beuchot, editor of Voltaire's _Works, iv. 212_

Bevius, Canon of Padua, ii. 503

Bewley, John H., of Buffalo, N.Y., _vii. 63_

Bey Oglou, the, iii. 166

Bezborodky, _vi. 389_

Biagoli, _iv. 318_

Bianchi, ii. 494

Bianconi, ii. 487

Bibiena, Antonío Divizio da, _iv. 174_

Bibiena, Cardinal, _iv. 174_

Bibiena, Maria da, _iv. 174_

_Bible, the_, ii. xiii; prophecies of, iv. 244

_Bibliographie Universelle_, _iv. 334_

_Bibliotheca Teubneriana_, _iv. 213_

_Bibliothèque de l' École des Hautes Études_, Paris, _ii. 412_

_Bibliothèque Historique de la Revolution_, _vi. 13_

Bindi, V., _Monumenti Storici ed. Artistici degli Abruzzi_, _iv. 288_

Bindlose, Sir Francis, _i. 101_

_Biographia Literaria_ (Coleridge's), _i. 489_; _iii. 435_

_Biographical Dictionary of Living Authors of Great Britain and
  Ireland_, _iv. 341_; _vi. 443_

_Biographie Universelles_, _vi. 246, 531_

Biondo, Niccolo, iv. 464

Birch, Alderman, _i. 435_

Biren, Ernest John, vi. 417

Biscay, Bay of, ii. 31

Bishop, Sir Henry, iv. 78

Bisognoso, bezonian, a rogue, vi. 347

Black Friar of Newstead Abbey, the, vi. _576_, 578, _et seq._

Black, John, "Maid of Athens'" husband, _iii. 16_

Black, John, _Life of Tasso_, _ii. 470, 485_; _iv. 145_

Black, Theresa (_née_ Macri), "Maid of Athens," iii. 15; _vi. 280_

Black Sea, _iii. 4_; _vii. 10_

Blackbourne, Dr., Archbishop of York, _iii. 298_

Blacket, Joseph, i. _323_, 359, _442_, _443_; vii. 11

Blacklock, Dr., _ii. 5_

Blackmore, Sir Richard, _i. 314, 404_

Blackstone, _Commentaries_, i. 29

Blackwood, William, iii. 444; _vii. 51_

_Blackwoods Edinburgh Magazine_, _iii. 182_; iv. 80, _119_, 139, _152_,
  157, 203, 240, 329, _368_, _521_, 570; v. 5, 204, 280, 282, 329; vi.
  xix, _16, 213, 278, 445_; vii. 51

Blair, Dr., vi. 128

Blake, Benjamin, barber, i. 422

Blake, K. Jex-, _The Elder Pliny's Chapters on the History of Art_, _ii.
  432_

Blanc, Mont, ii. 257, 299, 385

Blanchard, E.L., _Life and Remains_, iv. 324

Bland, Rev. Robert, _The Greek Anthology, etc._, _i. 366_; ii. 291;
  _iii. 32_; _v. 633_

_Bland-Burges Papers_, _i. 416, 438_

Blank verse, "allied to tragedy," i. 398; "prose poets like," vi. 73

"Blatant beast," a figure for the mob, ii. 40

Blenheim, battle of, _ii. 459_; iii. 57

Blessington, Lady, _Conversations with Lord Byron_, _i. 337, 390_; _ii.
  236, 423_; iv. _63, 64_, 70, _538, 545, 549, 562_, 570; _vi. 509_;
  vii. _38_, 82; Lawrence's portrait of, _iv. 64_

Blessington, Lord, _iv. 64_; _vi. 512_; vii. 82

Bligh, Lieutenant William, short account of, v. 587; _A Narrative of the
  Mutiny and Seizure of the Bounty, etc_., v. 581-583, 585, _588, 589,
  591-595_; _vi. 98-100, 105, 111_

Blondus, Flavius, _De Româ Instauratâ_, ii. 509

Bloomfield, George, i. 360

Bloomfield, Nathaniel, i. 300, 441, _442_

Bloomfield, Robert, _The Farmer's Boy_, i. _359_, 360, _442, 443_

Blore, Edward, architect, iii. 376

Blount, Henry, "Good night to Marmion," i. 312

Blücher, Marshal, _ii. 459_; _v. 553_; vi. _312_, 345; _vii. 39_

Blue-stockings, the, _iv. 176_; vi. 75

_Blues, The_, _i. 321, 362_; iv. 567-588; vi. 357, _587_; _vii. 17_

Blunt, Lady Anna Isabella Scawen (_née_ Noel), _ii. 215_

Blunt, Wilfrid Scawen, _ii. 215_

Boabdil, vi. 30

Boatswain, Byron's dog, i. 280; ii. 30

Boccaccio, Giovanni, ii. _353_, 373, 498, 500; _iv. 248, 253, 254_; vi.
  179; "the Bard of Prose," ii. 371; _Decameron_, ii. 495, 501, 502; his
  burial-place, ii. 499; his cenotaph at Arquà, ii. 503; _Il Comento
  sopra la Com media_, iv. 316

Bodleian Library, Oxford, _v. 302, 473_

Bodoni, ii. 472

Boehm, Mrs., her masquerade, iv. 177

Boeotia, ii. 66, 93

Boethius, _De Consolat. Philos._, _iv. 318_

Bogle, Scottish for goblin, vi. 449

Bohemia, evacuated by the Swedish garrisons, _v. 371_

Bohours, ii. 485

Boïardo, Matteo Maria, _Orlando Innamorato_, ii. 293, _354_, 485; iv.
  281, 283

Boileau, _i. 402_; ii. 358, 484, _485_

Boissevain, P., editor of Dio Cassius' _Hist. Rom._, _iv. 370_

Bolero, i. 492; iii. 3, _26_; vi. 526

Boleyn, Anne, her remark on the scaffold, _iii. 265_

Bolingbroke, Lord, hires Mallet to traduce Pope, i. 326

Bolivar, Simon (El Libertador), v. 555

Bonar, James, _Malthus and his Work_, vi. 461

Bonesani, Beccaria, _Dei Delitti e delle Pene_, _ii. 196_

Boniface VII., Pope, ii. 494

Bonivard, Amblard de, iv. 14

Bonivard, François de, Prior of St. Victor (Prisoner of Chillon), iv.
  3-28, 327; _Les Chroniques de Genève_, iv. 5; _Mémoires, etc._, _iv.
  18_

Bonivard, Jean Aimé de, iv. 9, _20_

Bonivard, Louis de, iv. 9

Bonn, vi. 419

Boone, Colonel Daniel, _The Adventures of; Containing a Narrative of the
  Wars of Kentucky_, vi. 348, 349

Boone, George, of Exeter, _vi. 349_

Booth, G., _The Historical Library of Diodorus the Sicilian_, _v. 11_

Booth's Theatre, New York, _Sardanapalus_ at, v. 2

_Border Minstrelsy_, ii. 4, _25_, 295

Borgia, Lucrezia, _ii. 354_

Borgo, Count Pozzo di, v. 539

Bornou, _vi. 474_

Borysthenes (Dniéper) river, iv. 211

Boscan, Juan, of Barcelona, _Leandro_; _The Allegory_, vi. 40

Bosphorus, vi. _219_, 220; _vii. 10_

Bosquet de Julie, ii. _305_, 306

Boswell, James, _Life of Johnson_, _i. 401, 409, 449_; ii. _460_, 489;
  _iv. 500, 573_; _v. 592_; _vi. 247, 455, 482_

Botzaris, Marco, Suliote chief, ii. 180

Boudot, M., _ii. 481_

Boufflers, Marshal, _ii. 297_

Boulanger, J.C., _De Terræ Motu et Fulminibus_, _ii. 488_

_Bounty_, Mutiny of the, See also _The Island_, v. 581-584. _See_ also
  _The Island_

Bourbon, Connétable Charles de (Comte de Montpensier, Dauphin
  d'Auvergne), _ii. 390_; iv. 258; v. _495_, 498, 515-518, _520_

Bourbon, Susanne, Duchesse de, _v. 499_

Bourbons, the, iv. 334

Bourdeille, Pierre de, _v. 520_

Bourne, H.R. Fox-, _Life of John Locke_, _ii. 353_

Bourrienne, M., _i. 489_

Bouveret, ii. 304; _iv. 18_

Bouwah! the Suliote war-cry, vii. 83

Bowles, Rev. William Lisle, _Strictures on Pope, etc._, i. 292, _305_,
  323-327, 352, 370, 421, _435_; _ii. 139_; iii. 535; _iv. 555, 562_;
  _Spirit of Discovery_, i. 324, 325, 404; _The Missionary of the
  Andes_, vii. 45; _The Invariable Principles of Poetry_, vii. 74, 75

_Bowles and Campbell_, vii. 74

Bowring, E.A., _The Tragedies of Vittorio Alfieri_, _v. 211_

Boyd, Hugh, iv. 313, _513_

Boyer, J.B., _Lettres Juives_, _iii. 123_

Boyne, W., _i. 495_

"Boz," _Memoirs of Joseph Grimaldi_, _vi. 11_

Bracciolini, Poggio, _ii. 354_

Braemar, i. 173

Braganza, vii. 6

Braham, John, _i., 347_; music for _Hebrew Melodies_, iii. 375

Bramante, first architect of St. Peter's, Rome, _iv. 270_

Brandenburgh, George William, Elector of, v. 373

Brandl, Professor A., _Goethes Verhältuiss zu Byron_, iv. 82;
  _Goethe-Jahrbuch_, _iv. 136_

Brandywine, battle of, _i. 500_

Brantôme, _Memoires de Messire Pierre de Bourdeille_, _v. 504, 520_

Brasidas, ii. 167, 335

Brass, Corinthian, vi. 284

Braziers, the, vii. 72

Bread-fruit (_Autocarpus incisa_), v. 596

"Break squares," to, vi. 487

Breitenfeld, battle of, _v. 371_

Brennus, iv. 258

Brenta, the, ii. 349

Brentano, M. Frantz Funck-, _L'Homme au Masque de Velours Noir_, _iv.
  514_

Brentford, ii. 66

Brenton, E.P., _The Naval History of Great Britain_, _vi. 589_

Brescia, v. 119, 138

Bret Harte, _The Society upon the Stanislaus_, _iv. 296_

Breuner, General, _iii. 455_

Brewster, Sir David, _Letters on Natural Magic_, _v. 483_; _Memoirs,
  etc., of Sir Isaac Newton_, _vi. 400_

Briareus, vi. 276

_Bride of Abydos_, _i. 340_; iii. _13, 17_, 80, 157-210, 217, 219,
  _275_, 319, _480_; _iv. 56_; _vi. 204_; vii. 55

Bridge of Sighs, Venice, ii. 327, 465; iv. 364; v. 139

Bristol, Countess of, _vi. 219_

"Britannicus," _Revolutionary Causes, etc., and A Postscript containing
  Strictures on Cain, etc._, v. 202

_British Album_, _i. 358, 383_

_British Archæological Society_, _iii. 120_

_British Bards, A Satire_, original title of _English Bards, and Scotch
  Reviewers_, i. xiv, 293, _303, 306, 307, 311-314, 316, 317, 321-325,
  327, 332, 339-342, 344-346, 353-355, 357, 361, 366, 367, 371-373, 375,
  376_

_British Critic_, vi. xx

British Museum, i. xiv, _108_; _ii. 441_; _v. 542, 548, 600_; _vii. 78_;
  _Egerton MSS._, i. _235_, 293, 387; _MS., Proof b_, _i. 394-396,
  398-401_; _Childe Harold MS._, _ii. 3-5_; _iii. 38_; _MS._, _vii. 87_

_British Review_ ("The Old Girl's Review;" "My Grandmother's Review"),
  _iii. 128_; iv. 578, 579; v. 204; vi. xx, 76

_British Theatre_, _iii. 158_

Brocken, German superstition about the, v. 483

Brodribb, Rev. W.J., _Pliny's Letters_, _ii. 380_

Brossano, Petrarch's son-in-law, ii. 484

Brougham, Lord, i. 293, _302, 306_, 338; _iv. 195_; _The Identity of
  Junius with a Distinguished Living Character established_, _iv. 513_;
  his Fabian tactics, vi. _67-70_; "Parolles," vi. 506; his critique of
  _Hours of Idleness_, _vi. 551_

Brown, Horatio F., _Venice, an Historical Sketch, etc._, ii. _338_, 340;
  _iv. 356, 361, 399_; v. 119, _125_; _Venetian Studies_, _iv. 427_

Brown, John, _The Kentucky Pioneers_, _vi. 349_

Brown, Rawdon, Preface to _Venetian Calendar of State Papers_, _iv. 447_

Browne, Felicia Dorothea (Mrs. Hemans), vii. 70

Browne, Isaac Hawkins, _The Fireside, a Pastoral Soliloquy_, _vi. 348_

Browne, Sir Thomas, _ii. 345_; _Religio Medici_, _iii. 165_

Browning, Mrs. Elizabeth Barrett, _Casa Guidi Windows_, iv. 239, _250_

Browning, Oscar, _Peter the Great_, iv. 203; _Charles XII._, _iv. 208_;
  _vi. 363_; _Dante_, _iv. 254_

Browning, Robert, _Poetical Works_, _ii. 346_; _Christmas Eve_, _ii.
  376, 441_; _Never the Time, etc._, _iii. 180_; _Evelyn Hope_, _iii.
  292_; _Pippa Passes_, iii. 348; _Confessions_, _iv. 217_; and
  Macready, v. 114; _Bishop Blougram's Apology_, _vi. 586_

Brownlow, Bishop of Winchester, vii. 22

Bruce, James ("Abyssinian Bruce"), _Life and Travels_, _iii. 99_; _v.
  302_; _vi. 122_

Bruchard, Henri de, _Notes sur le Don Juanisme_, vi. xx, _387_

Brue, Benjamin, _Journal de la Campagne en 1715_, iii. 442, _481_

Brummell, "Beau," _iv. 179_; vi. 451

Brunck, Richard Franz Philippe, i. 30; _Anthologia Græca_, i. 490;
  _Gnomici Poetæ Græci_, _ii. 404_

Brunelleschi, _ii. 376_

Brunswick, Duchess of, _vii. 35_

Brunswick, Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of, _ii. 239_; vi. 12, _312_

Brunswick, Frederick William, Duke of, ii. 230

Brussels, the Waterloo ball at, ii. 228, 292

Brutus, ii. 374, 392; iv. 370, _386_; _v. 560_; vii. 37

Bryant, Jacob, _iii. 179_; _Dissertation concerning the War of Troy,
  etc._, vi. 204, _211_

Bryant's _Dictionary of Painters_, _ii. 171_

Brydges, Sir E., _iv. 541_

Bucentaur, the Venetian State barge, ii. 335

Buchan, fifth Earl of, _i. 429_

Buckhurst, Thomas Sackville, Lord, _Gorboduc_, i. 197

Buckingham, George Villiers, second Duke of, _i. 197_; _The Rehearsal_,
  i. _309, 401_, 423, 447; _vi. 52, 303_

Buckingham, John Sheffield, Duke of, _Essay upon Poetry_, i. 354

Buda retaken from the Turks, iii. 458

Budd, the publisher, _i. 356_

Budge, E.A. Wallis, _Life and Exploits of Alexander the Great_, _v. 543_

Budgell, Miss, _i. 449_

Budgell, Eustace, i. 448, 449

Buffo, vi. 206

Bulgarin, _Iwan Wizigin_, iv. 203

Bull-fights, ii. 67-72

Bulmer, W., printer, _i. 317_; iii. 301

Bülow, Friedrich Wilhelm, Baron von, vi. 345

Bulukof, Count, _vi. 260_

Bumpus, John, _i. 234_

Bunbury H., _The Little Grey Man_, _i. 317_

Bungay, Friar, _vi. 78_

Bunyan, John, _vi. 208_

Bunyan, William, _An Effectual Shove, etc._, i. 417, _418_

Buonaparte, Jacopo, _Sacco di Roma, etc._, iv. 258; v. 471, _514, 516,
  520, 521_

Buonaparte, Joseph, _iv. 458_; v. 533

Buonaparte, Prince Lucien, ii. 522

Buonaparte, Napoleon. _See_ Napoleon Buonaparte

Buratti (Bucati), Pietro, _iv. 456, 457_

Burchard, _Diar._, _iii. 367-369_

Burdett, Sir Francis, _i. 435, 436_; vii. 30, _40, 67_, 68

Burgage, or tenure in burgage, vi. 590

Bürger, _Lenore_, _i. 305_

Burges, Elizabeth, Lady (_née_ Noel), _i. 437_

Burges, Sir James Bland, _i. 314_; _Richard the First_; _Exodiad_, _i.
  436, 437_

Burgoyne, General John, vi. 12

Burgundians, the, ii. 254, 297

Burke, Edmund, _i. 416_; iv. 75, _513_; v. 592; _Reflections on the
  Revolution in France_, _ii. 7_; _iii. 513_

Burkitt, Thomas, able seaman on the _Bounty_, v. 583

Burns, Robert, _Farewell to Ayrshire_, _i. 210_; Lewis's _Tales of
  Terror_, _i. 317_; referred to in _E.B. and S.R._, i. 360, 362;
  _Farewell to Nancy_, iii. 147; _The Life and Age of Man_, _iii. 449_;
  Dr. Currie's _Life of_, vi. 174;

Burrard, Sir Harry, _ii. 39_

Burton, Sir Richard F., _Arabian Nights_, _iii. 87, 104, 109, 113_

Burton, _Anatomy of Melancholy_, _ii. 236_; _v. 543_

Burun, Ralph de, _iv. 543_; _vi. 411_

Busaco, battle of, _i. 470_

Busby, Dr. Thomas, _A New and Complete Musical Dictionary_; _The Age of
  Genius_; Drury Lane _Address_, i. 481, 485; iii. 55-58; translation of
  _Lucretius_, iii. 57

Busingen, _iv. 97_

Bute, John Stuart, Earl of, iv. 501, 510

Butler, A.J., _The Hell of Dante_; _iv. 245_; translation of _Francesca
  da Rimini_, _iv. 320_

Butler, Dr., Headmaster of Harrow ("Pomposus"), i. 17, 88, _89_, 90, 91,
  _93_, 94

Butler, Rev. Alban, _Lives of the Saints_, _vi. 32, 33_

Butler, Samuel, _Hudibras_, _vi. 153, 404, 551_

Buxton, Fowell, _vi. 549_

Byng, George, M.P. ("the County Byng"), _vii. 67, 68_

Byng, Admiral John, ii. _40_, 41

Byrne, editor of _Morning Post_, _i. 358_

Byrne. Mrs. (Charlotte Dacre), "Rosa Matilda," i. _306, 357_, 370;
  _Hours of Solitude_, _i. 358_

Byron, Augusta Ada. _See_ Lovelace, Lady

Byron, Cecilie, Lady (widow of Sir Francis Bindlose), _i. 101_

Byron, Charlotte Augusta (Mrs. Christopher Parker), _iii. 417_

Byron, Elizabeth, Lady (_née_ Chaworth), _iv. 542_

Byron, Hon. Mrs. Frances (_née_ Levett), vi. 410

Byron, Hon. George, _vi. 410_

Byron, George Anson, iii. xxi; vii. 41

Byron, Hon. Juliana, _iii. 381_

Byron, Lucy, Lady, _i. 101_

Byron, the Little Sir John, _i. 1, 3, 119_

Byron, Admiral the Hon. John, _iii. 381, 417_; iv. 57; _vi. 410_;
  _Narrative_ of his shipwreck in the _Wager_; _Voyage round the World_,
  _iv. 58_; vi. _102_, 121

Byron of Rochdale, 1st Lord (Sir John Byron of Clayton), i. _3, 101,
  119_, 121; _vi. 294, 495_

Byron, Sir Nicholas, _i. 3_

Byron, Richard (2nd Lord), _i. 3, 101_; _iv. 14_; _vi. 294_

Byron, Sir Robert, _i. 101_

Byron, Sophia Maria, _vi. 410_

Byron, William (3rd Lord), _iv. 542_

Byron, William (5th Lord, "the wicked Lord Byron"), ii. 17; _iv. 58,
  542_; _vi. 121, 410, 497_

Byron, Hon. William, _iii. 381_

Byron, Sir William, _i. 121_

Byron, Lady (Miss Milbanke), _i. 260, 301, 359_; ii. x, _74, 288, 427_;
  iii. 411, _449_, 499; iv. _39_, 63, 184, _254, 492_; _vi. 22, 274_;
  her transcription of _Parisina_, iii. 499; "my moral Clytemnestra",
  _iv. 64_; "a poetess--a mathematician--a metaphysician," iv. 576;
  "Miss Lilac" of _The Blues_, iv. 570; on Byron's lameness, v. 470;
  _Remarks on Mr. Moore's Life, etc._, _vi. 21_; and M. Baillie, _vi.
  412_; patroness of the Charity Ball, vii. 71

Byron, Lord, _Diary_ or _Journals_ referred to, _i. 5, 25, 30, 45, 103,
  184, 303, 310, 362_; _ii. 61, 187, 304_; iii. _46, 50, 70, 105_, 149,
  150, _157, 165, 210_, 218, 303, _305, 307, 308, 311, 314, 411, 495_;
  v. _28, 61, 78, 159_, 199, _254, 477, 555, 615_; vi. _18, 128, 146,
  173, 197, 204, 240, 263, 421, 461, 504, 511_; _vii. 51, 74_; _My
  Dictionary_, _vi. 381_

Byron, Mrs. (mother), i. 269, _336_; _iii. 449_; _iv. 543_; Byron's
  letters to, _i. 125, 282, 351_; ii. ix, _24, 27, 34, 42, 49, 59, 63,
  100, 124, 128, 138_, 301; iii. _4, 13_, 441, _450_; _vi. 128, 195,
  565_; _furiosa_, vi. 30

"Byron's Pool," on the Cam, vi. 49

"Byron's Tomb," at Harrow, _i. 26_

Byzantium, ii. 337


C

Caballerías, the, ii. 47

Caballero, _Victoires et Conquètes des Français_, ii. 94

Cabot, Sebastian, _iv. 262_

Cabotto, or Gavotto, Giovanni, _iv. 262_

Cadiz, ii. 63, 67, 77, 93; iii. 1

Cadmus, i. 148

Cæcina, Aulus, ii. 299

Cæsar, _i. 351, 422_; ii. 397; iv. 352; _v. 560_; vi. 139, 339, 404; _De
  Bello Gallico_, iv. 331

Caia river, ii. 45

_Cain_, _iii. 32, 182_; _iv. 34, 48, 50_; v. 5, _9_, 197-275, 279,
  _306_, 469; vi. _385_, 444, _491_; _vii. 78_; Introduction to, v. 199;
  Dedication, v. 205; Preface, v. 207

Calderon, _El Mágico Prodigioso_, iv. 81; v. 470; _Los Cabellos de
  Absalon_, _iv. 100_

Caledonian Meeting, the, iii. 415

_Caledonian Mercury_, _iii. 45_

Calendario, Filippo, a stone-cutter, iv. 382

Calendario, Philip, a seaman, iv. 464

Calenture, the, v. 159; vi. 586

Calenus, A., _ii. 520_

Caligula, _ii. 408_; _iii. 455_; iv. 334; _v. 542_; vi. 276

Caliriotes (Albanese women), _ii. 183_

Callcott, Lady (Mrs. Maria Graham), iii. 532; _vi. 206, 207_

Callimachus, ii. 173; _vi. 445_

Callistratus, ii. 291

Calma, Abbé, _v. 211_

Calmana, Caimana, etc., Cain's twin sister, _v. 226_

Calmar, i. 177

Calmet, Augustine, _Dissertations sur les Aparitions_, _iii. 123_

Caloyer, Greek monk, ii. 130, 181; iii. 123

Calpac, centre part of Turkish headdress, iii. 119

Calpe's rock (Gibraltar), i. 378; ii. 89, 113, 455

Calprenède, M., _i. 398_

Calvert, Charles, actor, iv. 78; as "Sardanapalus," v. 2

Calvin, i. 417

Calvinism, Byron's, ii. 74

Calypso, ii. 118

Calypso's isle (Goza), ii. 118, 173; iii. 10

Camarases, John, translation of Ocellus Lucanus' _De Universi Natura_,
  ii. 198

Cambridge, Duke of, _iii. 145_

Cambridge, Rev. O.P., _iii. 107_

Cambridge University, i. 373, 392; Whig Club at, vii. _66_, 68

Cambyses, 2nd king of Persia, iv. 259

Camel, "ship of the desert," v. 606

Cameron of Fassieferne, John, ii. 292

Cameron of Lochiel, Donald, ii. 232, 292

Cameron, Sir Evan, ii. 232, 292

_Camerotti di sotto_, and _di soprà_, (Venetian prisons), _iv. 364_

Camese, Albanian kilt, ii. 146

Camillus, ii. 518

Camoëns, Luis de, i. 78, 313, 320, 370

Campbell, J. Dykes, _iii. 538_

Campbell, Thomas, _i. 331, 435_; vii. 49; _Specimens of the British
  Poets_, _i. 198_; vii. 74, 75; a true poet, _i. 306_; _Pleasures of
  Hope_, i. 361; _ii. 169_; _iii. 459_; _Gertrude of Wyoming_, _i. 429_;
  ii. xiii, _23, 113_; vi. 39; _Hohenlinden_, _ii. 49_; _Lochiel's
  Warning_, ii. 292; iv. 235; _Elegy on Princess Charlotte's Death_,
  _ii. 450_; _Battle of the Baltic_, _ii. 459_; _Last Man_, _iv. 42_;
  referred to in _Don Juan_, vi. 6, 75, 444

Campo Formio, Peace of, _ii. 363_

Can Grande della Scala, v. 562

Canaries, Isles of the Blest, _vi. 169_

Candia, ii. 340; _v. 127_

Cangas, battle of, _ii. 46_

Cannæ, battle of, ii. 255

Canning, George, _New Morality_, i. _294_, 363; Gifford's support of,
  _i. 304_; his "colleagues hate him for his wit", i. 377; M.P. for
  Liverpool, _i. 497_; attempts to form coalition Ministry, _i. 497_;
  his duel with Perceval, ii. 79; _Needy Knife-Grinder_ in
  _Anti-Jacobin_, _ii. 80_; praises _Bride of Abydos_, iii. 151, _197_;
  parodies Southey's _Elegy on H. Martin_, _iv. 482_; Pitt's "The Pilot
  that weathered the Storm," v. 568, _vi. 482_; and Roman Catholic
  Emancipation, v. 569; Byron on, _vi. 482_; Brougham and, _vi. 506_;
  quotes Christianity to sanction slavery, _vi. 549_; "the tall wit,"
  vii. 54; "for War," vii. 30

Canova, Antonio, ii. 324, _369_, 370; iv. 174, 536

Cantabria, Favila, Duke of, _v. 558_

Cantemir, Demetrius, _History of the Growth and Decay of the Othman
  Empire_, vi. 259, 277

Canterbury, vi. 421, 422

Canzani, Lambro, iii. 194, 219

Cape de Verd Islands, _vi. 169_

Cape Gallo, iii. 248

Capena, ii. _416_, 516

Capo di Ferro, Cardinal, ii. 508

Capo d'Istria, Count, President of Greece, v. 575

Capote, Albanese cloak, ii. 132, 181; iii. 450

Cappelletti, Giuseppe, _Storia della Republica di Venisia_, iv. 327,
  _345, 427_

Capperonier, M., _ii. 481_

Caracalla, ii. 517, 521; _iii. 180_

Caracci, Hannibal, _ii. 437_

Caractacus, vi. 497

Carapanos, Constantin, _Dodone et ses Ruines_, ii. _132_, 182

Carasman (or Kara Osman), Oglou, iii. 166

Caravaggio, vi. 502

Carbonari, the, _vi. 259, 489_; v. 567

Cardan, _De Consolatione_, _ii. 236_

Carew, Thomas, _Poems_, _iii. 17_; _The Spark_, ii. 236

Carey, Henry, _Chrononhotonthologos_; _Sally in our Alley_, i. 413;
  _Namby Pamby, or a Panegyric on the New Versification_, _i. 418_

"Caritas Romana," ii. 437

Carlisle, taken by the Highlanders, _vii. 25_

Carlisle, Frederick Howard, 5th Earl of, i. 354, 370, 383; _ii. 23,
  234_; _vii. 78_

Carlisle, Lady, v. 329

Carlo Dolce, vi. 502

Carlowitz plain, iii. 455

Carlyle, Thomas, _i. 489_; _French Revolution_, _iv. 13, 454_; _History
  of Frederick the Great_, _iv. 334_; _vi. 337_

Carmagnola, v. 179, 180

Carnarvon, 1st Earl of, _i. 336_

Caroline (of Anspach), Queen, _ii. 282_

Caroline (of Brunswick), Queen, i. _311_; _ii. 230_; iv. 555; _v. 15,
  206, 569_; vi. _67_, 236, 275, _290_, 450, _451_; vii. 72, _78_

Carpenter, Dr. F.J., _Selections from the Poetry of Lord Byron_, _iv.
  119_

Carr, Sir John (_Stranger in France_; _Travels_), i. _38_, 378, _379_;
  ii. _65_, 78

Carrara, Francesco Novello da (Signer of Padua), ii. 476, 482

Carreno, José Maria, Commandant-General of Panama, _v. 602_

Carrer, Luigi, _iv. 456, 457, 536_

Carrer Museum, Venice, _iv. 457_

_Cartaginense, Il_, _vi. 91_

Cartaret, Lord, _i. 418_

Carthage, iv. 251; vi. 348; burning of, v. 512

Carthaginians and Irish, vi. 337

Carttar, Joseph, coroner for Kent, vi. 265

Carus, Rev. W., _Memoirs of the Life of the Rev. Mr. Simeon_, _i. 417_

Carver, William, _vii. 22_

Gary, _New Pocket Plan of London, Westminster, and Southwark_, _vi. 434_

Gary, Rev. Henry Francis, _Dante_, iv. _23_, 313; _Memoir of_, iv. 314

Carysfort, John Joshua Proby, 1st Earl of, _i. 445_

Casaubon, _ii. 518_

Casemate, a, vi. 305

Cash, power of, vi. 458

Casimir V., king John, of Poland, iv. 201, 205, 211, 212

Cassander, _v. 487_

Cassandra, _i. 377_; iv. 243

Cassiodorus, _Tripartita_, ii. 521; _iii. 306_; _iv. 386_

Cassius, _ii. 374_; _iv. 120, 386_

Castelar, Emilio, _Life of Lord Byron_, _ii. 374_

Castellan, Antoine Louis, _Lettres sur la Morée, etc._ _iii. 249, 270_;
  _Moeurs des Ottomans_, _iii. 480_

Castelnau, Marquis Gabriel de, _Essai sur L'Histoire ancienne et moderne
  de la Nouvelle Russie_, vi. 264, _304, 305-307, 309-313, 315-317, 319,
  320, 331-335, 340, 343, 344, 352, 356, 358, 359, 362, 365, 366-368_

Castéra, J.H., _Vie de Catherine II._, _vi. 370, 392_

Casti, _Animali Parlanti_, iv. 156

Castiglione, Marchesa, iv. 157

Castlereagh, Lord, _ii. 342_; iv. 476; vi. _4_, 7, 264, 389, 418, 450;
  vii. 20, 30, 65, 81

Castri, village of, ii. _61_, 85, 92, 189

Castriota, George (Scanderberg or Scander Bey), ii. 124, 173

Catalani, Angelica, i. 346; _v. 562_

Cataneo, Maurizio, _iv. 150_

Cathay, vi. 457

Cathcart, Lord, _i. 468, 488_

Catherine II. of Russia, ii. 193, 198, _200_, 282; v. 550, 564; vi.
  _313, 333_, 351, 370, 381, 383, 387-399, 406, 411, 413, 414, 439

Catholic Claims, _iv. 561_

Catholic Emancipation, iv. 503; _v. 569_; vi. 506

Catilina, _iii. 117_

Catinat, Maréchal Nicholas, _Mémoires_, _vi. 170, 514_

Cato, i. 449; ii. 514; _iv. 253_; v. 506; vi. 270, 303

Catullus, _v. 613_; vi. 26, 139; vii. 17; _Ad Lesbiam_, i. 72; "Lugete
  Veneres, Cupidinesque," i. 74; "Mellitos oculos tuos, Juventi," i. 75

Caucasus, Mount, i. 378; v. 17, 30, 57, 294

Causeus, _Museum Romanum_, _ii. 509_

Cava, the Helen of Spain, ii. 46, 89; iv. 334

Cava, battle of, _vi. 14_

Cava, kava, or ava, a Tongan intoxicating drink, v. 600

Cavalier, a military earthwork, vi. 352

Cavalier Servente, iv. 165, 172

Cavalli, Marquis Antonio, iv. 547

Cawthorn, James, i. 294, 387, 453; ii. ix, x; _vii. 9_

Cayster river, ii. 182

Ceccho, Captain, ii. 477

Cecilia Metella, tomb of, ii. 402-405

Cecrops, i. 462

Cellini, Benvenuto, v. 471, _516, 518, 521_

Ceneda, Lorenzo, Count-bishop of, iv. 332

_Centaur_, H.M.S., wreck of, _vi. 90, 92, 94-96, 99, 110_

_Century Dictionary_, _ii. 135_; _v. 135_

_Century Magazine_, _iii. 435_

Cephalonia, _ii. 125_; vii. 83

Cephalus, ii. 178

Cephisus river, i. 459; iii. 272

Ceraunian mountains ("Chimera's Alps"), ii. 131, 181

Cerement (searment), ii. 154

Ceres, vi. 129; "fell with Buonaparte," vi. 383

Cerigo, island of, ii. 167

Certaldo, Boccaccio's tomb at, ii. _373_, 499

Certosa Cemetery, _i. 21_

Cervantes, _Don Quixote_, _i. 299_; ii. 89, 178; vi. 303, 483

Cesarotti, ii. 496; _iv. 457_

Cesi, Pietro, President of Romagna, _vi. 212_

Cevallos, Don Pedro de, _i. 338_

Chad, G.W. _vi. 374_

Chæronea, ii. 294.

Chalmers, George, _iv. 513_; _The Life of Mary Queen of Scots_, vii. 53

Chambrier, M., _iv. 514_

_Champion, The_, iii. 532-535; vii. _37_, 38

Champollion, Jean Franjois, _v. 603_

Chandler, Dr., _Travels in Greece_, ii. 172, 189

Chantrey, Sir Francis, vii. 49

Chaponnière, J.J., editor of _Advis et Devis de l'ancienne et nouvelle
  Police de Genève, etc._, iv. 5

Chappell, William, _Old English Popular Music_, _vi. 145_

_Charity Ball, The_, vii. 71

Charlemagne, iv. 287-290; vi. 507

Charlemont, Lady, _iii. 105_; iv. 569; vi. 215

Charles I., i. _2, 3, 101_, 130,; _v. 560_; vii. 35, 36

Charles II., i. _2_, 123, _198_; _v. 487_

Charles III., Duke of Savoy, iv. 4, 10

Charles IV. of Spain (Connétable de Bourbon, Comte de Montpensier), _ii.
  390_; iv. 258; v. 495, _498_, 515-516, _520_

Charles V. of Spain, _ii. 453_; iii. 308, 309; _v. 499, 549_

Charles VII. (Duke of Lorraine), _iii. 458_

Charles VIII. of France, ii. 504

Charles IX. of Sweden, _v. 371_

Charles XII. of Sweden, _i. 107_; iv. 202, 207, 233; v. 551; vi. 362,
  _363_

Charles of Anjou, ii. 494

Charles of Saxony, Prince, _vi. 605_

Charles the Bold, ii. 297

Charles, Prince (the Pretender), _i. 173_

Charles Edward, Prince, _ii. 369_

Charles, R.H., translation of Dillman's _Ethiopic Text_ (_Book of
  Enoch_), _v. 302_

Charlotte, Princess, wife of Tzarovitch Alexey, _vi. 417_

Charlotte of Wales, Princess, ii. 313, 450; iii. 45, 376; vii. _35_, 78

Charlotte, Queen, _iii. 4_

Charrière, E., _La Vie vaillant Bertran du Guesclin_, _v. 549_

Chateaubriand, François Réné, Vicomte de; _ii. 190_; _iii. 195, 431_; v.
  538, 539; _Les Aventures du dernier Abencerrage_, _v. 558_; _Congress,
  etc._ v. _562, 567_, 575; _Les Martyrs ou le Triomphe de la religion
  chrétienne_, v. 575

Châteauneuf-de-Randon (Lozère), _v. 549_

Chatham, Earl of, i. 113; _iv. 510_; vi. 478; vii. 28

Chaucer, mentioned in _Hints from Horace_, i. 395; his use of the word
  _lemman_, _ii. 22_; _Canterbury Tales_ _ii. 155_; the nightingale's
  "merry note," _iii. 170_; _terza rima_, iv. 313; _Compleint to his
  Lady_, iv. 239; _Wife of Bath_, iv. 484

Chaumont, Treaty of, _v. 550_

Chaworth, George, Viscount, _iv. 542_

Chaworth, Mary Ann (Mrs. Chaworth-Musters), i. 52, 189, _192_, 210, 329,
  _277_, 282, 283, 285, 475; ii. 18, _29_. 421; iv. 31, 32, 35, 36, 39,
  _542_; Byron's "bright morning star of Annesley," iv. 38

Chaworth, William, _i. 189_; _ii. 17_; _iv. 542_

Cheltenham, _v. 609_

Chemnitz, battle of, _v. 371_

Cheops, king, vi. 79

Cherbuliez, J.L.A., _vi. 461_

Chermside, Sir Herbert Charles, Governor of Queensland, _vi. 497_

Chermside, Lady (_née_ Webb), _vi. 497_

Cherry, Andrew, _The Travellers_; _Peter the Great_, i. _306_, 345

Cherubim, the, v. 228

Cherubini, his opera _Les Abencerages_, _v. 558_

_Chester Mysteries_, _vi. 551_

_Chester Plays_, v. 200, _207_

Chesterfield, 4th Earl of, _Letters_, i. 415; vi. 525

Chesterfield, Philip Henry, 5th Earl of, President of the Four-Horse
  Club, vii. 26

Chetsum, Rev. David, _ii. 283_

Chevalier, Le, _iii. 13_

Chezy, A.L., Jāmā's _Medjnoun and Leila_, _iii. 160_

Chiaus, a Turkish messenger, iii. 113

Chichester, Lady, _ii. 23_

Chichester, Mrs., _i. 350_

_Childe Harold_, Introduction to Cantos I. and II., ii. ix-xv; Notes on
  the MSS. of, ii. xvi-xx; Itinerary, ii. xxi-xxiv; Preface to Cantos I.
  and II. ii. 3-8; Canto I., ii. 15-84; Notes on Canto I., ii. 85-95;
  Canto II., ii. 99-163; Notes on Canto II., ii. 165-208; Introduction
  to Canto III., ii. 211-214; Canto III., ii. 215-289; Notes on Canto
  III., ii. 291-307; Introduction to Canto IV., ii. 311-315; Original
  Draft Canto IV., ii. 316-319; Dedication of Canto IV., ii. 321-326;
  Canto IV., ii. 327-463; Notes on Canto IV., ii. 465-525; referred to,
  i. _5, 232, 277, 282, 324, 355, 366, 368, 379_, 387, 453-455; iii.
  xix, _1, 2, 4_, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, _13_, 14, _19_, 21, 23, 24, _90, 91,
  96, 107, 120, 121, 123, 129, 134, 145, 165, 168, 210_, 225, _336, 395,
  417, 450, 459, 460, 470, 480, 485, 495_, 499, _521_; iv. 6, _34, 40,
  41, 53-59, 62, 63, 65_, 79, _87, 100, 104, 105, 127, 131, 132, 139_,
  155, _162, 166, 173, 193, 194, 196_, 238, 244, _257, 266, 271, 275,
  304, 364, 397, 404, 413, 422, 425, 426, 446, 456_, 471, _529, 536,
  578, 580_; v. _27, 73, 126, 139, 149, 153, 157, 163_, 333, _365, 408,
  500, 556, 607, 610, 612, 615_; vi. xv, xvii, _12, 13, 48, 74, 84, 116,
  149, 186, 200, 212, 234, 303, 382, 384, 419, 424, 434, 476, 539, 558_;
  vii. _7, 37, 49_, 51, _55, 58_

_Childe Harold's Good Night_, ii. 26; _vii_. 6

_Childish Recollections_, i. _17_, 84-106; ii. 8, _12_, 95; _iii. 324_

_Children of Apollo_, i. 294, _342, 445_

Childs, George W., _vii. 63_

Chili, Independence of, v. 556

Chillon, Castle of, ii. _303_, 304; iv. 3, 4, 18

Chimariot mountains, ii. 131, 181

Chinazzo, David, _The War of Chioza_, ii. _338_, 477

Chioggia (Chioza), war of, ii. 338, 476, 497

Chisholm, G.G., ii. xxiv

_Chiswick Press_, i. xi

Choiseul-Gouffier, Count, _Voyage Pittoresque de la Grèce_, _ii. 168_;
  _iii. 295_; _vi. 151_

Chouet, _i. 414_

Chrematoff, vi. 307

Christian, Charles, _v. 622_

Christian, Edward, Chief justice of Ely, _v. 588_; editor of
  _Blackstone's Commentaries_, _v. 622_

Christian, Fletcher, mate of the _Bounty_, v. 581-584, _588_; short
  account of, v. 622

_Christian Observer_, iii. 377

Christians of Ewanrigg, the, _v. 622_

Christodoulos, an Acarnanian, Περὶ Φιλοσόφου, κ.τ.λ. [Greek: Peri\ Philoso/phou,
  k.t.l.], ii. 198

Christopher Caustic's _Terrible Tractoratian, etc._, _i. 307_

_Chronique de Bayart_, _v. 515_

Chryseus, _ii. 462_

Chrysostom, vi. 28

Chulos, footmen, _ii. 67, 71_

Church, Rev. A., _Pliny's Letters_, _ii. 380_

Churchill, Charles, iv. 45, _51_; v 337; _Prophecy of Famine_, _iv. 14_;
  _The Times_, _iv. 21_; _The Candidate_, iv. 46; _The Farewell_, _iv.
  174_

Churchill, Charles, master-at-arms on the _Bounty_, v. 583

_Churchill's Grave_, iv. 45, _51, 71, 230, 266_; v. 337; _vi. 401_

Cibber, Colley, _The Provoked Husband_, _i. 399_; _Lives_, _iii. 280_

Cicero, "Tully's fire," i. 29; Addison on his puns, _i. 398_; Sulp.
  Severus' letter to, _ii. 133_; _In Verrem_, _ii. 168_; speeches in the
  Forum, ii. 301, 413; _De Finibus_, _ii. 345_; _Epist. ad Familiares_,
  ii. 362; _Epist. ad Atticum_, ii. _384_, 509; "Alas, for Tully's
  voice," ii. 392; _In Catilinam_, ii. _396_, 510; _Academ_., _ii. 399_;
  Middleton's _Life_ quoted, _ii. 408_; site of his villa, ii. 455, 522;
  Romans and the theatre, ii. 492; _De Divinat_., ii. 510; _vi. 585_;
  _De Suo Consulatu_, ii. 510; _De Legibus_, _ii. 519_; _De Naturâ
  Deorum_, _iv. 115_; _Epist_., _iv. 120_; _Pro Sexto Roscio, Amerino_,
  _iv. 438_; Diodorus Siculus contemporary with, v. 3; "the topical
  memory of the ancients," _vi. 16_

Cicisbeo, origin of the word, iv. 171

Cicogna, E.A., _Personaggi illustri della Venezia patrizia gente_, _iv.
  457_; _Inscrizioni Veneziane_, _v. 123_

Cicognara, Leopoldo, Conte de, ii. 324, 472; _iv. 456, 457_

Cicognini, Giacinto Andrea, _Convitato di Pietra_, vi. xvi

Cid Hamet Benengeli, i. 299

Cilicia, v. 4, _24_

Cimon, _iv. 108_

Cincinnatus, iii. 314; v. 571

Cinna, _ii. 393_

Cintio Giraldi, _Nouvelles_, v. 471

Cintra, Convention of, ii. xi, 38, 39, _65_, 86; mountain, ii. 31, 34;
  Royal Palace at, ii. 37

Circassia (Franguestan), iii. 111; _vi. 279_

Circe, _v. 573_

Cisternes, Raoul de, _Le Duc de Richelieu_, _vi. 333_

Ciudad Real, _ii. 89_

Ciudad Rodrigo, fall of, _i. 496_; _vi. 69_

Civil Wars, the, _i. 3_

Civitella, village of, ii. 523

Civran, _iv. 331_

Claiborne, W.C.C., Governor of Louisiana, _iii. 297, 298_

Clairmont, Jane (her transcription of _Childe Harold_, Canto III.), ii.
  _145_, 211, 214, _216, 217, 230, 232, 288, 304_; iv. 3, 70

Clancarty, Lord, _vi. 374_

Clare, John Fitzgibbon, 1st Earl of, i. 100

Clare, John Fitzgibbon, 2nd Earl of ("Lycus"), i. xi, 96, 98-100, _128_,
  200, 222

Clarence, Duke of, vi. 60, _451_

Clarendon, _History of the Rebellion_, _i. 3_

Clarens, ii. 277, 304; _iv. 18_

Clark, J.W., Cambridge, _vi. 433_

Clarke, Edward Daniel, _Travels in Various Countries_, i. 455; ii.
  _168_, 172, 204; iii. 75, _94_, 151, _272, 295_; vi. _171, 204, 211_;
  _The Tomb of Alexander, etc._, _v. 542_

Clarke, Hewson, i. 373-375, 383; ii. 213

Clarke, John, _i. 406_

Clarke, J.S., _Memoir of William Falconer_, _ii. 169_

Clarke, Mary Anne, _i. 391_

Claude Lorraine, _ii. 168_; vi. 502

Claudian, ii. 412; _In Ruffin._, _v. 289_; _Epigrammata_, _v. 562_

Claudius, ii. 520

Clayton, Sir Richard, _Critical Enquiry into the Life of Alexander the
  Great_, _vi. 226_

Clement XII., Pope, _ii. 389, 432_; _v. 521_

Cleon, ii. 190

Cleonice, _iv. 108_

Cleopatra, i. 490; ii. 397; iii. 11; v. 484; vi. 269; her mummy in the
  British Museum, v. 542

Clermont, Mrs., _vi. 22_

Cleveland, Duchess of, _iv. 541_

Clinton, George, _Memoirs of the Life and Writings of Lord Byron_, iii.
  443, _447_; v. 581

Clitumnus river, ii. 379-381

Clodius, i. 351; _iv. 352_; _vi. 139_

Clootz, Jean Baptiste, Baron de (Anacharsis Clootz), vi. xviii, 13

Club, Byron's definition of a, i. 407

Clusium, iv. 334

Clytemnestra, _ii. 426_

Clytus, _ii. 124_

Coalition Ministry, the, _i. 500_

Cobbett, William, _i. 297_; ii. 40; _v. 572_; _vi. 380_; vii. 65, _67_,
  68

_Cobbett's Weekly Register_, v. 540, _572_; _vi. 266_

Cochineal, kermes, vi. 575

Cochrane, Thomas, Lord, iv. 111; _vi. 67_

Cockburn, Admiral Sir George, _ii. 239_

Cockburn, Mrs. Robert (Mary Duff), _i. 192_

Cocker, _Arithmetic_, vi. 601

Cockney School, the, _iv. 339_

Coehoorn, Baron Menno van, a Dutch military engineer, vi. 344

Coelius Antipater, _Annales_, _ii. 378_

Cohen, Francis (afterwards Sir F. Palgrave), translation of _Old
  Chronicle_ (Marino Faliero); _Rise and Progress of the English
  Constitution_; _History of the Anglo-Saxons_, iv. 46

Coke on Littleton, vi. 568

Colbleen mountain, i. 194

Cole, W., boatswain on the _Bounty_, v. 583

_Coleorton, Memorials of_, _iv. 585_

Coleridge, Miss Edith, _iii. 454_

Coleridge, Hartley, _Essays_, _ii. 331_; _First Visit to the Theatre in
  London_, _v. 474_

Coleridge, H.N., _Study of the Classics_, _vi. 117_

Coleridge, Sara, _i. 489_

Coleridge, Mrs. S.T., _iv. 521_

Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, _The Devils Walk_, _i. 31_; _vii. 21_; Byron
  and, _i. 305, 365_; iii. 444; vi. 74; nitrous oxide, _i. 307_;
  _Poems_, _i. 315, 316_; _ii. 22_; referred to in _English Bards, and
  Scotch Reviewers_, i. 316, 369; on Monk Lewis, _i. 138_; _Letters of_,
  _i. 318_; _ii. 401_; _iv. 225, 585_; _v. 175, 544_; _vi. 350, 421_;
  _Table Talk of_, _i. 318_; iv. _318, 339_, 485; _v. 175_; _vi. 152_;
  Cottle's _Early Recollections of_, _i. 329_; _Anima Poetæ_, _i. 367_;
  _ii. 113, 236_; _iv. 587_; _vi. 91_; and Charles Lloyd, _i. 368_;
  _Frost at Midnight_, _i. 369_; Sir J. Bland Burges, _i. 437_; on
  dancing in Germany, i. 475; on Kotzebue, _i. 489_; _Biographia
  Literaria_, _i. 489_; _iii. 435_; vi. _4_, 39, _167, 168, 175_;
  _Ancient Mariner_, _ii. 22_; iv. _22_, 27, _104, 225, 230, 506_; _vi.
  106, 114_; Lamb's apology for, _ii. 22_; _Christabel_, _ii. 134, 274,
  360_; iii. 443, _471, 476, 511, 519_, 537; _iv. 20_, 82, _224_; v.
  281; vi. _243_, 279; vii. 45; _Hymn before Sunrise in the Valley of
  Chamouni_, _ii. 254_; _iv. 110_; _Dejection: An Ode_, _ii. 264_; _vi.
  39_; _The Friend_, ii. _281_, 301; _vi. 174_; _Lines to Nature_, ii.
  302; _vi. 179_; "Oh for one hour of _The Recluse_," _ii. 337_;
  Boccaccio, _ii. 374_; _Essays on His Own Times_, _ii. 397, 401_; a
  Parliamentary reporter, _ii. 401_; _Kubla Khan_, _ii. 416, 418, 447_;
  _iv. 267_; v. _73_, 277; _Israel's Lament_, _ii. 450_; his influence
  on Rogers, iii. 320; _Lines to a Gentleman_, _iii. 336_; Byron's
  letters to, iii. 441; _iv. 338_; Byron's beneficiary, iii. 444;
  "Apostacy and Renegadoism," _iii. 488_; _Songs of the Pixies_, _iii.
  524_; _Zapolya_, _iv. 24_; _Sibylline Leaves_, _iv. 42_; _Religions
  Musings_, _ibid_.; depreciates Voltaire, _iv. 184_; "No more my
  visionary soul shall dwell," _iv. 225_; on Walpole's _Mysterious
  Mother_, _iv. 339_; author of the libel on Shelley? iv. 475; _The Plot
  Discovered, etc._, _iv. 512_; _Miscellanies, etc._, _iv. 515_; Hazlitt
  on, _iv. 518_; the result of pantisocracy, _iv. 521_; on Southey's
  _Life of Wesley_, _iv. 522_; translates Schiller's _Piccolomini_, _iv.
  566_; _Lectures of 1811-1812_, _iv. 575_; his visit to the Beaumonts,
  _iv. 585_; _Pains of Sleep_, _v. 78_; on Keats and Adam Steinmetz,
  "There is death in that hand," _v. 175_; and Pitt's description of
  Napoleon, _v. 544_; _Critique_ on Maturin's _Bertram_, vi. xvii, _4_;
  _Morning Post_, vi. 175; his marriage, _ibid._; "hath the sway," vi.
  445; _Literary Remains_, _vi. 576_; his note-books, _vii. 18_;
  Mackintosh on, _vii. 32_

Coligny, _vi. 246_

Coliseum (or Colosseum), Rome, ii. 423-435; iv. 131

Collegio dei Signore di notte al Criminal, _iv. 427_

Colleoni, Battolommeo, iv. 336, 392

Collier, Jeremy, _Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness of the
  English Stage_, i. 416; _Shakespeare_, _vi. 502_

Collignon, Maximo, _Histoire de la Sculpture Grecque_, _ii. 365, 432,
  445_

Collini, Mdlle., i. 348

Collins, _Ode to Pity_, _ii. 34_; _How Sleep the Brave_, _ii. 50_; _Ode
  on the Death of Mr. Thomson_, iii. 50; _Irish Eclogues_, iii. 224

Collins, _Peerage_, _vi. 410_

Colman the younger, George, i. _306_, 343; _iv. 75_; _The Iron Chest_;
  _Heir-at-Law_, i. 343; _John Bull, or An Englishman's Fireside_, i.
  343, 400; _The Review, or the Wags of Windsor_, iii. 43; _Love Laughs
  at Locksmiths_, vi. 308

Cologne, _vi. 419_

Colonna, Cape, ii. 156, 169; iii. 86, _134_

Colonna de' Francesi, La (Ravenna), vi. 212

Colonna, Vittoria, _iv. 262_

Columbia, Republic of, _v. 555_; vi. 456

Columbus, Christopher, iii. 76; _iv. 262_; vi. 552

Columella, _De Re Rustica_, _ii. 488_

Comboloio, a Turkish rosary, iii. 181, 275

Commodus, iv. 334

Comnena, Anna, _Alexiad_, ii. 202

_Complaint, The_, _iv. 220_

Compostelli, Pietro de, _iv. 448, 467_

Conan the Jester, v. 209

"Concision" used for "conciseness," vi. 550

Condé, Prince de, iv. 262

_Condolatory Address to Sarah, Countess of Jersey, on the Prince Regents
  returning her Picture to Mrs. Mee_, vii. 37

Condorcet, Marie Jean Antoine, Marquis de, President of Legislative
  Assembly in 1792, vi. 13

Conduit, Mrs. (Catherine Barton), _vi. 400_

Congreve, i. _198_, 306, _349, 416_; vi. 510

Congreve, Sir William, inventor of "Congreve rockets," vi. 50

_Conquest, The_, vii. 82

Consiglio Minore (Venice), _iv. 345_

Consiglio dei Dieci. _See_ Council of Ten

Constable, Archibald, _i. 310, 436_

Constans, ii. 520

Constant, Henri Benjamin de Rebecque, v. 566, _567_

Constantine, Emperor, ii. _336_, 520

Constantine, Grand-Duke, _v. 564_

Constantinople (Istambol, Ἑπτάλοφος [Greek: HEpta/lophos]), i. 378;
  ii. 152, 194; iii. 17, 21; vi. 219

_Constitutionel, Le_, v. _566_, 577

Contarini, Doge Andrea, ii. 477, 497

Contarini (afterwards Foscari), Lucrezia, v. 115, 130

Conti, _v. 371_

Contrario, Ugoccion, _iii. 506_

Cook, Captain, i. 325; v. 582; _vi. 19_; voyage in the _Resolution_, _v.
  588, 605_

Cook, Dutton, _A Book of the Play_, _i. 414_

Cooke, George Frederick, i. 46, _344_; _iv. 338_

Cookery, science of, vi. 561

Cooper, actor, iv. 324

Copenhagen, bombardment of, i. 468; _v. 588_

Copernicus, _i. 402_

Copet, _iv. 53_; vii. 50

Coray, Diamant or Adamantius, _Bibliothèque Hellénique_, ii. 196-199,
  203

Corday, Charlotte, _vi. 14_

Cordoba, _ii. 54_

Corfu, ii. 193

Corfu, Giovanni da, iv. 464

Corinth, ii. 363; iii. 440-496; Gulf of, _ii. 60_

Corinthian brass, vi. 284

_Corinthians_, _v. 262_

_Coriolanus_, _ii. 388, 452_; _iv. 338_; _v. 27_

Cork Convent, ii. 35, 86

Cork and Orrery, 8th Earl of, _vi. 504_

Cork and Orrery, Mary, Countess of ("Countess Crabby"), vi. 504

Cornaro, Flaminio, _Ecclesiæ Venetæ_, _v. 123_

Cornaro, Marco, iv. 402, 465

Cornelia, daughter of Metellus Scipio, and widow of P. Crassus, _iv.
  264_

_Cornelian, The_, i. 66, _240_; iii. 48

Cornwall, Barry. See Procter, B.W.

Cornwall wreckers, ii. 141, 182

Coron, or Corone (the ancient Colonides), iii. 249

_Corresponding Society, The_, iv. 516

_Corsair_, i. 388, _457_; _ii. 252_; iii. xix, _46, 49_, 217-229, 303,
  319-321, _409_; v. 584; _vi. 132_

Corsi, Cardinal, ii. 495

Cortejo, Spanish, vi. 55

Cortes, v. 555

Cosmo II., ii. 499

Costerden, Elizabeth, _vi. 294_

Costerden, William, _vi. 294_

Cotta, v. 81, 108

Cottle, Amos, _Translation of the Edda of Sæmund_, i. _314_, 328, _329,
  403_

Cottle, Joseph, _Alfred_; _The Fall of Cambria_, i. 328, _436_; _Early
  Recollections of Coleridge_, _i. 329_

Cotton, Mrs., of Worcester, _iii. 209_

Couch of Hercules, _vi. 220_

Coulman, M.J.J., _iv. 543_

Council of Ten (Il Consiglio dei Dicci), iv. _363, 366, 385_, 399, _441,
  448_, 465, 470; v. 115-118, 169

_Courier, The_, _i. 423, 436_; ii. xii; iii. _45_, 377, _488_, 534; iv.
  477-479, _482_; v. 203; vi. _4_, 12

Courland, Anne, Duchess of (Empress of Russia), vi. 417

Courland, Frederick William, Duke of, vi. 417

Courland, James, 3rd Duke of, vi. 417

Courlande, Pierre, last Duc de, _vi. 417_

_Courrier_, _v. 566, 577_

Courtney Melmoth. _See_ Pratt, Samuel Jackson

Courtney, W.P., _English Whist_, _vi. 507_

Coutts, Mrs., _iv. 541_; Byron's "Mrs. Rabbi;" _Vivian Grey's_ "Mrs.
  Million," vi. 504

Covent Garden Theatre, O.P. riots at, _i. 347_; _vi. 11_; _Manfred_ at,
  iv. 78; Lee's _The Three Strangers_ at, _v. 337_

Cowley, Abraham, _i. 403_; _vi. 166_; _Davideis_, _i. 436_

Cowley, Henry Wellesley, 1st Baron, _ii. 79_

Cowley, Mrs. Hannah (_née_ Parkhouse), _i. 314_; _The Belle's
  Stratagem_, _i. 358, 403_; _Siege of Acre_, _i. 436_

Cowley, W.D., translation of Parrot's _Journey to Ararat_, _v. 294_

Cowper, Joseph Meadows, _Memorial Inscriptions, etc._, _vi. 422_

Cowper, Lady (afterwards Palmerston), _i. 301_

Cowper, William, mentioned in _English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers_, i.
  362; _The Task_, iv. 174; vi. 348; Hayley's biography of, _i. 321_;
  _Milton_, _v. 218_

Coxe, William, Archdeacon of Wilts, _Trav. Switz._, _ii. 385_; _Memoirs
  of John, Duke of Marlborough_, vi. 174

Crabbe, George, i. _306_, 365; vi. 6, 75; vii. 49; _Resentment_, iii.
  128

"Crane," to, vi. 524

Crashaw, Richard, vi. 166

Crassus, ii. 405; _iv. 264_

Creech, Thomas, _Translation of Horace_, vi. 247

Cremâ, v. 138

Cremâ, Augustinus de, _ii. 340_

Creon, king of Corinth, _i. 170_

Crespan, Gio., _Della Vita e delle lettere di Luigi Carrer_, _iv. 457_

Crespi, the tenor, _vi. 206_

Cressy, battle of, i. 2

Crete, _v. 127_

Creusa, i. 159

Crib, i. 466

_Critical Review_, iii. _473_, 499, _518_; iv. 6, _13, 27_, 81, _99_

Croesus, iii. 519

Croker, John Wilson, _ii. 4, 187_; iii. _157_, 217; iv. _74_, 157,
  _339_; _v. 546_; _vi. 482_; vii. 49; article on Keats in _Q.R._, _vi.
  445_; _vii. 76_

Croly, D.D., Rev. George, _Paris in 1815_; _Catiline_; _Salathiel_; _The
  Angel of the World_, vi. 444, _445_

Cromwell, Oliver, i. 122, 123; ii. 292, 394, _453_; iv. 334; _v. 560_;
  vi. 174; _vii. 35_

_Cronaca Augustini_, _v. 190_

_Cronaca Dolfin_, v. 117, 118, _121, 172_

Crosby and Co., B., i. xii, _234_

_Crosby's Magazine_, _i. 368_

Crossing the Line, v. 616

Croupade, ii. 70

Crousaz-Crétet, Léon de, _vi. 264_

Cruikshank, drawing of Jackson's rooms, _i. 434_; frontispiece to
  Rowfant Library Catalogue, _iv. 508_

Crusaders, the, _i. 117_

Cruscanti, the, _iv. 152_

Crusius, Martinus, _Turco-Græcia_, _iii. 122_

Ctesias of Cnidos, _Persica_, v. 3, 4, _11_; _vi. 122_

Ctesilaus, _ii. 431_

Cuba, _iii. 296_

Cuesta, ii. 89

Culloden, battle of, i. 173; ii. 292; _vi. 12_

Cumberland, Ernest Augustus, Duke of, and King of Hanover, gazetted
  Field-Marshal 1813, vii. 31

Cumberland, William Augustus, Duke of, vi. 12

Cumberland, Princess Olive of, _iv. 541_

Cumberland, Richard, _Wheel of Fortune_, i. 45, _344_; referred to in
  _English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers_, i. _306, 314_, 343; _The West
  Indian_; _The Jew_, _i. 344_; and Townsend, _i. 403_; _Observer_, _i.
  414_; _iii. 85_; _Exodiad_; _Calvary_, _i. 436_

Cumourgi (Courmourgi or Cumurgi), Ali, iii. 442, 455

Cunningham, Allan, _vi. 3_

Curll, a bookseller, i. 220, 326

Curran, John Philpot, _ii. 236_; iv. 561; vi. 450; _Life of_, iv. 555;
  "Longbow from Ireland," vi. 509

Currie, M.D., James, _Works of Robert Burns, with an Account of his
  Life, etc_., vi. 174

_Curse of Minerva_, i. _378_, 451-474; ii. ix, _33, 106, 107, 168, 192,
  252, 366_; iii. 270

Curtis, Sir William, v. 578; _vii. 68_

Curtius, Q., _Hist. Alexand._, _vi. 226_

Curwens of Workington Hall, the, _v. 622_

Curzon, _Visits to Monasteries of the Levant_, ii. 294

Cuvier, le Bon G., _Recherches sur les Ossemens Fossiles_, etc., v. 210;
  vi. 385, 415

Cyanean Symplegades, _vii. 10_

Cyanometer, _vi. 216_

Cyaxares, _v. 107_

Cybele, ii. 328

Cyclades, vi. 118, 203

Cymar, or simar, a shroud, iii. 143

_Cymbeline_, _vi. 487_

Cypress tree, "the only constant mourner o'er the dead," iii. 99

Cyprus, iv. 400

Cyrus, king of Persia, v. 5; vi. 572

Czaplinski, Governor of Poland, _iv. 211_


D

d'Abrantés, Duke (Junot), _ii. 39, 40_

d'Acerenza, François Pignatelli de Belmonte, Duc, _vi. 417_

d'Acerenza, Jeanne Catherine, Duchesse, _vi. 417_

Dacians, the, _ii. 412_

Dacier, M., i. 402; _Aristotle_, _vi. 182_

Dacre, Charlotte. _See_ Byrne, Mrs.

Dacre, Lady (Mrs. Wilmot), vii. 48

D'Alembert, Jean-le-Rond, ii. 209; _v. 554_; _vi. 63_

Dalkeith, Countess of, _i. 310_

Dallas, Rev. Alexander, i. 387; ii. xvi

Dallas, Judge, _i. 495_

Dallas, R.C., his copy of _British Bards_, i. xiv, 293, _298_, 322;
  Byron's letters to, i. 294, _347, 359, 404_; ii. xi, xii, xiv, xviii,
  _15, 24, 30, 32, 37, 65, 73, 83_, 95, _104, 105, 161-163_, 208; _iii.
  129_; _iv. 125_; _vii. 9_; Fitzgerald's and Byron's _jeux d'esprit_,
  _i. 298_; _Recollections of the Life of Lord Byron_, i. _305_, 387;
  ii. ix-xii, xiv, xv, 89, _104, 120, 176_; _iii. 107_; iv. 446; _MS. of
  Childe Harold_, ii. xvi, _15_, 16, 17, 19, 22-24, 27, 29, 30, 32, 33,
  37, 38, 41-43, 45, 46, 48-52, 54, 56, 57, 60, 62, 64, 66, 82, 83,
  100-102, 105-107, 110, 112-116, 126, 131, 135, 138-140, 146, 147, 149,
  150, 155, 157, 159-162, 328, 329, 336, 341, 342, 352, 370, 373, 382,
  385, 413, 419, 421, 443, 451, 458, 460; a suppressed Note on Spain and
  Portugal, ii. 87; on _Cain_, v. 199; certain "ludicrous stanzas" of
  _The Island_, _v. 615_; MS. _of The Island_, v. 587, 589, 590, 592,
  595-597, 600-604, 611, 612, 615, 621, 625, 632, 636, 637, 639; _Don
  Juan MS_., vi. 143, 144, 150, 159, 167, 168, 170; "Yes! wisdom shines
  in all his mien," vii. 12; MS. of _On a Royal Visit, etc._, _vii. 36_

Dallas, Robert, _iii. 18_

Dallaway, Rev. James, _Constantinople Ancient and Modern_, _iii. 90,
  166_

Dalrymple, Sir Hew, _ii. 39, 40_

dal Sale, Alberto, _iii. 506_

Dalzell, Sir George, _Shipwrecks and Disasters at Sea_, vi. _87, 89-92,
  94-96_, 99, _102-110, 112_

Damætus, i. 128

Damas d'Antigny, Joseph Elizabeth Roger, Comte de, vi. 312

Damascus, _ii. 151_

Damon, _i. 175_

Dampier, discoverer of the bread-fruit, _v. 596_

d'Ancona, A., _Manuale della Letteratura Italiana_, _iv. 536_

Dandies, the, iv. 176

Dandolo, Doge Andrea, iv. 352, _366, 438, 459_

Dandolo, Giovanni, _iv. 356_

Dandolo, Doge Henry, ii. _329, 336_, 337, 475

Dandolo, Conte Girolamo Antonio, _Sui Quattro Cavalli, etc._; _La Caduia
  della Repubblica di Venezia_, _iv. 456, 457_

Danes at battle of Copenhagen, _i. 468_

Daniel, _To the Lady Lucy, Countess of Bedford_, iv. 239

Daniel, prophecies of, _ii. 78_; the writing on the wall, iii. 398; in
  the lions' den, vi. 235; _Book of_, _vi. 504_

Dante, ii. 355, 375, 494, 503; iv. 237-276; v. 562; vi. 146, 212, 213,
  303; his tomb, ii. 371, 494; iv. 237, 244; Ricci's monument to, _ii.
  375_; _Inferno_, iii. 227, 249, 270; iv. _23_, 238, 245, _254, 272_,
  314, 316; vi. _36, 37, 105_, 289, 408, 606; _Div. Commedia_, iv. 237,
  570; _Paradiso_, _iv. 347_; _La Vita Nuova_, _iv. 248, 253_; _Sonnet_,
  _iv. 249, 253_; _Il Convito_, _iv. 253, 256, 274, 318_; _Purgatorio_,
  _iv. 256, 263, 272_; _vi. 181_; _Epistola IX. Amico Florentino_, iv.
  276

Danton, Georges Jacques, vi. 13

Danube, vi. 304, 306, 331, 368

Dardanelles, the, _iii. 13_; vi. 208

d'Argens, Marquis, _Lettres Juives_, _iii. 123_

_Darkness_, iv. 42; _v. 315_

Darmesteter, James (_Notes to Childe Harold_), _ii. 67, 106, 115, 134,
  149, 236, 325, 345, 358, 419_; translation of _Zend-Avesta_, _iv. 112_

Darnley, Lord, _vii. 29_

Daru, P., _Histoire de la République de Vénise_, iv. 332, _471_; v. 115,
  _124, 179, 188, 190, 195_; vi. 199; _Histoire de la République
  Française_, _v. 196_

Darwin, Charles Robert, _i. 367_

Darwin, Erasmus, _The Botanic Garden_; _The Temple of Nature_, i. _306_,
  367

Davenport, actor, as "Ulric" in _Werner_, v. 324

David, i. 490

Davies, Scrope B., ii. 211, 212; _iv. 179_; _Parisina_ dedicated to,
  iii. 501

Davies, Thomas, _Massinger_, _i. 304_; _Life of Garrick_, _i. 409, 428_

Davis, Henry Edward, _ii. 283_

Davison, Mrs., iv. 70

Davison, T., printer, i. 452, 453; _iii. 259, 315, 323_; _vii. 58_

Davoust, General, _v. 550_

Davy, Lady (Mrs. Apreece), _iv. 541_

Davy, Sir H., _i. 307_; iv. 472, 570, 586; his safety-lamp, vi. 51

Davy, Martin, Master of Caius College, Cambridge, _iii. 170_

Dead Sea, ii. 237, 294

_Death of Calmar and Orla_, i. 177

Debora, or Azzrum, Cain's sister, _v. 226_

Decies, Lord, Archbishop of Tuam, _i. 390_

Dee river, Aberdeenshire, i. 193, 238

_Deformed Transformed, The_, _ii. 423, 483_; _iv. 15_; _v. 72, 371_,
  469-534, _606_; _vi. 500_

d'Egville, _Don Quichotte, ou les Noces de Gamache_, _i. 347_

de la Bastie, M. le Bimard, Baron, _Mémoires de l'Académie, etc._, ii.
  480, 481, _482_

De la Berge, _Essai sur le règne de Trajan_, _ii. 412_

de la Croix, Sieur, _i. 493_

Delacroix, Ferdinand Victor Eugène, painter, _iv. 461_

de la Guilletière, Le Sieur, _Lacedémone Ancienne et Nouvelle_, _iii.
  122_

de la Houssaie, Sieur Amelott, _History of the Government of Venice_,
  _iv. 358_

de la Motraye, Aubrey, _Voyages_, _vi. 295, 296_

Delano, Amasa, _Narrative of Voyages, etc._, _v. 622_

De la Pryme, Charles, _iv. 46_

De La Rose, Pierre, _vii. 3_

Delavigne, Casimir Jean François, _Marino Faliero, tragédie en cinq
  actes_, iv. 329, _367_

Delawarr, George John, 5th Earl of ("Euryalus"), i. 7, 100; _ii. 22_

Delawarr, Thomas, 3rd Earl of, _i. 101_

Delbora, or Awina, Abel's sister, _v. 226_

Delhis, or delis, Turkish bravos, "Forlorn Hope," ii. 136, 149; iii.
  168, 459; vi. 312

Della Cruscan School, i. _304, 323_, 357, _358, 441, 444_; Academy
  (Florence), _i. 358_; ii. _357_, 485

della Scala, Francesco can Grande, v. 562

Delort, M., _iv. 514_

Delphi, i. 425; ii. 15, _60, 61_, 85, 92

Delphin, _Martial_, _vi. 27_

Delpini, Charles Anthony, _Don Juan; or, The Libertine destroyed_, vi.
  xvi, _11_

Del Pinto, vi. 227, 228

Delvinachi (Illyria), ii. _134_, 174, 177, 202

Demeter, _v. 570_

Demetrius, Byron's servant, _ii. 75_

Demetrius Poliorcetes, v. 486

Democracy, "an Aristocracy of Blackguards," _vi. 381_

Democritus, i. 422

Demosthenes, i. 29; ii. 301

Denham, Clapperton, and Oudney, _Narrative of Travels ... in Northern
  and Central Africa_, _vi. 474_

Denman, Lord, i. _366_; ii. 291

Dennis, John, i. 220, 326; _iii. 279_; _Essay on the Operas after the
  Italian manner, etc._, i. 410

Dent, M.P., John ("Dog Dent"), vii. 49

Denvil ("Manfred Denvil"), the actor, iv. 78

d'Epinay, Madame, _ii. 266_

_De Principatibus Italiæ Tractatus Varii_, _ii. 478_

Derby, Lord, _Homer's Iliad_, _vi. 339_

d'Erceville, Rolland, _Recherches sur les Prérogatives des Dames chez
  les Gaulois, etc._, ii. 6

Deropoli, plain of, ii. 134

Dervish Tahiri, ii. 175, 176; _iii. 134, 450_

Dervishes, the, i. 492; iii. 254

Derwentwater, _iv. 525_

Desaix de Voygoux, Louis Charles Antoine, vi. 14

Descamisados, or Sansculottes of the Spanish Revolution, vi. 456

Deshayes, ballet-master at the King's Theatre, i. 347

De Silver and Co., i. 452, 453

des Issarts, Marquis de Forbin, _v. 566_

Desmoulins, Camille, _vi. 14_

d'Este, Marquis, of Tuscany, ii. 354; iii. 503

d'Este, Alfonso, _ii. 486_

d'Este II., Alfonso, Duke of Ferrara, iv. 266

d'Este, Borso, _ii. 354_

d'Este, Ercolo, _ii. 354_

d'Este, Hugo, iii. 503

d'Este, Leonora, _ii. 355_; iv. 145, 147, 148, 151, 152

d'Este, Lionel, _ii. 354_

d'Este, Luigi, Cardinal, _ii. 486_; _iv. 146_

d'Este, Niccolo, Marquis, _iii. 505-507_

d'Este, Ugo, _iii. 505-507_

_Destruction of Sennacherib, The_, iii. 404

_Detached Thoughts_, _i. 99, 205_; _ii. 301_; _iv. 75, 179, 562, 580,
  584_; _v. 485_; _vi. 270, 360, 509_

Dettingen, battle of, _vi. 12_

_Deuteronomy_, ii. 294; _iv. 499_

_Devil's Drive, The_, _i. 30_; vii. 21-34

Devonshire, Elizabeth, Duchess of, _ii. 410_; _iii. 31_; _vi. 70, 488_

Devonshire, Georgiana, Duchess of, v. 329, _378_

Devonshire, William Spencer, 6th Duke of (Byron's "Duke of Dash"), vi.
  50

Dewick and Clarke, printers, _vii. 3_

D'Herbelot, _Bibliothèque Orientale_, _ii. 149_; iii. 76, _109, 120,
  145, 173_; _iv. 113_; v. 280; _vi. 292_

d'Houdetot, Comtesse, ii. 265, 300

Diana, _vi. 151_

Dibdin, Thomas John, i. 341; _iv. 338_; _The Jew and the Doctor_;
  _Mother Goose_, i. 345, 346; _The Grinders, or more Grist to the
  Mill_, _vii. 61_

Dickens, Charles, v. 114; _vi. 208_; _Tale of Two Cities_, _vi. 435_

_Dictionary of Antiquities_, _vi. 151_

_Dictionary of National Biography_, _ii. 25, 280_; _iv. 501, 503, 513_;
  _v. 589_; _vi. 67_

Diderot, _ii. 266_

Dido, i. 157

Diez, _iv. 171_

Digentia river, ii. 523

_Dilettanti Society_, i. _378_, 379, 454; ii. xi, 109

Dillman, Professor, _Ethiopic Text of Book of Enoch_, _v. 302_

Dillon, Charles, actor, iv. 78

Dinner-bell, "the Tocsin of the Soul," vi. 232

Diocletian, _iii. 308_

Diocletian's (Pompey's) Pillar, v. 548

Diodati, Villa, ii. _257_, 300

Diodorus Siculus, _Bibliothecæ Historicæ_, v. 3-5, 11, _14, 21, 81, 106,
  405, 543_

Diogenes, ii. 241; v 565; vi. 303, 436

Diogenes Laertius, i. 18, _414_; _De Vitâ et Sententiis_, vi. 585

Dion Cassius, ii. 179; _Hist. Rom._, ii. _411_, 510, _511_, 512; _iv.
  370_

Dionisus, G.J., _Canonico di Verona_, _ii. 496_

Dionysius, ii. 413; _Antiq. Rom._, ii. 510, 512, 513, 518

Dionysius the Areopagite, _Celestial Hierarchy_, _v. 286_

Dionysius of Halicarnassus, _ii. 497_

Dionysius the Younger, _iii. 311_

Dionysus, India occupied by, v. 21

Dirce river, ii. 189

Disdar, ii. 187

Disraeli, Benjamin, _Vivian Grey_, _vi. 504, 506_

Disraeli, Isaac (_Curiosities of Literature_), ii. 468, 470; iii. 217,
  499; _vi. 555_

d'Istria, Count Capo, v. 575

Djerrid, or jerreed, Turkish javelin, iii. 97

Dniéper river, vi. 201, 202, _208_, 211, _233_

Dniester river, _vi. 362_

Dodona, site of, ii. 132

Dodsley, A., _The Ordinary_, _ii. 17_; _Description of the Leasowes_,
  _iii. 41_; _Plays_, v. 200

Dodwell, E., _Classical Tour_, i. 455; iii. 272; _Tour through Greece_,
  _vi. 151_

Dog-tax Bill, 1796, _vii. 49_

D'Ohsson, Mouradja, _Tableau générale de l'Empire Othoman_, ii. _136_,
  206; _iii. 176, 206_

Dolabella, _ii. 405_

Dolce, Carlo, vi. 502

_Dolfin Cronaca_, v. 117, 118, _121, 172_

Dolfino, Doge Giovanni, ii. 475

d'Olivet, M. l'Abbé (Thoulier), _Histoire de l'Académie Française_, ii.
  485

Dolman, Miss Maria, iii. 41

_Domestic Pieces (Poems)_, _ii. 247, 426_

Domitian, _ii. 408_; iv. 334

Domitius Marsus, i. 73

Don, brig of, vi. 405

_Don Juan_, _i. 260, 203, 362, 403, 434_; _ii. 30, 59, 139, 149, 227,
  281, 332, 342, 366, 372, 374, 441_; _iii. 13, 397, 463, 481, 488, 490,
  494, 495_; iv. _16, 17, 47, 60, 125, 132, 165_, 184, _195, 226, 232_,
  238, _243_, 279, 280, 475-477, _566_, 570, _578_; v. _159_, 202-204,
  _351, 396, 497, 568_, 584; vi.; _vii. 9, 25, 76, 77_

Don Quixote, i. 490

Donati, Corso, _iv. 253_

Donati, Gemma, iv. 253

Donate, Andrea, _v. 123_

Donate, Ermolao (or Almoro), v. 116, 134

Donatus, Tib. Cl., _ii. 514_; _Life of Virgil_, _ii. 407_

Donne, Dr., vii. 19

Donoughmore, Earl of, Byron's speech on motion for Committee on Roman
  Catholic claims, _iv. 561_

Doomsday Book, _vi. 411_

Dorchester, Lady, ii. 319; iv. 548, _566_; _vi. 608_

Doria, Paganino, _iv. 356_

Doria, Pietro (Genoese admiral), ii. 338, 476, 497

Doria, transcript of Sanudo's _Diaries_, iv. 326

Doroshénko, Peter, President of the Western Ukraine, iv. 201

Dorotheus of Mitylene, Archbishop of Monembasia, _Univ. Hist._, ii. 198

D'Orsay, Count Alfred, "Cupidon déchaîné," vi. _507_, 526, 547

Dorset, Charles Sackville, Earl of, _To all you Ladies, etc._, i. 198,
  _418_

Dorset, George John Frederick, 4th Duke of, i. 194; iii. _423_, 425

Douce, Francis, edition of Holbein's _Dance of Death_, _vi. 555_

Dover, vi. 420

Dover, Lord, preface to Walpole's _Letters to Sir H. Mann_, _iv. 339_

Dowden, Edward, _Life of Shelley_, ii. _145, 258_, 300; iv. 475

Downie, Commodore, _iv. 198_; _vi. 508_

Drachenfels, Castle of, ii. 249, 295; vi. 419

Dramali, Turkish general, _v. 556_

"Drapery misses," vi. 442

Drayton, Michael, _The Barons' Wars_, _iii. 405_

_Dream, The_, _i. 210_; _ii. 219, 220, 260, 332_; iv. 31-41, _63, 404,
  544_

Dresden, re-entered by Napoleon, v. 553; battle of, _vi. 14_

Drexel Institute, _vii. 63_

Dromedary, "ship of the desert," v. 606

Drouineau, Gustave, _Rienzo_, _ii. 415_

Druid oak, Newstead Abbey, vi. 497

"Druids," the, i. 443; ii. 213

Drummond, Sir William, iv. 337; _A Review of the Government of Athens
  and Sparta_; _Herculanensia_, ii. 204 _Academical Questions_, _ii.
  422_; _vi. 528_

Drury Lane Theatre, burnt, i. 417; _Byron's Address_, iii. 51; iv. 69;
  _Manfred_ at, iv. 78; _Marino Faliero at_, iv. 324, 328; the
  sub-Committee, _iv. 338, 584_; _Sardanapalus_ at, v. 2; _The Two
  Foscari_ at, v. 114; _Werner_ at, v. 324; Lee's _The New Peerage_ at,
  _v. 337_; _Don Juan: or, The Libertine_ at, _vi. 11_; _Nourjahad_ at,
  _vii. 33_ _Manuel_; _Ina_ at, _vii. 48_

Drury, Henry, _i. 25, 84, 88_; ii. xvii, _100_; _iii. 13, 27_; _vi.
  280_; _vii. 8, 10_

Drury, Dr. Joseph, Headmaster of Harrow ("Probus"), i. _15_, 16, _17,
  25, 86_, 89, 90, 94, 103; ii. 387

Drury, Mark, _i. 17, 89_

Dryden, John, on the Earl of Dorset, _i. 198_; his _Virgil_, i. 220,
  477; referred to in _English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers_, i. 305,
  306, 312; Byron's support of, _i. 368_; a translator, _i. 375_; in
  _Hints from Horace_, i. 395, 397; _Almanzor_, i. 398; a caricature of,
  _i. 401_; _Alexander's Feast_, _ii. 123_; _iv. 446_; _Absalom and
  Achitophel_, _ii. 420_; _vi. 482_; _Cymon and Iphigenia_, iii. 59;
  "the ponderous ball expires," _iii. 493_; _Palamon and Arcite_, _iv.
  26_; Georgics, _iv. 208_; a borrower from Boccaccio, _iv. 316_; to
  "partake," _iv. 362_; "Thou shall believe in," vi. 74; _Indian
  Emperor_, _vi. 178_; _Theodore and Honoria_, _vi. 180_; "Dedication"
  of the _Æneis_, _vi. 182_; his publisher Tonson, _vii. 57_

_Dublin Examiner_, _iii. 473_

_Dublin University Magazine_, iv. 82; vi. xx

Dubois, Edward, _My Pocket-Book, etc._, _i. 378, 379_

Dubost, i. 390

Dubourdieu, Admiral, _iii. 25_

Ducange, _Glossarium ad Scriptores Med., etc._, _ii. 435_

Ducato, Cape (Leucadia's Cape), ii. 125

_Duel, The_, iv. 542

Duff, Mary (Mrs. Robert Cockburn), _i. 192_

Duff, Sir M.E. Grant, _Notes from a Diary_, i. 293

Dufferin, Lady, _i. 343_

Dugdale, _Monasticon_, v. 200, _207_

Dugdale, Sir William, _A Short View of the Late Troubles in England_,
  _vi. 174_

_Duke William_, wreck of the transport, _vi. 95_

Dulauloy, General, _vii. 24_

Dumarsais, _i. 402_

Dumouriez (Dumourier), General Charles François Duperier, _Memoirs_, vi.
  12, _13_

Dunbar, battle of, _ii. 394_

Duncan, _vi. 14_

Dunning, John, _iv. 513_

Dupaty, President, ii. 508

Dupont, Marshal, _ii. 54_

Duppa, R., _Life of Michael Angelo_, _iv. 272, 273_

Dupré, F., _v. 554_

Dura, in Assyria, vi. 504

Duran, H., _Romancero General_, _iv. 529_

Duris, the historian, _v. 11_

Dwarfs, vi. 242

Dyce, Rev. Alexander, _iii. 348_; _Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay_, _vi.
  78_

Dyer, George, _Country Walk_, _iii. 330_; _Sketch of Southey_, _vi. 175_

Dying gladiator, statue of the, ii. 432


E

_E Nihilo Nihil; or, An Epigram Bewitched_, vii. 55

_Earl of Abergavenny_, wreck of the ship, _vi. 91_

Early English Text Society, _v. 207, 496_

_Early Poems from Various Sources_, i. 210-285

Earthquakes, ii. 377, 505

East India Co., _i. 377_; _vi. 236_

Eastlake, Sir C.L., his picture "Byron's Dream," _iv. 37_

_Eccentric Review_, _i. 322_

_Ecclesiastes_, i. 307; vi. 303

_Ecclesiasticus_, _ii. 155_

Eckermann, _Conversations with Goethe_, iv. 157, 327, 328; v. 119,
  _122_, 199, 204

Eckersall, Harriet (Mrs. T.R. Malthus), _vi. 461_

Eckersall, John, _vi. 461_

_Eclectic Review_, i. _379_, 430, _431, 432_; iii. 444, _493_, 500; iv.
  6, 158, 203, 240; v. 204, 329; vi. 162

Edgcumbe, or Edgcombe, Richard, _ii. 430_; _iii. 72_; _iv. 15_

Edgeworth, Maria, vi. 18

_Edinburgh Annual Register_, _i. 435, 436_

_Edinburgh Evening Post_, _i. 430_

_Edinburgh Monthly Magazine_, afterwards _Blackwood's Edinburgh
  Magazine_, _q.v._

_Edinburgh Review_, i. xiv, 202, 292, 294, _301-303, 305, 310, 330, 331,
  336-341_, 382, 392, 395, _429, 432_; ii. xv, _109_, 196, 201, 204,
  213, 315, _360_; iii. 77, 151, 219, 377; iv. 6, _48_, 80, 158, 239,
  313, 329, _342, 513, 574_; v. 5, 119, 204, 280, 282, _338, 551_; vi.
  xx, _9, 51, 67_, 76, _172, 175, 403, 445, 459, 551_; _vii. 32_

_Edinburgh Weekly Journal_, vi. xix

Edleston (Byron's "Cornelian"), i. 66; _ii. 104_

Edom, Sea of, _vi. 122_

Edu, Rajah of Ellichpur, _v. 631_

Edward the Black Prince, _i. 107_; vi. 422

Edward III., _vi. 496_

Edward VI., _iv. 542_

Edwards, Captain, of the _Pandora_ frigate, v. 584

Edwards, Dr., Master of Sidney Sussex Coll., Cambridge, _i. 417_

Egan, Pierce, _Life in London_, _i. 321, 434_; _vi. 431-433_; _Anecdotes
  of the Turf_, _vi. 433_

Egeria, ii. _454_, 515; Grotto of, ii. 416

_Egerton MSS._, in British Museum, i. _235_, 293, 387; ii. xvi

Eginhard, _iv. 288_

_Egotism. A Letter to J.T. Becher_, i. 247

Egripo, the Negropont, iii. 173

Egypt, evacuated by the French, _ii. 108_; the Pyramids of, v. 550

Ehrenbreitstein, ii. 251, 297

Eiger, the Grosse, _iv. 129_

Ekenhead, Lieutenant, _iii. 13_

Elam, v. 4

Elchingen, Michel Ney, Duke of, _vi. 373_

Eldon, John Scott, Earl of, ii. 213; iv. 328, 482; v. 203; vi. _460_,
  569; vii. 13, 29

Elector Palatine, the, _i. 2_

Electric telegraph, invention of the, iv. 505

_Elegiac Stanzas_, _i. 5_

_Elegiac Stanzas on the Death of Sir Peter Parker, Bart._, iii. xix, 417

_Elegy_, vii. 75

_Elegy on Newstead Abbey_, i. 116

Elena, Duchess, _iv. 367_

Elgin, Lady, i. 452

Elgin, Lord, and the Elgin Marbles, i. 378, 452-474; ii. x, xi, _100,
  106_, 108-110, 167, 168, 172, 188

Elizabeth, Princess, _i. 437_

Elizabeth, Queen, _i. 197_; _ii. 453_

Ellenborough, Lord, vi. 265; vii. 29

Ellice, _v. 555_

Ellis, A.G. (British Museum), _iii. 95_

Ellis, F.S., ed. _Golden Legend_, _iv. 494_; _vi. 33, 230, 273_

Ellis, George Agar, _i. 396_; ii. xiii; iii. 77, _94_, 151, 219, 321;
  _iv. 514_

Elliston, Robert W., iii. 51; _iv. 338_; _Memoirs of_, iv. 328

Elmsley, Professor, _vii. 52_

Eloïsa, v. 634

Elze, Karl, _Life of Lord Byron_, i. xi, _4, 18_; _ii. 248, 352_; _iv.
  14, 543_

Encina, Juan del, _Teatro Completo_, _v. 207_

_Encyclopædia Biblica_, v. 4, 219, 491

_Encyclopædia Britannica_, _iii. 107, 130_; _v. 558_

_Encyclopædia Metropolitana_, _ii. 415_

_Encyclopédie, La Grande_, _v. 566_

Endor, witch of, iii. 392; iv. 108

_Endorsement to the Deed of Separation, in the April of 1816_, vii. 41

Engen, battle of, _vi. 14_

Englaender, Dr. D., _Lord Byron's Mazeppa_, _iv. 214, 220_

_Englische Studien_, iv. _214_, 324, 329

_English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers_, i. xiv, _128, 203_, 289-384, 387,
  _406, 409, 431, 443, 448_, 453, 454; ii. ix, x, _108, 109, 202, 304,
  205, 366_; _iii. 32, 196, 210, 324, 435_; _iv. 21, 182, 244, 519,
  555_; v. 537, 540; _vi. 50, 67, 292, 587_; _vii. 6, 15_

_Enigma on the Letter I_ (spurious), iii. xxi

Ennui, "the best of friends," vi. 176; "a growth of English root," vi.
  512

_Enoch, Book of_, v. 281, _286, 291_, 302, _311_

Ensor, Miss Fanny, as "Myrrha" in _Sardanapalus_, v. 2

Eos (Dawn), _v. 497_

Epaminondas, ii. 155; vi. 376

_Ephesians_, _v. 233_

Epicurus, vi. 139

_Epigram_, vii. 65

_Epigram. From the French of Rulhières_, vii. 62

_Epigram on an Old Lady who had some curious notions respecting the
  Soul_, vii. 1

_Epigram on the Braziers' Address to be presented in armour by the
  Company to Queen Caroline_, vii. 72

_Epigrams_, vii. 81

_Epilogue_, vii. 63

Epirus, _ii. 127_

_Episode of Nisus and Euryalus_, i. xii, 151, _177_

_Epistle from Mr. Murray to Dr. Polidori_, vii. 47

_Epistle to a Friend in answer to some lines, etc._, ii. _163_; iii. 28

_Epistle to Augusta_, _ii. 247, 456, 457_; iv. _56_, 57, _152_; _vi.
  498_

_Epistle to Mr. Murray_, vii. 51

_Epitaph_, vii. 65

_Epitaph for Joseph Blacket, late Poet and Shoemaker_, _i. 359_; vii. 11

_Epitaph for William Pitt_, vii. 64

_Epitaph on a Beloved Friend_, i. 18; _ii. 137_

_Epitaph on John Adams of Southwell_, vii. 1

Erasmus, ii. 281; _Naufragium_, _vi. 93_

Eratosthenes of Cyrene, _Catasterismi_, _ii. 439_

Eratostratus, i. 467

Erechtheum, the, _i. 463_; _ii. 106_

Erechtheus, ii. 102

Erizzo, Nicolas, ii. 472; v. 117, 134

Erneis, or Ernysius, vi. 410, _411_

Ernst, W., _Memoirs of the Life of Lord Chesterfield_, _vi. 525_

Eros, iv. 105

Erskine, Thomas, Lord ("Strongbow from Tweed"), i. 429; iii. 45; vi.
  509, 596; _vii. 66_

Esarhaddon, v. 4

Esau, _v. 285_

Eschinard, _Descrizione di Roma, etc._, _ii. 516, 517_

Esdaile, Mrs. (Shelley's eldest daughter), _ii. 13_

Espadas, or matadors, ii. 68

Éspinasse, F., _Life of Voltaire_, _ii. 282_

Essling, battle of, _vi. 14_

Este. _See_ d'Este

Esterhazy, Prince, v. 539

Eteocles, v. 403

Ethiopians, _Book of Enoch_ preserved by the, _v. 302_

Etna, v. 55

Eton, William, _A Survey of the Turkish Empire_, ii. 191, 194

Etruria, king of, ii. 90

Eucrates, _ii. 393_

Euganean hills, ii. 483

Eugene, Prince, _Mémoires_, _iii. 256, 455_; iv. 331

Eunapius Sardianus, _Vitæ Philosophorum et Sophistarum, Philostratorum,
  etc._, _iv. 105_

Euphrates, river, v. 15, 108

Euripides, _Medea_, i. 168; vii. 10; _Hippolytus_, _v. 496_

_European Magazine_, _i. 343_; iii. 444, 500; _iv. 99, 490_; v. 329

Eurotas' banks (Laconia), ii. 150

Euryalus, i. 151, _175_; _ii. 387_

Eurystheus, _ii. 431_

Eusebius, ii. 513; v. 281; _Chron._, _v. 107_

Eustace, _Classical Tour in Italy_, i. 452; ii. _440_, 500, 516, _524_

Euthanasia, iii. 39

Eutropius, _Hist. Rom. Brev._, _ii. 411_; the Eunuch, vi. 8

Euxine Sea, ii. 455; vi. 219, 220

Evans, Mr., Master at Harrow, _i. 25, 89_

Eve's curse, v. 271

_Evening Statesman_, _i. 319_

_Examiner_, _ii. 215_; iii. xx, 304, _389, 427, 428, 436, 438_, 532-534,
  _538_; iv. 478; v. 204, 540; vi. xx; vii. 17, _40_

Eyre, trunk-maker, _i. 437_

Ezekiel, _iv. 43_


F

Fabius, i. 220

Fabricius, _Script. Gr. Var._, _iii. 122_

Facciolati, ii. 92

Fagiono, Stefano, iv. 464

Fagiuolo, Niccolo, iv. 464

Fagniani, Maria (Lady Yarmouth), _i. 501_

Fairburn, John, _The Stripling Bard; or, The Apostate Lartreate_, _iv.
  521_

Fairfax, Edward, translation of Tasso's _Ger. Lib._, _iii. 362_; _iv.
  296_

Falbowski, the _pane_ (Lord), iv. 201, _212_

Falconer, William, _The Shipwreck_, ii. 169

Faliero, Dogaressa Aluica, _iv. 448_

Faliero, Bertuccio, iv. 346, _367_, 464

Faliero, Lucia, _iv. 365_

Faliero, Marino, iv. 239, 240; story of, iv. 462; Petrarch on the
  Conspiracy of, iv. 468

Faliero, Doge Ordetafo, iv. 336, 390

Faliero, Doge Vitale, iv. 336, _390_

Falkland, Charles John Cary, 9th Viscount, i. 351

Falkland, Lucius Cary, Lord, i. 121, _128, 432_; _iv. 21_

Falkner, Mr., i. xii

Fandango, the, i. 492

Fanshawe, Harriet, _Enigma on the Letter H._, iii. xx

_Fare Thee Well_, iii. 537

_Farewell! if ever fondest prayer_, iii. 409

_Farewell Petition to J.C.H., Esq._, vii. 7

_Farewell to England_ (spurious), iii. xx

_Farewell to Malta_, iii. 24

_Farewell to the Muse_, i. 254

Farish, Rev. W., _i. 417_

Farquhar, _The Beaux' Stratagem_, i. 415; iv. 481; _Recruiting Officer_,
  ii. 88

Fas, or Fez, vi. 197, 198

Faucit, Helen, as "Angiolina" in _Marino Faliero_, iv. 324; as "Marina"
  in _The Two Foscari_, v. 114; as "Josephine" in _Werner_, v. 324

Faunus, Lucius, _De Antiq. Urb. Rom._, ii. 510-513

Fauvel, M., ii. _99_, 168, 187, 190

Favell, _iv. 225_

Favila, Duke of Cantabria, _v. 558_

Fazillac, M. Roux-, _iv. 514_

Fazzioli, Venetian kerchiefs, vi. 83

Fea, the Abbate, _Spiegazione dei Rami Storia, etc._, _ii. 518_

Feere, consort or mate, ii. 22

"Feeble" used for "foible," vi. 550

Feinagle, Gregor von, vi. 16

Fellowes, Henry Wallop, _vi. 569_

Fénélon, _Télémaque_, _ii. 118_; vi. 303

Fennell, C.A.M., _Ancient Marbles in Great Britain_, i. 455

Fenwick, John, translation of _Dumourier's Memoirs_, _vi. 13_

Ferdinand and Isabella, _ii. 47_

Ferdinand V. of Spain, _vi. 212_

Ferdinand VII. of Spain, ii. 54, 55, _78_, 90, 91; v. 538, 558

Ferdousi, _i. 353_

Ferney, _iv. 53_

Ferrand, M., _Histoire des Trois Démembremens de la Pologne_, _v. 551_

Ferrara, ii. 312, 354, 503, _505_; iv. 141

Ferrara, Alfonso d'Este II., Duke of, iv. 266; _vi. 212_

Ferrari, Girolamo, iii. 441

Festus, _De Verb. Signif._, _ii. 437_

Fewterel, the prize-fighter, _i. 433_

Fiandra, Comte Baldovino di, _iv. 352_

Ficino, _ii. 365, 495_; iv. 280

Fielding, Beau, _iv. 541_

Fielding, _The Tragedy of Tragedies, or the Life and Death of Tom Thumb
  the Great_, i. 313, _389, 392, 436_; _Amelia_, i. 385; _The Golden
  Rump_, _i. 414_; _Jonathan Wild_, ii. 171; iv. 284; _Tom Jones_, _ii.
  386_; iv. 284, 332; _History of the Adventures of Joseph Andrews_, iv.
  284; vi. _254_, 511; _Journey from this World to the Next_, iv. 483,
  _518_; his "superior grossness," vi. xviii, 210; his use of "was,"
  _vi. 208_

Fielding, Sir John, Bow Street magistrate, _i. 416_

Figuranti, vi. 207

Fiji, v. 599

Filicaja, _Poesie Toscaine_, ii. 312, _361_

_Fill the goblet again_, i. 283

Finden, _Illustrations of the Life and Works of Lord Byron_, _ii. 11_

Fingall, Arthur James Plunkett, 8th Earl of, iv. 559

Finlay, _History of Greece_, ii. _107, 139, 140, 146_, 165, _175_, 180,
  _193_, 441; _v. 556_; _vi. 168_; _Greece under Othoman and Venetian
  Domination_, _iii. 166, 194, 195, 481_

Finley, John, the pioneer, _vi. 349_

_First Kiss of Love, The_, i. 82

Fitger, Arthur, iv. 324

Fitzgerald, Colonel, iv. 157

Fitzgerald, Edward, translation of _Rubáiyát_ of Omar Khayyám, iii. 87,
  _109_

Fitzgerald, Lord Edward, iv. 548

Fitzgerald, Percy, _Life of George IV._, _i. 416_

Fitzgerald, W.L., _The Tyrant's Downfall_, _iii. 435_

Fitzgerald, William Thomas (_Nelson's Triumph_; _Tears of Hibernia_;
  _Nelson's Tomb_), i. 297, _444_, 448, 481, 485; iii. 312; _iv. 549_

Fitzpatrick, Richard, _Dorinda: a Town Eclogue_, i. 500

Flaminius, Consul, ii. 505, 508

Flaminius Vacca, _Memorie_, ii. 508, 509, 511, 515

Flash language, instances of, vi. 431-433

Flavian Amphitheatre (Colosseum), Rome, ii. 423-435

Fletcher, _Rule a Wife and Have a Wife_, i. 415; _The Two Noble
  Kinsmen_, _ii. 217_

Fletcher of Saltoun, Andrew, _An Account of a Conversation, etc._, _v.
  602_

Fletcher, William (Byron's servant), ii. 28, _52_; _iii. 381_; _iv.
  367_; vii. 6, 8

Fletcher, Mrs. William, _vi. 22_

Florence, ii. 312; iv. 249; Uffizzi Gallery at, _ii. 365_

_Florence Miscellany_, _i. 358_

Florentine nobility, the, ii. 365

Florus, ii. 179

Foix, Odet de, _v. 498_

Folger, Captain Mayhew, of the American ship _Topaz_, v. 582, _622_

Fontainebleau, Treaty of, ii. 90

Fontenelle, Le Bovier de, _Entretiens sur la Pluralitè des Mondes_, ii.
  198; _iv. 523_; _vi. 246_

Fontenoy, battle of, _vi. 12_

Foote, Samuel, _The Mayor of Garratt_, i. 412

Fop's Alley, i. 410; vii. 58

Forbes, Lady Adelaide; _ii. 447_; vi. 116

Forbes, Sir W., _Life of Beattie_, _ii. 5, 479_

Forbin des Issarts, Marquis de, _v. 566_

Ford, John, _i. 304, 397_; _'Tis Pity she's a Whore_, _iv. 377_

Fold, Richard, _Handbook for Spain_, _ii. 54, 57, 68, 79_; _vi. 116_

Forli, _vi. 212_

Forman, Alfred, _The Metre of Dante's Comedy discussed and exemplified_,
  iv. 239

Forman, H. Buxton, i. xi; _Prose Works of P.B. Shelley_, iv. 3, _18_,
  100; vi. xix; _The Metre of Dante's Comedy, etc._, iv. 239

Forster, John, v. 114

Forster the murderer, _i. 308_; _vi. 50_

Forsyth, Joseph, _Remarks on Antiquities, etc., in Italy_, ii. _435_,
  484

Forsyth, William, _History of the Captivity of Napoleon_, _v. 544-546,
  548_

Forteguerri, _Ricciardetto_, iv. 156, _166, 176, 319_

_Fortunes of Nigel_, _i. 351_

Foscari, Doge Francesco, _ii. 327, 507_; iv. 459; v. 115, 117, 118; _vi.
  199_

Foscari, Jacopo, v. 115

Foscari, Lucrezia (_née_ Contarini), v. 115, _130_

Foscari, Marco, v. 118

Foscari, Maria, or Marina (_née_ Nani), v. 115

Foscari, Nicolò, v. 115

Foscolo, Ugo, ii. 324, 496; iv. 156, _166_, 281, _319, 367, 436, 457_

Foster, Augustus, iii. 31

Foster, Vere, _The Two Duchesses_, _iii. 31_; vii. 15

Foston-le-Clay (Foston, All Saints) Vicarage, vi. 596

Foulon, Joseph François, _vi. 435_

Four-Horse Club, the, _vii. 26_

Fox, C.J., i. 113; _vi. 9_; Byron's _On the Death of Mr._, i. 34;
  _Monodies on_, i. 356; his friend Fitzpatrick, i. 500; one of "the
  wondrous Three," iv. 75; "with Fox's lard was basting William Pitt,"
  iv. 511; _History of James II._, iii. 170; his grave in Westminster
  Abbey, v. 541

Fox, Charles Richard, _ii. 80_

Fracassetti, Giuseppe, _Petrarch's Letters_, _ii. 351_

_Fragment, A_, i. 21, _192_; iii. 123; iv. _47_, 51, _193_, 203

_Fragment from the Monk of Athos_, iii. 18

_Fragment of an Epistle to Thomas Moore_, vii. 39

_Fragment of a Novel by Byron_, _iv. 20_

_Fragment of a Translation from the 9th Book of Virgil's Æneid_, i. xii,
  _151_

_Fragment--written shortly after the marriage of Miss Chaworth_, i. 210

_Fragments of School Exercises: from the "Prometheus Vinctus" of
  Æschylus_, i. 14

Fragonard, his portrait of Franklin, _v. 554_

Frame Workers' Bill, _i. 412, 495_

France, v. 553

_Francesca of Rimini_, iv. 313-322

Francis I., Emperor of Austria, _i. 489_; v. _498_, 503, 539, _573_, 576

Francis Maria II., Duke of Rovere, ii. 498

Francis, Sir Philip, _iv. 513_

Franguestan (Circassia), iii. 111

Frankfort, i. 489

Franklin, Benjamin, iv. 516; _Opinions and Conjectures concerning ...
  Electrical Matter, etc._, v. 554

Fraser, Mrs. Susan, _Camilla de Florian_, iii. 26

_Fraser's Magazine_, _iv. 542_; v. 204

Fraticelli, _Il Canzoniere di Dante_, _iv. 248_

Frederick the Great, _i. 107_; vi. 337

Frederick II. of Prussia, ii. 209, _282_; iv. 334; _v. 637_

Frederick William III. of Prussia, v. 539, 550, 553, _577_; _vii. 39_

French, Waterloo and the, vi. 345

French Revolution, ii. 82; _vi. 13, 14_

Frere, J. Hookham, _i. 395_; _ii. 327_, iii. 151; vii. 48, 49; _The
  Rovers, or the Double Arrangement_, _ii. 7_; British Minister, Spain,
  _ii. 79_; _The Needy Knife-Grinder_, ii. 80; his article in _Q.R._ on
  Lady Morgan's _France_, _ii. 187_; _Whistlecraft_, iv. 155, 156, 279,
  283; vi. xvi; vii. 53; the _ottava rima_, iv. 238

Fréron, Elie Catharine, _ii. 282_

Friar, the Black, at Newstead Abbey, vi. _576_, 578, _et seq._

Fricker, Edith (Mrs. R. Southey), _iv. 521_; vi. 175

Fricker, Mary (Mrs. Robert Lovell), _iv. 521_

Fricker, Sarah (Mrs. S.T. Coleridge), _iv. 521_; vi. 175

Fricker, Stephen, _vi. 175_

Friendly Islands, the, v. 581

Friuli's mountains (Julian Alps), ii. 348

Frizzi, Antonio, _Memorie per la Storia di Ferrara_, _iii. 507_

_From Anacreon_, i. 149

_From the French_, iii. 428; vii. 76

_From the Portuguese_ ("_Tu mi chamas_"), iii. 71

Frosini, or Phrosine, iii. 145

Frundsberg, George, leader of the Landsknechts, _v. 520_

Fry, Elizabeth, vi. 425

Fryer, John, master of the _Bounty_, _v. 594_

_Fugitive Pieces_, i. xi, 1-75, _213_; _iii. 381, 383, 387, 388, 390,
  400, 438_; iv. 584

Fuller, _Worthies: Lincolnshire_, _vi. 596_

Fullerton, Lady Georgiana, v. 329

Fulvius Ursinus, ii. 510, 517

Funck-Brentano, M. Frantz, _L'Homme au Masque de Velours Noir_, _iv.
  514_

Furius Leptinus, _ii. 520_

Furtwaengler, A., _Masterpieces of Ancient Greek Sculpture_, _ii. 446_

Fusina, _ii. 349_; _vii. 72_


G

Gabor, Bethlen, king of Hungary, iv. 331; _v. 349, 352_

Gabriel of Bergamo, Bishop, iv. 467

Gaddi, Cardinal de', _v. 516_

Gail, Jean Baptiste, ii. 197

Galahad, _iv. 320_

Galiffe, J.A., _Notices Généalogiques sur les Familles Genevoises_, iv.
  5; _Galignanis Gazette_ (or _Messenger)_, i. 452; _iv. 338_; v. 540;
  vii. 80

Galileo Galilei, ii. 369, 496; vi. 610

Galiongee, or galiongi, Turkish sailor, iii. 184

Gall, Richard, _i. 211_; _vi. 462_

Gallehault, _iv. 320_

Gallienus, _vi. 446_

Gallo, Cape, iii. 248

Gallois, Léonard, _Historie de Napoléon d'après lui-même_, iii. 304

Galt, John, _Voyages and Travels_, i. 492; _Life of Lord Byron_, iii.
  150, _205_; _vi. 195_

Galvani, Professor, _i. 308_; _vi. 50_

Galvanism, i. 307; vi. 50

Gamba, Count, _vi. 179_, _A Narrative of Lord Byron's Last Journey to
  Greece_, _vii. 86_

Gambas, the, _iv. 259_

Gambier, Admiral Lord, _i. 468_

Gandia, Duke of, _iii. 367_

Garcia, H.E. Don Juan, _vi. 437_

Garcilasso, or Garcias Lasso, de la Vega, vi. 40

Gardiki sacked by Ali Pasha, _ii. 139_ Garnett, Dr. Richard (keeper of
  Printed Books in the British Museum), _Italian Literature_, ii. _324,
  351_, 370; iv. 281; _v. 535_

Garrick, David, i. 26, 344, _409_; iii. _51_, 52, 53; _Lying Valet_, i.
  400; produces _Don Juan; or, The Libertine Destroyed_, at Drury Lane
  Theatre, _vi. 11_

Garter, story of the, ii. 7

Garth, _vi. 236_

Gas, nitrous oxide, i. 307

Gas first used in London, vi. 434

Gas Light and Coke Co., _i. 307_

Gascoigne, M.P. for Liverpool, i. 479

Gaston de Foix, Due de Nemours, vi. 212

Gastuni, _iii. 184_

Gates, General, _vi. 12_

Gauls, the, _ii. 413_; iv. 331, 334

Gautier, Léon, _Voyage en Espagne_, _ii. 67_, _Les Epopées Françaises_,
  _v. 496_

Gavotto, or Cabotto, Giovanni, _iv. 262_ Gay, _The Beggar's Opera, i.
  416_, iv. 75; vii. 74; _Trivia, iv. 160_, _Epitaph_, vi. 561

Gayarré, Charles Étienne Arthur, _History of Louisiana; Fernando de
  Lemos, iii. 298_

Gayton, Miss, i. _347_, 348

_Gazette_, _i. 488_

_Gazette Extraordinary_, iii. 303

_Gazetteer_, _iv. 542_

_Gazetteer of the World_, ii. xxiv; _iii. 24_

Gebhart, Émile, _De l'Italie_ (_Le Sac de Rome_), v. 471, 472, _510,
  515, 520_

Gebora, battle of, _i. 470_

Geddes, Rev. Alexander, _Critical Remarks on the Hebrew Scriptures, v.
  208_

Gelasius, _ii. 512_

Gell, Sir William, _Topography of Troy; Ithaca; Itinerary of Greece_, i.
  _336_, 379; ii. 109, _189_, 204

Gelo the tyrant, iv. 440

Gemma, Dante's wife, iv. 253

_Genesis_, _iv. 127_; v. 197, 201, 207, 210, 277, 280, _285, 291, 300,
  527_

Genest, _English Stage_, _ii. 331_; _iv. 573_; v. 324

Geneva, _iv. 53_

Genlis, Stephanie Félicité Ducrest, Marquise de Sillery, Madame de, i.
  494

Genoa, _v. 158_

Genseric, king of the Vandals, _ii. 390, 408_; _iii. 233, 251_

_Gentleman's Magazine_, _i. 337_; _ii. 11, 216_; iv. _53_, 82, _99_,
  139; v. 470, _578_; _vi. 410, 508, 551_; _vii. 19, 27_

Geoffrey II., of Villehouardin, _iii. 185_

George I., _iii. 209, 299_

George II., _ii. 282_; _iv. 491_; _vi. 12, 496_; _vii. 76_

George III., i. _416, 425_, 486, _500_; _ii. 230_; iv. 476, _556_; _v.
  542, 560_; vi. 77, 368, 451, _496_; _vii. 31, 35, 76_; in _Vision of
  Judgment_, iv. 485-525

George IV., i. _319_, 487, _491_, 495, _497_, 500; _ii. 360, 450_; iii.
  45; iv. _74_, 548, _555_; v. 204, _206_, 539, _569, 578_; vi. _374_,
  385, 425, _451_, 478; vii. 17, 20, _22, 27, 29, 32_, 35-37, _40_, 80

George William, Elector of Brandenburgh, v. 373

Georgia, i. 378; vi. 279

Gérard, his portrait of Napoleon, _iii. 314_

_G. Dict. Univ._, _ii. 415_

Germantown, battle of, _i. 500_; _vi. 12_

Germany, "how much we owe to thee," i. 486

Gesner, _Death of Abel_, _iii. 31, 32_; v. 200, 201, 208, _266_;
  _Bibliotheca Univ._, _iii. 122_

Ghibellines, the, _iv. 253_

Ghormezano, Signor, _ii. 99_

Ghosts, ii. 255

Giaffir Pacha, iii. 189

Giamschid, Sultan, iii. 108

Giant's Grave (Bosphorus), vi. 219

"Giants' Staircase" (Venice), iv. 325, 336

_Giaour, the_, _ii. 37, 135, 136_; iii. _17_, 85-146, 149, 150, _183,
  210_, 217, 225, _235, 254, 293, 384, 453, 464, 465, 481_; _iv. 21, 38,
  125_; _v. 428, 612_; _vi. 165, 244, 332_

Gibbon, Edward, as a translator, _i. 375_; _Decline and Fall of the
  Roman Empire_, ii. 174, 185, 202, _283_, 307, _350, 392, 434, 475_,
  479, _482_, 508; iii. _173, 251_, 301, _519_; iv. 53, 141, _288, 386_;
  vi. _8, 9, 139, 179_, 260, _279, 446_; _Miscellaneous Works_, ii. 490;
  iii. _299_, 503; _Antiquities of the House of Brunswick_, iii. 503

Gibraltar (Calpe's Rock), i. 378; ii. 89, 113, 455, 525; _v. 588_; vi.
  344

Gieta, Colonel, iv. 205, 208

Gifford, William (editor of the _Quarterly Review_), his edition of
  _Massinger_, i. 292, _304_; his _Baviad and Mæviad_, i. 294, _304_,
  362, 363; short account of, i. 304; _Epistle to Peter Pindar_; edition
  of _Ben Jonson_ and _Ford_, _i. 304_; translation of _Juvenal_, _i.
  304, 362, 375_; _iii. 301_; _v. 63, 64, 613_; vi. _255_, 256; of
  _Persius_, _i. 304_; "a true poet," _i. 306_; alludes in _Mæviad_ to
  Kotzebue's _Pizarro_, _i. 344_; describes Miles Peter Andrews in
  _Baviad_, _i. 353_; referred to in _English Bards, and Scotch
  Reviewers_:--"his heavy hand, etc," i. 356; "born beneath an adverse
  star," i. 360; "bear witness, Gifford, Sotheby, Macneil," i. 362; _iv.
  182_; "Why slumbers Gifford?" i. 363; attacks Delia Cruscans in
  _Baviad_ and _Mæviad_, _i. 358_; criticizes Jerningham in _Baviad_,
  _i. 383_; on Weber, _i. 397_; his patron, Lord Grosvenor, _i. 412_;
  his "ultimus Romanorum," _i. 444_; "Edwin's mewlings" in _Baviad_, _i.
  444, 445_; advises publication of _Childe Harold_, Canto I., ii. xi;
  advises suppression of stanzas on Sir John Carr in _Childe Harold_,
  _ii. 65_ enthusiastic about _Childe Harold_, Canto III., ii. 211;
  approves Canto IV., _ii. 327_; on the _Giaour_, iii. 76; Byron on
  _Bride of Abydos_, iii. 149; on _Corsair_, iii. 217; on _Siege of
  Corinth_, iii. 443; his corrections of _Siege of Corinth_, _iii.
  467-470, 474, 479-482, 484-486, 489, 492, 494, 495_; on _Parisina_,
  iii. 449; on _Manfred_, iv. 79, _136_; Murray's adviser, iv. 157; on
  _Marino Faliero_, act i., _iv. 367_; omits to correct Byron's bad
  grammar, _iv. 419_; reviews _Lectures on the English Poets, etc._,
  _iv. 575_; his addition to _Two Foscari_, _v. 196_; on _Cain_, v. 204;
  revises _Heaven and Earth_, v. 279, _310_; his note to _Don Juan_ on
  Memnon Statue, _v. 497_; "we've Gifford here reading MS.," vii. 48

Gight, _i. 336_

Gill, landlord of Byron's lodgings in Nottingham, _vii. 1_

Gillies, _History of Greece_, _iii. 90_

Gillray's _Caricatures_, i. _307_, 476; _iv. 509_; _vii. 29_

Gindely, Anton, _History of the Thirty Years' War_, _v. 352, 371, 416_

Ginguené, P.L., _Hist. Lit. d'Italie_, _iv. 459_

Giorgione (Giorgio Barbarelli), "Judgment of Solomon", iv. 162

Giovanelli, Palazzo, _iv. 163_

_Girl of Cadiz_ (_To Inez_), _ii. 59, 75_; iii. 1; _vi. 82_

Girondins, or Girondists, _vi. 13, 14_

Gisborne, v. 204

Gisborne, Mrs., _iv. 100_

Giustiniani, Franceschino, _iv. 365_

Giustiniani, Pietro Giovanni, _v. 134, 179, 188, 195_

Glaciers, ii. 385

Gladiators, ii. 431, 433, 520

Gladstone, W.E., _iii. 157_; _vi. 26_

Gladwin, Francis, translation of Sa'di's _Gulistan_, _iii. 160_

Gleig, _History of the British Empire in India_, _i. 468_

Glenbervie, Sylvester Douglas, Lord, _Ricciardetto_, iv. 156, _176_

Glenesk, Lord, _MS. of Siege of Corinth_, iii. 448, _451, 452, 454-467,
  469-471, 473, 476, 477, 479, 482, 483, 487-489, 491-495_

Gloria, Maria da, of Portugal, _ii. 11_

Gloucester, Duke of, i. 498; _iv. 177_

Glover, _i. 317_

Gluck, music of _Don Juan; or, The Libertine Destroyed_, _vi. 11_;
  _Armida and Rinaldo_, _vi. 34_

Gnatoo, or tappa cloth (Tonga Islands), v. 600

Gneisnau, August Wilhelm Antonius Neidhart von, vi. 345

Gobbi, _iv. 271_

Godfrey of Viterbo, _ii. 337_

Godoy, Manuel de, Duke of Alcudia, Principe de la Paz, ii. 54, 90

Godwin, William, iii. 444; iv. 475; Essay _Of Population_, _vi. 459_

Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, and Monk Lewis, _i. 317_; _Faust_, _i.
  318_; iv. 80, 81, _85, 110_; v. 201, _247_, 281, _294, 409_, 470, 471,
  474, _493, 494_; vi. 483; _Sorrows of Werther_, i. 494; _Travels in
  Italy_ ("Letters from Italy"), _ii. 330, 335, 424_; _Kennst du das
  Land_, _iii. 157_; review of _Mannfred_ in _Kunst und Alterthum_, iv.
  _21_, 80-82, _340_; translation of _Manfred_, _iv. 136_; _vii. 55_;
  _Conversations of_, iv. 157, 327, 328; v. 119, _122_, 199, 204;
  _Marino Faliero_ dedicated to, iv. 328, _340-342_; _vi. 443_; _vii.
  63_; _Aus meinem Leben_, _iv. 342_; on _Vision of Judgment_, _iv.
  480_; on _Irish Avatar_, _iv. 556_; _Sardanapalus_ dedicated to, v. 7;
  on _The Two Foscari_, v. 119, _122_; on _Cain_, v. 199, 204; "The
  moment he reflects, he is a child," v. 279; on _Heaven and Earth_, v.
  281; _Werner_ dedicated to, v. 335; on _Don Juan_ in _Kunst und
  Alterthum_, vi. xix; Madame de Staël on, vi. 168

_Goethe-Jahrbuch_, iv. 82, _136_; v. 282

Goettlingius, C., _Hesiod Carm._, _ii. 188_

Gold, vi. 455

Goldau, _iv. 97_

Golden Fleece, vi. 158

Goldoni, Carlo, iv. 157; _Belisarus_; _Le Bourru Bianfaisant, etc._, iv.
  164; _Mercanti_, _iv. 166_

Goldsmith, Edmund, _v. 289_

Goldsmith, Oliver, _Vicar of Wakefield_, i. 480; _vi. 145, 586_;
  _Citizen of the World_, ii. 88, 323; _Deserted Village_, vi. 471

Golitsyn, Prince Basil, iv. 202

Gondola, description of a, iv. 165

Gondoliers of Venice, ii. 329, 468; iv. 165

Gonzaga, Cardinal Luigi Valenti, ii. _371_, 495

Gonzaga, Scipio, _iv. 143, 144_

Good, John Mason, _The Book of Job_, _iv. 498_

Goodman's Fields Theatre, _i. 414_

Goose, game of, vi. 471

Gordianus III., Emperor, _ii. 423_

Gordon, Duchess of, _ii. 350, 479_

Gordon, Lord George, _i. 484_

Gordon, Pryse Lockhart, _Personal Memoirs, etc._, ii. _226, 227_, 294;
  iv. 156; _Life of Alexander VI._, _iii. 369_

Gordon, Mrs. P.L., _ii. 226_

Gordon, Thomas, _History of the Greek Revolution_, _v. 557_; vii. 53

Gordon, Sir William, _i. 173_

Gordons, the, i. 172

Gorrequer, Major, _v. 545_

Gorton, _Biog. Dict._, _ii. 173_

Gosnell, S., printer, i. 478

Gothenburg (Gottenburg). i. 487, _488_

Goths, Rome sacked by the, ii. 390

Gottschall, Rudolph von, iv. 203

Gouffier, Count Choiseul-, _Voyage Pittoresque de la Grèce_, _ii. 168_;
  _iii. 295_; _vi. 151_

Gounod, his "Maid of Athens," _iii. 16_

Gouria, _ii. 143_

Gower, Hon. F. Leveson, his article in _Nineteenth Century_--"Did Byron
  write _Werner_?" v. 329

Goza (Calypso's Isle), ii. 118, 173; iii. 10

Gozzi, Count Carlo, _Memoirs_, _ii. 120, 339_

Grabius, Joannes Ernestus, _Spicilegium SS. Patrum_, _v. 302_

Gracchus, Tiberius, vi. 407

Gradenigo, Dogaressa Aluica, iv. 333, _377_

Gradenigo, Beriola, _iv. 377_

Gradenigo, Nicolò, _iv. 377_

Gradenigo, Doge Pietro, _iv. 360_

Grafton, Augustus Henry, 3rd Duke of, _iv. 177_; _Autobiography_ iv. 510

Grafton, Duchess of, _iv. 177_

Graham, Mrs. (Lady Callcott), iii. 532; _vi. 206, 207_

Graham, General Thomas (Lord Lynedoch), _i. 469_

Grahame, Rev. James, _Sabbath Walks_; _Biblical Pictures_; _British
  Georgics_, i. _305_, 323, 370, _429_

Granada, _ii. 46, 54_; _v. 558_; vi. 30

Granard, George, 6th Earl of, _vi. 116_

Granby, John Manners, Marquis of, vi. 12

Grand Council (Venice), v. 169

_Grande Encyclopédie, La_, _v. 566_; _vi. 313_

Grange, James, pastry-cook, Piccadilly, _i. 321_; _iv. 583_

Granger, _Biog. Hist. of England_, _iii. 298_

Grant, Harding, _Chancery Practice_; _Lord Byron's Cain, etc., with
  Notes_, v. 203, 204

_Granta, A Medley_, i. 56; _iv. 516_

Granville, Lady, v. 329

Granville, Lord, v. 329; _vii. 36_

Grattan, _i. 100_; iv. 556, 561; vi. 226, 450

Graves, Oliver B., of Cambridge, Mass., _vii. 3_

Gray, May, Byron's nurse, _vii. 1_

Gray, Thomas, _Alcaic Fragment_, i. 49; _The Fatal Sisters_, _i. 70_;
  _ii. 252_; Lloyd's parodies on, i. 220; Lewis' _Tales of Wonder_, _i.
  317_; "glance their many-twinkling feet," _i. 483_; _Elegy_, _ii.
  399_; _iii. 240_; vi. _181_, 503; _Progress of Poesy_, _ii. 413_; his
  lyric measure, _iii. 128_; _Poemata_, _iii. 423_

Great Council (Maggior Consiglio), Venice, _iv. 360, 399_

Greatheed, Bertie, _i. 358_

Greece, i. 424; ii. 62, 109, 149, 154; iii. 90, 446; v. 555; vii. 85,
  87; Isles of, vi. 169

Greek Committee, the, v. 331

Greeks, the, ii. 191, 192; defeat Turks at Lerna, v. 556

Green, _Hist. English People_, _i. 468_

Green, poet, _iii. 330_

Greene, Robert, _Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay_, _vi. 78_

Greenwood, scene-painter, Drury Lane Theatre, i. 346

Grenville, Lord, _i. 437, 470, 497_; _iii. 45_

Grenville, Lord George, _Portugal; a Poem_, _ii. 4_

Grete, river (Southwell), i. 239

Greville, Charles, _vi. 451_

Greville, Colonel, i. 348

Grey, Charles, 2nd Earl of, vi. 478

Grey, Lord, _i. 497_; _iii. 45_

Grey, Mr., _iii. 170_

Grief, Martin, iv. 329

Griffin, A., _i. 234_

Griffith, H.T., edition of Cowper's _Task_, etc., _vi. 348_

Griffiths, Arthur, _Memorials of Millbank_, _vii. 34_

Griffiths, George Edward, _iv. 165_

Grillion's Hotel, Albemarle Street_vi. 437_

Grillo, Angelo, _iv. 146_

Grillparzer, _Sappho_, _v. 61_

Grimaldi, Joseph, _i. 345_; _vi. 11_

Grimm, Baron F.M., _Cor. Lit._, _ii. 266_

Grindelwald, _iv. 110_

Gritti, Benedetto, _v. 116_

Grolierius (Grollier), Cæsar, _Historia Expugnatæ ...Urbis_, v. 471,
  _510_

Gronow, Captain, _Reminiscences_, _i. 345, 357, 476_; _vi. 69, 276, 507,
  508, 529_

Gropius, Karl Wilhelm, ii. 166, 171

Grose, Captain Edward, 1st Life Guards, vi. 355

Grose, Francis, _Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue_, _ii. 66_;
  _vi. 433_

Grosvenor, 1st Earl, i. 412

Grosvenor, Robert, 2nd Earl (afterwards Marquis of Westminster), i. 412

Grote, George, _History of Greece_, _ii. 102, 158, 341_; _iii. 311_;
  _iv. 566_

Grotta Ferrata, site of Cicero's villa, ii. 522

Grouvelle, i. 402

Gruterus, ii. 299

Guadalquivir, _ii. 54_; vi. 112

Guadiana river, ii. 46

Gualandra hills, ii. 505-507

_Guardian_, _i. 418_

Guariglia, Signor, _vi. 205_

Guarini, _Pastor Fido_, iv. 141

Guasti, _Tasso's Letters_, _ii. 355_

Guelphs, the, _iv. 253_

Guesclin, Bertrand du, v. 549

Guhl, _ii. 441_

Guicciardini, Francesco (Luigi), _Sacco di Roma_, _iv. 258_; v. 471

Guiccioli, Countess (_My Recollections of Lord Byron_), _i. 99_; _ii.
  289, 374_; iv. _119, 213_, 237, 241, _545, 547, 549, 563_, 570; v. 5;
  vi. _52, 297_, 373

Guiccioli, Palazzo, _ii. 372_; iv. 279

Guido, fresco of the Aurora, vi. 526

Guilford, Earl of, _iv. 143_

Guiscard, Robert, _ii. 390_

Gunpowder, discovered by Friar Bacon, vi. 340

Gurney, Hudson, _The Golden Ass of Apuleius; in English Verse, entitled
  Cupid and Psyche_, _vi. 165_

Gurney, William Brodie, vi. 66

Gurwood, Colonel, _Wellington Dispatches_, vi. 266

Gustavus Adolphus, king of Sweden, "The Lion of the North," v. 371,
  _373_, 553

_Guy Mannering_, _iv. 566_

Gwynne, Nell, _vi. 496_

"Gynocracy" used for "gynæcocracy," vi. 473, 588

H

Hachette, _iv. 14_

Hadrian, i. 20, _462, 493_; ii. 167, _411, 431, 436, 440_

Hadrian's Mole, ii. 439

Hafiz. _See_ Stott

Hague, vi. 419

Haivali (or Kidognis), ii. 200, 207

Hales, Sir Matthew, vi. 610

Halford, Bart., Sir H., An Account of what appeared on Opening the
  Coffin of King Charles the First, _vii. 35_

Halgh of Halgh, George, _vi. 294_

Halifax, George Savile, Marquis of, _i. 413_

Hall, Captain Basil, _Narrative of a Voyage to Java, 1840_; _Voyage to
  the Corea and the Loochoo Islands_; _Extracts from a Journal written
  on the Coast of Chili, etc_., _v. 546, 548, 556_

Hallam, Henry, i. _306_, 340, 380; _Middle Ages_, i. 337; _iv. 288_; vi.
  464

Hallet, midshipman on the _Bounty_, v. 588

Hamburg, i. 487, _488_

Hamet Benengeli, Cid, i. 299

Hamilton, Anthony, Archdeacon of Colchester, _ii. 108_

Hamilton, Archibald, 9th Duke of, _i. 311_

Hamilton, Lady Anne, _Epics of the Ton_, i. 294, _311, 330, 343_, 353,
  _468, 471_; _Secret Memories of the Court of England_, _i. 311_; _vii.
  78_

Hamilton, Sir William Richard ("Dark Hamilton"), Lord Elgin's Secretary,
  _Memorandum on the Earl of Elgin's Pursuits in Greece_, i. 455, _466_;
  ii. x, 108, 167, _168_, 204

_Hamlet_, i. 401; _ii. 64, 99, 103, 154, 418, 450_; _iii. 543_; iv. 77,
  _95, 458_; _v. 25, 423_; vi. _309_, 342, 386, 394, _432_, 456, 511,
  550, 570-572

Hammer-Purgstall, J. von, _Histoire de l'Empire Othoman_, iii. _166,
  312_, 441, _454, 455_

Hammond, George, iii. 217; iv. 472; vii. 49

Hamond, Mrs. (Miss Chaworth Musters), _i. 277_

Hampstead, ii. 66

_Handbooks_ for--_Central Italy_, _ii. 373, 380_; _iv. 275_; _Greece_,
  _ii. 117, 127, 157, 166, 189_; _Northern Italy_, _ii. 372_; _iv. 336,
  392, 430_; _vi. 212_; _Rome_, _ii. 389, 403_; _iv. 271, 273_

Hanmer, _vi. 487_

Hannibal, _i. 349, 493_; ii. _187, 459_, 505; _iii. 301_; _v. 606_

Hansard, _Parliamentary Debates_, _iv. 482_

Hanson, Charles, _vi. 460_

Hanson, Hargreaves, _i. 86_

Hanson, John, _i. 25, 86_; _iii. 540_; _vi. 100_

Hanson, Mary Anne (Lady Portsmouth), _vi. 569_

Hanson, Newton, _i. 86_

Happiness, "was born a twin," vi. 130; Horace's Art of, vi. 490

Haratch, Turkish capitation tax, _iii. 195_

Harcourt, General, _ii. 23_

Harcourt, Mrs., _ii. 23_

Hardinge, George ("Jeffries Hardsman"), Senior Justice of Brecon, etc.,
  _vi. 508_

Hare, Francis ("Silent Hare"), _vi. 529_

Harley, Lady Charlotte Mary (afterwards Bacon), "Ianthe," ii. xii, 11

Harmodius and Aristogeiton, ii. 228, 291; v. 556

Harmonists, the, vi. 554

Harness, Rev. W., _i. 66_; _ii. 204_; _iv. 575_

Harold, Baron de, _iii. 100_

_Harper's New Monthly Magazine_, _vi. 349_

Harpocration, _vi. 169_

Harrison, John ("Longitude Harrison"), inventor of watch compensation,
  vi. 19

"Harroviensis," _A letter to Sir Walter Scott, etc._, v. 202

Harrow, i. 15-20, 25, 84-106, 208, 222, 237, 259; ii. 66; vi. 49;
  "Byron's Tomb" at, _i. 26_; speech-day at, i. _86_, 102; rebellion at,
  _i. 93_; Byron's first English exercise at, _iv. 48_

Harrowby, Lord, vii. 13

Harte, Bret, _The Society upon the Stanislaus_, _iv. 296_

Hartford, _Works of Lord Byron, In verse and Prose_, iii. xxi;
  _Remarkable Shipwrecks_, _vi. 98, 102, 103_

Harvard University Library, _vii. 3_

Harvey, _i. 405_

Hasell, E.J., _Tasso_, _ii. 356_

Hastings, Francis Rawdon, 1st Marquis of, _i. 497_

Hastings, Warren, impeachment of, iv. 72; _v. 542_

Hathaway, Miss, as "Zarina" in _Sardanapalus_, v. 2

Havard, William, i. 428

Hawarden, Lady, _i. 485_

Hawke, Admiral Edward, Lord, vi. 12

Hawkesbury, Lord, vii. 13

Hawksworth, _Voyages_, _ii. 7_

Hay, iii. 217

Haydn, iii. 376

Haydon, _Life of_, i. 456; "The Elgin Horse's Head," _ii. 336_

Hayley (or Hailey), William, _The Triumph of Temper_; _The Triumph of
  Music_, _i. 305_, 321, 322, 370; vi. 587; translation of three cantos
  of Dante's _Inferno_, iv. 238, 244, 313; _Essay on Epic Poetry_, iv.
  244; _Life of Milton_, _vi. 7_

Haymarket Theatre, _Werner_ at, v. 324

Hayter, Bishop of Norwich, _iii. 299_

Hayward, Peter, midshipman on the _Bounty_, _v. 588, 605_

Hazlitt, William, _ii. 17_; _My First Acquaintance with Poets_, _iv.
  518_; "Scamp, the Lecturer," of _The Blues_, iv. 570; _Lectures on the
  English Poets_, iv. 570, _586_; _vi. 12, 175_; _Lectures of 1818_, iv.
  575; _The Spirit of the Age_, _vi. 506, 509_

Hearne, _Journey from Hudson's Bay_, _iv. 220_

Heath, James, _Flagellum_, _vi. 174_

Heath, Miss, actress, as "The Witch of the Alps," in _Manfred_, iv. 78;
  as "Zarina" in _Sardanapalus_, v. 2

Heathcote, Katherine Sophia Manners, Lady, vii. 17

Heathcote, Sir Gilbert, _vii. 17_

_Heaven and Earth_, _iv. 50_; v. 277-321, 469, _527_

Heaviside, Dr., _i. 431, 432_

Heber, Richard, _Early English Poets_, _i. 396_

Heber, Reginald, Bishop of Calcutta, _i. 396_; iii. 151, 217; _v. 111_;
  Reviews _Marino Faliero_ in _Quarterly Review_, iv. 329; reviews
  _Sardanapalus_, _Two Foscari_, and _Cain_ in _Quarterly Review_, v. 5,
  _111_, 119, 204; on _Don Juan_ in _Quarterly Review_, vi. xx

_Hebrew Melodies_, _ii. 273_; iii. xix, 382-406, _417_; v. 199, _231_

Hecatonnesi Islands, ii. 200

Hecla (Iceland), vi. 569

Hector, v. 488, 577

Heinemann (G. Vuillier), _History of Dancing_, _i. 492_

Heiss, Baron, _iv. 514_

Helbig, _Guide to the Collection of Public Antiquities in Rome_, _ii.
  432_

Helen, iv. 334; vi. 535

Helena, Princess (Duchess of Albany), iii. 157

Helicon, i. 373, 397

Heligoland, i. 487, _488_

Hell, Byron's definition of a gambling, i. 407; vi. 436 paved with good
  intentions, iv. 499; vi. 338

Hellespont, iii. 13, 178, 179; vi. 112, 204

Helps, _vi. 567_

Helvetii, the, ii. 299

Helvoetsluys, vi. 419

Hemans, Captain, _vii. 70_

Hemans, Mrs. Felicia Dorothea (_née_ Browne), vii. 70

Henley, S., _Notes to Vathek_, iii. 76, _87, 105, 109, 110, 120_; _iv.
  244_

Henley, "Orator," vi. 303

Henry, John, _v. 560_

Henry, Patrick, one of the leaders of the American Revolution, v. 560

Henry of Prussia, Prince, _v. 550_

Henry I., _i. 493_

Henry II., i. _1_, 116; _v. 495_

Henry IV., i. 399; _iii. 134, 432_; _iv. 13, 262, 407_

_Henry IV._, vi. 20, _48, 256_, 342, _347, 431_, 444, 453

Henry IV., Emperor of Germany, _ii. 390_

Henry V., ii. _19_, 216

_Henry V._, _vi. 487_

_Henry VI._, _vi. 347_

_Henry VII_, _vi. 496_

Henry VII., Emperor of Germany, ii. _403_, 494

Henry VIII., i. _1_, 119; _v. 499_; vii. 35, 36

_Henry VIII._, _vi. 495_

Hephæstion, vi. 378

Hephæstus, _v. 396_

Heraclidæ, the, _ii. 431_

Herbert, Baron, Austrian Ambassador, _iii. 4_

Herbert, George, _Jacula Prudentum_, _iv. 500_

Herbert, William, Dean of Manchester, _i. 306_; _Horæ Scandicæ_, i. 336

Hercules (Alcides), i. 144; v. 27; Couch of, _vi. 220_

_Hercules_, wreck of American ship, _vi. 90_

Hermann, Mrs., as "Angiolina" in _Marino Faliero_, iv. 324

Hero and Leander, iii. 14, 178

Herod the Great, iii. 400

Herod, king of Chalcis, _vi. 139_

Herodes Atticus, _ii. 416_

Herodias, i. 490

Herodotus, _ii. 272_; _v. 107_; vi. _79_, 169, _572_; _Cleobis and
  Biton_, vi. 186

_Herod's Lament for Mariamne_, iii. 400

Herostratus, i. 467

Herrick, Robert, _To Anthea_, _iv. 35_

Hertford, Marchioness of, _vii. 22_

Hervey, Lord ("Lord Fanny"), _Lines to the Imitator of Horace_, i. 326

Hesiod, ii. 188; _Works and Days_, _vi. 169_

Hesperus, vi. 180

Heterodoxy, vi. 267

Hetman of the Cossacks, vii. 39

Heyne, Christian Gottlob, i. 490

Hiero, a painter, _ii. 168_

Highgate, "swearing on the horns" at, ii. 66

Highland Light Infantry, iii. 416

_Highland Society, the_, iii. 415

Highland welcome, a, vi. 272

Hildyard, Lieutenant J.T., _Historical Record of the 71st Highland Light
  Infantry_, _iii. 416_

Hill, Rev. H., iv. 476; _vi. 4_

Hill, S. McCalmont, _iii. 18_

_Hints from Horace_, i. _298, 303, 343, 359, 360_, 385-450, 453; ii. ix,
  _108, 192, 196_; _iv. 517_; _vi. 433, 442_

Hippocrates, ii. 197

Hippocrene, i. 328, 373

Hippolytus, _vi. 255_

Hiron, _vi. 153_

Hispalis (Seville), ii. 52, 60, 93; vi. 15

_Historical Records of the Life Guards_, _i. 495_

Hita, Ginès Perez de, _Historia de las Guerras Civiles de Granada_, _iv.
  529, 530_; _v. 558_

Hoadley, _ii. 504_

Hoare, Rev. Charles James, i. 372

Hobbes, Thomas, _v. 615_; vi. _195, 200_, 570; vii. 32

Hobhouse, John Cam (afterwards Lord Broughton de Gyfford), _Imitations
  and Translations_, i. xiii, _264, 327_; _ii. 30_; iii. xix; vi. 62,
  _142_; vii. 8; his _lines_ in _English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers_,
  i. xiv, xv, 292; _Epistle to a Young Nobleman in Love_, _i. 267_; on
  _Hints from Horace_, i. 388; _Travels in Albania and other Provinces
  of Turkey, in 1809 and 1810_, i. 454, _460_; ii. _15, 60_, 84, _100,
  106, 125, 130, 131, 133, 136, 137, 142, 145, 148, 153, 157, 158, 169,
  171_, 174, 182, _189, 194, 198, 200_, 208, _441, 461_; _iii. 7, 8, 14,
  20, 85, 93, 145, 173, 179, 180, 194, 272, 468_; iv. 31; _vi. 151, 204,
  208, 231, 261_; vii. 9; "I don't remember any crosses here," _ii. 36_;
  "one of the finest stanzas I ever read," _ii. 42_; with Byron in
  Spain, _ii. 52_; "said they were vultures," _ii. 61_; _en route_ for
  the Negroponte, _ii. 75_; _Historical Illustrations to the Fourth
  Canto of Childe Harold_, ii. 313-315, _358, 379, 380, 389, 390, 403,
  408, 410, 412, 435, 437, 439, 486, 512, 524_; _iv. 146, 245_; _v.
  153_; _vi. 233_; _Italy: Remarks made in Several Visits from the Year
  1816 to 1854_, ii. 315; _Childe Harold_ dedicated to, ii. 321;
  _Letters written by an Englishman resident in Paris, etc._, ii. 326;
  _v. 545_; the Abbé de Sade's _Mémoires_, _ii. 350, 351_; _Notes to
  Childe Harold, Canto IV._, ii. 465-525; at Theodora Macri's, _iii.
  16_; the Giaour story, iii. 76; an odd report about Byron, iii. 218;
  _Siege of Corinth_ dedicated to, iii. 445; his parody of _Stanzas to
  Augusta_, _iv. 56_; "went to the highest pinnacle," _iv. 95_; "pelted
  with a snowball," _iv. 97_; note on Dante, iv. 238; _Essay on the
  Present Literature of Italy_, _iv. 245_; on _Cain_, v. 204; the MS. of
  _Werner_, v. 326; "about morality," vi. xix; the Zoili of Albemarle
  Street, vi. xix, 467; his article in _Westminster Review_ on _Don
  Juan_, _vi. 3_; "this is so very pointed," _vi. 22_; his remarks on
  _Don Juan_, _vi. 22, 26, 47, 50, 52, 59, 62, 78, 79, 98_; MS. of _Don
  Juan_, _Canto XVII._, given to, _vi. 608_; on the Lisbon Packet, vii.
  6; _Farewell Petition to_, vii. 7; _Miscellany_, vii. 8; "will bring
  it safe in his portmanteau," vii. 51; _My Boy Hubbie O!_ vii. 66; his
  pamphlet, _A Trifling Mistake in Thomas Lord Erskine's recent
  Preface_, _vii. 66_; M.P. for Westminster, vii. 69; Byron's _Love and
  Death_, _vii. 85_

Hobhouse, Sir John, iii. 76

Hobson, Captain, _vi. 146_

Hoche, General L., ii. 251, 296; vi. 14

Hock, i. 486

Hodgson, Rev. Francis, Byron on Boatswain's death, _i. 280_; letters
  from Byron to, _i. 280, 282, 379_; _ii. 29, 42, 63, 78, 104, 187, 192,
  331_; _iii. 35, 38, 449_; _vi. 182, 467_; _vii. 10_; _Gentle
  Alterative for the Reviewers_, i. 295; _Bland's Greek Anthology_, _i.
  306, 366_; _iii. 32_; translation of _Juvenal_, _i. 337_; referred to
  in _English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers_, i. 375; _Lines on a Ruined
  Abbey_, _ii. 20, 170_; Byron's _Epistle to a Friend_, _ii. 163_; iii.
  28-30; _Lady Jane Grey_, _ii. 170_; _Monitor of Childe Harold_, _ii.
  360_; on the _Giaour_, _iii. 137_; on the _Bride of Abydos_, iii. 151;
  "scribbler Mr. Hodgson," _iv. 165_; and _Cain_, v. 199; Byron's _Lines
  to--written on board the Lisbon Packet_, vii. 4; MS. of _Devil's
  Drive_, _vii. 21_; "principally to shock your neighbour," _vii. 42_

Hodgson, Rev. James T., _Life of the Rev. Francis Hodgson_, _i. 375_;
  _ii. 288_; _iii. 28, 30_

Hofmann. _Lexicon Universale_, _ii. 156, 173, 261, 328, 390_; _iii. 181_

Hofmann, C., _Primavera y Flor de Romances_, _iv. 174, 529_

Hogarth, caricature of Wilkes, _iv. 508_

Hohenlinden, battle of, _vi. 14_

Hohenlohe, Prince, _v. 550_

Holbein, _Dance of Death_, vi. 555

Hole, Rev. Richard, _Arthur; or, The Northern Enchantment_, _i. 314,
  436_

Holford, Margaret, _Margaret of Anjou_, vii. 44, 45, 59

Holland, Henry Fox, 1st Lord, _ii. 40_

Holland, Henry Richard Vassall Fox, 2nd Lord, _ii. 80_

Holland, Henry Richard Vassall, 3rd Lord, i. 294, _306, 337_, 338, 340,
  _356_, 380, _417_; ii. xi, _51-54_; iii. 151, 155, _170_; "Sir Richard
  Bluebottle" of _The Blues_, iv. 570; his motion on Napoleon's
  treatment at St. Helena, _v. 545_

Holland, Elizabeth, Lady (née Vassall), i. 294, _355_, 380; _ii. 80_;
  _vi. 541_; _A Memoir of the Rev. Sydney Smith_, _vi. 596_; Napoleon's
  snuff-box, vii. 77

Holy Alliance, the, ii. 402; v. 538, 539, _564_; vi. 267

Homer, i. 312, _379, 398, 404_; vi. 73, 173, 177, _211_, 263, 327,
  _478_; vii. 62; a punster, _i. 377_; _Odyssey_, _i. 426_; ii. _100_,
  173; _iv. 264_; "and Homer (damn him) calls," _i. 427_; in _Hints from
  Horace_, i. 432, 438; the Homeric ghosts, _ii. 255_; _v._ Ariosto,
  _ii. 359_; _iv. 266_; _Iliad_, ii. 301, _452, 462_; _v. 488, 512,
  573_; vi. _117_, 218, 339, _513_, 534; Dante superior to! ii. 495;
  ἀπείρων [Greek: a)pei/rôn ], _iii. 179_; his Ocean stream, vi. 218;
  catalogue of ships, vi. 503

Homunculi, v. 493

Hone, W., publisher of _Poems on his Domestic Circumstances_, i. 452,
  453; iii. xx, _24_; _Every Day Book_, _ii. 66_; publishes _Wat Tyler_,
  _iv. 521_

Honorius, ii. 35, 86, _440_, 521

Hood and Sharpe, publishers, _i. 379_

Hook, James, _A Lass of Richmond Hill_, _vii. 59_

Hook, Theodore, i. _306_, 344; _Tekeli_; _Fortress_; _Music Mad_, _i.
  341_; editor of _John Bull_, _v. 206_

Hoole's _Tasso_, _ii. 143_

Hooper, G., _Waterloo: The Downfall of the First Napoleon_, _ii. 234_

Hooper, W., _Rational Recreations_, _vi. 550_

Hope, Thomas, _Anastasius_, _i. 390_; Byron omits stanzas in _Childe
  Harold_ on, ii. xi; _Household Furniture and Internal Decoration_,
  _ii. 108_

Hope, Mrs. Thomas (Louisa Beckford), _i. 390_; _iv. 580_

Hoppner, John, R.A., _vii. 54_

Hoppner, John William Rizzo, vii. 54

Hoppner, Richard Belgrave, English Consul at Venice, _ii. 351_; iv. _15,
  459_, 471, 472, _547_; vii. 54; translation of Goethe's review of
  _Manfred_, iv. 82

Horace, _Odes_, i. 81; _ii. 40, 76, 262, 387, 421, 448_; iv. _197, 243_,
  323; vi. _15, 77, 78_, 236, 453, 521; _vii. 73_; _Satires_, i. 184;
  _ii. 405_; _v. 568_; vi. 391, _446_; _Ars Poetica_, i. 385, _402,
  409_; ii. ix, xiv; iv. 518; "Farewell, Horace--whom I hated so," ii.
  388; his Sabine farm, ii. 455, 524; _Epist._, _v. 367_; vi. 246,
  _273_, 474, 490; Louis XVIII.'s criticisms on Sanadon's translations
  of, _v. 567_; _Epist. ad Pisones_, vi. _15_, 177, 505; Scholar of
  Love, vi. 139; _Epodes_, vi. 378, 536; his Art of Happiness, vi. 490

Horistan Castle, Derbyshire, i. 2

Homer, Francis, _i. 302, 470_

"Horns," "swearing on the," at Highgate, ii. 66

Horsetails, a Pasha's standard, iii. 480

Hortensius, vi. 270

Horton, Eusebius, iii. 381

Horton, Anne Beatrix, Lady Wilmot, origin of "She walks in beauty," iii.
  381; iv. 569, 570; vii. _54_, 61

Horton, Sir Robert J. Wilmot, vii. 54

Hoste, Captain Sir William, iv. 456

Hounslow Heath, i. 484

Houris, ii. 60; iii. 110; vi. 364

_Hours of Idleness, and Other Early Poems_, i. xi-xiii, 1-288, _303,
  311, 374, 432_; _iii. 182_; _iv. 67_

Houson, Miss Anne, i. 70, 244, 246, 251, 253

Houson, Rev. Henry, _i. 70_

Howard, Hon. Frederick, _i. 355_; ii. _11_, 234, 293

Howatt, Hill, iv. 31

Howe, Admiral Richard, Earl ("Black Dick"), _v. 588_; vi. 12, 14

Howell, _iv. 167_

Hoyle, Rev. Charles, _Exodus_, i. 372, _430_

Hoyle, Edmund, _i. 372_; vi. 173

Hroswitha, _Lapsus et Conversio Theophrasti Vice-domini_, iv. 81

Huascar, Supreme Inca of Peru, _ii. 82_

Hucknall Torkard Church, _i. 3, 70_; _ii. 334_; iv. _14_, 479

Hughes, _iii. 16_

Hughes, Mrs., _vi. 496_

Hugo, Victor, _Les Feuilles d'Automne, ii. 358_; _Le Rhin_, _iv. 14_;
  _Orientale_, iv. 202

Hulme, Thomas, _Journal_, _vi. 554_

_Humane Society_, vi. 50

Humboldt, Baron Alexander von, v. 539; vi. 215

Hume, David, _History of England_, _i. 374_; _ii. 266_

Hume, Joseph, _ii. 504_

Hungary, Bethlen Gabor, king of, iv. 331; _v. 349, 352_

Hunt, James Henry Leigh, his copy of _Fourth Edition of Childe Harold_,
  i. xvi, _311, 334_; Byron's letters to, iii. 218; v. 537, 582, 584;
  _Lord Byron and Some of his Contemporaries_, _iii. 474_;
  _Autobiography_, _iii. 509_; _vi. 26_; the _Examiner_, iii. 532,
  _538_; _Story of Rimini_, _iv. 36_; _Stories from the Italian Poets_,
  iv. _275_, 281, 314; _Morgante Maggiore_, _iv. 285_; the _Liberal_,
  iv. 571; in Horsemonger Lane Gaol, vii. 16; "Blackguard Hunt," vii.
  _67_, 68

Hunt, John, iv. 281, _285_, 478, 479; v. 279, 325, 537, 581; publishes
  _The Deformed Transformed_, v. 472; and _Don Juan_, vi. xvi

Hunt, Dr., i. 455

Hunter, _Imperial Gazetteer of India_, _v. 631_

Hunter, William, _vi. 412_

_Huntingdon Peerage_, _ii. 215_

Huntly, George, 2nd Earl of, _i. 173_

Huon, of Bordeaux, v. 496

Hussite, or Taborite, Crusade, _v. 549_

Hyde of land, a, vi. 411

Hydra, Hydrea, or Idra, island, i. 457; iii. 270

Hyginus, _Fabulæ_, _iv. 287_; _vi. 535_

Hymettus, i. 459; ii. 157; iii. 271

Hypocrisy, vi. 410, 453

Hypsilantes, _v. 556_


I

_I saw thee weep_, iii. 390

_I would I were a careless child_, i. 205

"Ianthe" ("Flower o' the Narcissus"). _See_ Harley, Lady Charlotte M.

Ibort, Jorge (Tio Jorge), ii. 94; v. 559

Ibrahim Pasha, ii. 174

_Ich Dien_ (_Windsor Poetics_), vii. 36

Idra, Hydra, or Hydrea, island, i. 457; iii. 270

Iermolof, Catherine II.'s favourite, vi. _388_, 389

_If that high world_, iii. 383

Ihne, _Hist. of Rome_, _ii. 377_

Ile de Paix, iv. 26

Ilissus, _i. 459; iii. 272_

Illyria, ii. 129

_Imitated from Catullus_, i. xi, 75

_Imitation of Tibullus_, i. 74

_Imitations and Translations_, i. _264, 266, 268, 272, 277, 281-283,
  285, 287_, 288; _vi. 62_

Imlay, _North America_, _vi. 349_

_Imperial Dictionary_, _ii. 137_

_Imperial Gazetteer of India_, _v. 631_

_Imperial Magazine_, _iv. 43_

_Impromptu_, vii. 82

_Impromptu, in reply to a friend_, iii. 69

_Incantation, the_ (_Manfred_), iv. _15, 63, 64_, 79, _91_

_Independent Whig_, iii. 534

India, i. 468; conquered by Dionysus, v. 21; invaded by Nadir Shah, vi.
  384

Inglefield, Captain, H.M.S. _Centaur_, _vi. 90, 92, 94-96, 99_

Ingleston, George, "Brewer," _i. 433_

Innocent II., Pope, _ii. 389_

Inquisition, Spanish, v. 558

_Inscription on the Monument of a Newfoundland Dog_, i. 280; _ii. 30;
  vi. 304_

Interlaken, _iv. 119_

Invercauld, _i. 171_

Ionian Islands, ii. 193

Iphis, _ii. 13_

Irad, son of Enoch, _v. 285_

Ireland, W.H. ("Flagellum"), _All the Blocks, an Antidote to All the
  Talents_, i. 294, 356

_Iris, The_, _i. 331_, ii. 383

Irish and Carthaginians, vi. 337

_Irish Avatar_, iv. _49_, 555; vi. 368, _439_

Iron Mask, Man in the, iv. 514

Irving, Sir Henry, iv. 78; as "Werner," v. 324

Irving, Washington, _Abbotsford and Newstead Abbey_, iv. 32, 38; _vi.
  497_, _Chronicle of the Conquest of Granada, vi. 30_, _History of the
  Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus, vi. 552_

_Isaiah_, ii. 166, _398_, iii. 305

Iskra, iv. 202

_Island, The; or, Christian and his Comrades_, _i. 173; iii. 459, 467,
  494_, v. 579-639; iv. _61_, 485; _v. 514_, vi. xvi, _106, 193, 405_

Isles of Greece, vi. 169

Ismail, siege of, vi. 264, 304-370

Ismenus river, ii. 189

Israello, Bertuccio, iv. _356_, 464

Italy, ii. 361; iv. 256; vi. 8

Ithaca, ii. 124, 177

Itys, _iv. 287_

Ilulus, i. 159


J



Jackals, vi. 382

Jackson, General Andrew, _iii. 298_

Jackson, "Gentleman," i. 433; _iv. 303; vi. 433_

Jackson, James Grey, _Account of the Empire of Marocco and Suez ... to
  which is added an account of Tombuctoo_, _vi. 51, 198_

Jackson, Lady, _The Court of the Tuileries_, _v. 567_

Jackson, Rev. Luke, _i. 70_

Jackson, William, a Keswick carrier, _vi. 177_

Jacobi, M., _i. 494_

Jacobinism, _v. 544_

Jacob's _Reports_, v. 204; _vi. 460_

Jacobs, _Epig. Græc_., i. 18

Jamat-al-Aden, the Mussulman paradise, iii. 197

Jamblichus, the philosopher, iv. 105; _v. 480_

James I., _i. 173, 198_, iv. 543

James II., ii. _121_, 292; iv. _504_

James V., ii. 295

Jāmā, _Medjnoun and Leila_, _iii. 160_

Janina, or Joannina (Yanina), lake of, ii. 129, 179, 189; Archbishop of,
  _iii. 145_

Japhet, v. 284

Jason, _i. 170_, vi. _177_, 521

Jassy, Treaty of, _v. 551_

Jeaffreson, Cordy, _Real Lord Byron_, iv. 32

Jefferies, Judge, i. 332

Jefferson, Thomas, _iv. 159_

Jeffrey, Francis, Lord, referred to in _English Bards, and Scotch
  Reviewers_, i. xiv, 301, 302, 332, 333, 339; Moore's duel with, i.
  _203_, 305, 333-335, 380; "self-constituted Judge of Poesy," i. 301;
  "his pay is just the sterling pound a sheet," i. 302; founder of the
  _Edinburgh Review_, i. 302; _v. 338_; reviews _Marmion_ in _E.R._, _i.
  310_, Montgomery's poems in _E.R._, _i. 331_; article on de Cavallos'
  work in _E.R._ by Brougham and, _i. 338_; Byron accused of personality
  towards, i. 382; "the Devil and Jeffrey," i. 429; lines in _Hints from
  Horace_ on, i. 430-433; counsel for Sir F. Burdett v. William Scott,
  _i. 436_, his articles in _E.R._ on:--_Childe Harold_, ii. 213;
  _Giaour_, iii. 77; _Corsair_ and _Bride of Abydos_, iii. 151, 219;
  _Hebrew Melodies_, iii. 377; _Prisoner of Chillon_, iv. 6; _Manfred_,
  iv. 80-82; _Beppo_, iv. 158; _Prophecy of Dante_, and _Marino
  Faliero_, iv. 329; _Sardanapalus_, _Two Foscari_, and _Cain_, v. 5,
  119, 204; _Heaven and Earth_, v. 282; _Werner, v. 338_; _Don Juan_,
  vi. xx; "refreshing," iv. 574; on Moore and Byron, v. 280; on the
  Pantisocratic or Lake School, vi. 175; on Byron's abuse of Southey,
  vi. 403; "once my most redoubted foe," vi. 404; his review of Barry
  Cornwall's _Sicilian Story_;--comparison of _Don Juan_ with _Diego di
  Montilla, vi_, _445_; holds up Scott as an example to Byron, vi. 459

Jehoshaphat, valley of, iv. 288

Jekyll, Joseph, _Corr_., _i. 319_; _vi. 413, 504_

Jemappes, battle of, _vi. 13_

Jenner, Edward, _i. 307_; and vaccination, vi. 50

Jephson, _Two Strings to your Bow_, _i. 345_; _The Servant with Two
  Masters_, _i. 445_

_Jephtha's Daughter_, iii. 387

_Jeremiah_, _iii. 312_; _iv. 43_

Jerningham, Edward, _The Nunnery_; _The Old Bard's Farewell_, i. 383

_Jerningham Letters_, _i. 383_

Jerningham, Sir George, Bart., _i. 383_

Jerreed, djerrid, jarīd, a Turkish javelin, in. 97, _168_

Jersey, Sarah, Countess of, _vi. 541_; vii. 37, 40

Jersey, Earl of, iv. 472

Jerusalem, iii. 401

Jesse, J.H., _Memoirs, etc., of George III._, _vii. 31_

Jesuits, the, ii. 493; _v. 558_

Jesus Christ, vi. 267

_Jeux d'Esprit and Minor Poems, 1798-1824_, vii. 1-88

Jews, v. 100, 236, 573

Jex-Blake, K., _The Elder Pliny's Chapters on the History of Art_, _ii.
  432_

Joan of Arc, i. 313

João V., Don, ii. 87

_Job, Book of_, iii. 406; iv. 498; vi. 59, _605_; vii. 34

Joel, _iv. 43_

_John Bull_, iv. _555_, 571; _v_. 206

_John Bull's Letter_, _iii. 280_; _vi. 75_

John, of Trocnow, surnamed Zižka, or the "One-eyed," v. 549

John George, elector of Saxony, v. 373

John II. of France, _v. 549_

John Casimir V., king of Poland, iv. 201, 205, 211, 212; _vi. 246_

_John Keats_, vii. 76

Johnson, James, _Musical Museum_, _vi. 64_

Johnson, Miss, _iii. 45_

Johnson, Dr. Samuel, _Lives of the Poets_, _i. 220, 401, 416, 423_;
  _Prologue to Irene_, _i. 400_; Boswell's _Life of_, _i. 401, 409,
  449_; _ii. 460, 489_; _vi. 247_; _Rasselas_, _ii. 37_, iii. 145; vi.
  574; "Hell is paved with good intentions," iv. 499; "brandy for
  heroes," _v. 592_; _Life of Milton_, vi. 174; _Life of Dryden_, _vi.
  182_; _Vanity of Human Wishes_, _vi. 183_; on misers, _vi. 455_;
  "liked an honest hater," vi. 482; _Dictionary_, _vi. 575_, and Lord
  Auchinlech's reminder, _vii. 35_

Johnston, J., "the Cheapside impostor," ii. 212, 213; iii. xx

Johnston, Major, leader of insurrection (1805) in N.S. Wales, _v. 588_

Johnstone, Sir James, _ii. 4_

Joncières, Victorini, v. 2

Jones, Inigo, _iv. 161_

Jones, Sir William, _iii. 86_; _A Grammar of the Persian Language_,
  _iii. 100_; _Solima_, _iii. 110_; _Asiatic Research_, _iv. 555_

Jonson, Ben, i. _304_, 398, 420; iv. 239; and Sylvester, _vi. 7_; _Every
  Man in his Humour_, _vi. 68_

Jordan, Mrs., _i. 353_

Jordan, Professor, _ii. 413_

Jornandes, _De Getarum Origine_, iii. 235

Joseph and Potiphar's wife, _vi. 255_

Joseph, king, ii. _53_, 89

Joseph II., Emperor, _vi. 313. 414_

Josephus, _v. 208_

Joshua, grave of, _vi. 220_

Joubert, Barthélémi Catherine, vi. 14

_Journal de Savants_, _iv. 578_

_Journal de Trévoux_, iv. 578

_Journal des Economistes_, _vi. 461_

_Journal in Cephalonia_, vii. 83

_Journal of a Soldier of the 71st Regiment_, _vi. 376_

_Journal of the Archæological Association_, _vi. 497_

_Journals of the House of Lords_, _iv. 542_

Joy, Mr., iv. 472

Juba, king of Mauretania, _vi. 236_

_Judges_, _iii. 118_

Julia Alpinula, ii. 256, 299

_Julian_ (_A Fragment_), iii. xxi, 419

Julian Alps ("Friuli's mountains"), ii. 348

Julian, Count, ii. 46, 89

Julian the Apostate, vi. 9

Juliet, i. 37, _38_; her tomb at Verona, _v. 562_

Julius Alpinus, ii. 299

Julius Cæsar, ii. _375_, 392, 434, 490, 514, _520_; v. 476

_Julius Cæsar_, vi. 268

Julius II., Pope, _iv. 271, 273_; _vi. 212_

Julius III., Pope, ii. 508

Jungfrau, the, ii. 385; iv. 81, 82, 94, _102_, 109

Junia, wife of Cassius, _ii. 374_

_Junius, Letters of_, iv. 476, 480, 512-515

_Juno_, wreck of the, _vi. 105, 107, 108_

Junot (Duke d'Abrantés), _ii. 39, 40_

Jupiter, i. 14; vi. 130

Jupiter Olympius, temple of, _i. 462_; ii. 167

Jupiter Optimus Maximus, temple of, ii. 412

Jura range, the, ii. 269, 273

Justin Martyr, _ii. 513_

Justinian, _ii. 166_

Justinius, _Hist._, _ii. 60_; _iv. 40_; _v. 79_

_Juvenal_, _i. 297, 303, 304, 351_; ii. _187_, 190, _416_, 516; iii.
  _16_, 301; _v. 63, 64, 543, 613_; vi. 27, _139, 254-256_

_Juvenilia_, i. xi


K

Kaff (Mount Caucasus), i. 378; vi. 292

Kahn, Gustave, _Don Juan_, vi. xx

Kalamas river (Acheron), ii. 131, 180, 181

Kalamata, gulf of, _iii. 249_

Kaleidoscope, vi. 109

Kamschatka, i. 492

Kant, Professor Immanuel, vi. 418; _vii. 32_

Kara Osman, or Carasman, Oglou, iii. 166

Kashmeer, the butterfly of, iii. 105

Katzones, Lambros, iii. 194, 219

Kava, cava, or ava, a Tongan intoxicating drink, v. 600

Kazdaghy, Mount, _vi. 211_

Kean, Charles, as "Sardanapalus," v. 2; as "Manuel, Count Valdis," _vii.
  48_

Kean, Mrs. Charles (Miss Ellen Tree), iv. 78; as "Myrrha" in
  _Sardanapalus_, v. 2

Kean, Edmund, _i. 344_; _iv. 338, 436, 584, 587_

Keary, C.F., _The Francis Letters_, _iv. 513_

Keates, Admiral Sir Richard Goodwin, _iii. 25_

Keats, George, _vi. 446_

Keats, Georgiana, _vi. 446_

Keats, John, _Lines_ on, iii. xx; vii. 76; and Coleridge, _v. 175_;
  "killed off by one critique," vi. 445; _Endymion_, _vii. 76_

Kebbiera, Lilla, _vi. 160_

Keble, _Christian Year_, ii. 292

Keith, Lord, _iii. 428_

Kellerman, General, _ii. 39_

Kemble, Charles, i. 46, _344, 353_

Kemble, John Philip, _iv. 338_

Kendal, Duchess of, _iii. 209_

Kennard, John Peirse, _v. 175_

Kennedy, Dr. James, _Conversations on Religion with Lord Byron_, _iii.
  393_; v. 199

Kennet, D.D., White, _Memoirs of the Family of Cavendish_, _v. 615_

Kenney, James, _i. 306_; _Raising the Wind_, i. 342; _Sweethearts and
  Wives_, _i. 343_

Kent, Duke of, i. 498

_Kent's London Directory_, _iv. 583_

Kentucky, wars of, vi. 348

Keppel, Admiral Augustus, Viscount, vi. 12

Khmelnítzky, Bogdán, _iv. 211_

Kibitka, springless carriage, vi. 383

Kidd, Captain, vii. 5

Kiepert, _Carte de l'Épire et de la Thessalie_, ii. xxiv

Killiecrankie, ii. 292

Kilworth, Lord, _i. 485_

King, "Jew," _i. 357_; _vi. 100_

King, Leonard W., his article "Assyria" in _Enc. Biblica_, v. 4

King, R.J., _Handbook to the Cathedrals of England_, _vi. 596_

King, Rosa, i. 357

_King John_, i. 356; vi. 165

_King Lear_, ii. 196; vi. 256, 446

_King Richard_, i. 401

King's College, Cambridge, i. 392

_Kings, Book of_, _v. 107_

Kingsley, Rev. Charles, _Last Buccaneer_, _iii. 451_; on _Don Juan_, vi.
  xviii; _Westward Ho!_ _vi. 483_; _Letters and Memoirs_, _vi. 517_

Kinkel, G., editor of _Bibliotheca Teubneriana_, _iv. 243_

Kinnaird, Douglas, iii. 375, _402_; iv. 70, _343_, 472, 478, _545, 549_;
  v. 325, 537; vi. _12, 100_, 373, _450, 455, 458, 546_; _vii. 77_;
  _Letter to the Earl of Liverpool_, _vi. 374_; _Letter to the Duke of
  Wellington on the Arrest of M. Marinet_, _ibid._

Kinnaird, Lord, iv. 472

Kipling, Rudyard, _Barrack-Room Ballads_, _v. 72_

Kirk, J.F., _History of Charles the Bold_, ii. 298

Kit-Cat Club, _vii. 57_

Kitto, _Travels in Persia_, _v. 294_

Kizlar aghasi, head of the black eunuchs, iii. 168

Kleeman, Nicholas Ernest, _Voyage de Vienne à Belgrade_, _vi. 216, 280_

Klencke, Professor, _Alexander von Humboldt_, _vi. 216_

Knebel, iv. 81

Kneller, Sir Godfrey, _vi. 496_

Knight, _American Mechanical Dictionary_, _v. 404_

Knight, Cornelia, _Personal Reminiscences_, _v. 563_; _Autobiography_,
  _vii. 35_

Knight, H. Gally (_Ilderim, a Syrian Tale_; _Phrosyne, a Grecian Tale_;
  _Alashtar, an Arabian Tale_), iv. 175; vi. 230; vii. 44, 45, 51,
  _60_, 70; Byron's _Ballad_ on, vii. 58

Knight, Richard Payne, _Taste_, _i. 337, 383_; _Monody on the death of
  C.J. Fox_, _i. 356_; _Specimens of Ancient Sculpture_, i. _378_, 454

Knight, Professor W., _Life of William Wordsworth_, _iv. 341, 582_;_ vi.
  91, 178_; _Shakespeare_, _vi. 487, 502_

Knight and Lacy, i. _234_, 452

Knights of St. John, _iv. 400_

Knolles, _The Turkish History_, vi. 259

Koch, _History of Europe_, _i. 468_; _ii. 364_; _iv. 197_

Kochlani horses, v. 496

Kodrikas, Professor Panagios (Panagiotes), translation of _Fontenelle_,
  ii. 198

Koepang Bay, v. 583

Kölbing, Professor Engen (_Englische Studien_), _Ada Byron, ii. 289_;
  _Siege of Corinth_, iii. 442, _449, 454, 472, 475, 496_; _Prisoner of
  Chillon, and other Poems_, iv. 6, _15, 21, 42_; _Mazeppa_, _iv. 214_;
  _Marino Faliero_, iv. 324, 329

Kolokotrones, _v. 556_

Kopreas, the herald, _ii. 431_

Korân, the, iii. _103, 109, 110, 113, 119_, 181, 186, _195_, 206

Kosciusko, v. 550, 551; vi. 418

Kotchúbey, Matrena, iv. 202

Kotzebue, Augustus Frederick Ferdinand von, _Pizarro_, i. 344, 489

Kourakin, Prince Alexis Borisovitch, vi. 307

Koutousof, Michailo Smolenskoi, Commander of Austro-Russians at
  Austerlitz, vi. 351-354

Koutsonika, Suliote leader, ii. 180

Krasnoi, battle of, _iv. 207_

Krdschalies, Turkish levies, _iii. 188_

Krüdener, Baronne de (Barbe Julie de Wietenhoff), _v. 564_

Kruitzner, Friedrich (Count Siegendorf), v. 327

_Kunst und Alterthum_, iv. _21_, 80, 81, _340_

Kyrle, John, "The Man of Ross," vi. 350


L

La Bédoyère, Charles Angélique François Huchet, Comte de, iii. 431

_La Revanche_, vii. 15

Lacedæmon, ii. 155

_Lachin y Gair_, i. 171

Lactantius, _De Falsâ Religione_, ii. 512

_Lady Hobart_, wreck of the ship, _vi. 96, 109, 110_

_Lady of the Lake, ii. 347_

Laertius, Diogenes, i. 18, _414_

La Fayette, _v. 567_; vi. 13

Lafitte, Jacques, Governor of Bank of France, vi. 456

Lafitte, Jean, chief of the Pirates of Barataria, _iii. 296-298_

Lafitte, Marshal, _v. 567_

Lafitte, Pierre, _iii. 297_

La Fontaine, de, vi. xviii; _Contes et Nouvelles en Vers_, _vi. 62_

La Harpe, Frédéric César, v. 564

Laing, Malcolm, _History of Scotland, etc._; _Poems of Ossian, etc._,
  _i. 183_

Laïus, _ii. 431_

Lake School of Poets, the, _ii. 115, 281_; iii. 320, _473_; _iv. 184,
  339, 485_

_Lalla Rookh_, _iii. 181, 186_; _iv. 176, 587_

Lamartine, _Voyage en Orient_, _ii. 171_

Lamb, Lady Caroline (_Glenarvon_), i. _301_, 476; ii. 429; iii. xx, xxi,
  _31_, 59; _iv. 177_; v. 329; vi. 138, 451; vii. 45

Lamb, Sir P., Viscount Melbourne, i. _300_, 380; _vii. 15_

Lamb, Charles, _i. 329, 343, 438_; _ii. 22_, iv. 478; _Specimens of
  English Dramatic Poets_, iv. 81, _377_; _v. 489_; _Triumph of the
  Whale_, iii. xx; _On the Tragedies of Shakespeare_, _v. 339_;
  _Fragments of Criticism_, _vii. 18_

Lamb, Hon. George, i. 300-302, _306_, 368, 380; _vii. 15_; _Whistle for
  It_, i. 338

Lamb, Hon. Mrs. George (Caroline Rosalie Adelaide St. Jules), _i. 301_;
  _iii. 31, 32_, vii. 15

Lamb, Mary, _i. 343_

Lamb, William, _i. 300, 306_

Lamberti, Anton Maria, _La biondina in gondoleta_, iv. _456_, 457

Lambro Canzani (or Lambros Katzones), iii. 194, 219

Lamech, v. 209

_Lament of Tasso_, _ii. 354_; _iii. 503_; iv. 139-152, 237, _266_; _v.
  152_; _vii. 55_

_Lamentations_, ii. 166

_L'Amitié est l'Amour sans Ailes_, i. _106_, 220; _ii. 12_

Lamotte, _i. 423_

_Lancashire Glossary_, _ii. 71_

Lancaster, Henry, Duke of, _v. 549_

Lanciani, Professor R., _Ruins and Excavations of Ancient Rome_, _ii.
  413, 416, 424, 425, 436, 440_

Lancilotto, iv. 321

Landino, _Commentary on Dante_, _iv. 272_

Landor, Walter Savage, Works, _iii. 402_; _Idyllia Heroica Decem. Librum
  Phaleuciorum Unum_, iv. 484; _Gebir_, iv. 485; _v. 613, 614_; _A
  Satire on Satirists, etc._, _iv. 518_; _v. 614_; _Juvenal_, _v. 613_;
  "that deep-mouthed Boeotian," vi. 445; his use of "commence" with the
  infinitive, _vi. 567_


Landsknechts, the, _v. 520_

Landwehr, Prussian troops at Leipsic battle, vii. 23

Lanfranchi, Palazzo, _vi. 402_

Lang, Andrew, _Life and Letters of J.G. Lockhart_, iii. 532; _The Making
  of Religion_, _v. 601_

Langeron, Andrault, Comte de, vi. 312

Langhorne, Rev. John, translator of _Plutarch's Lives_, _iv. 109, 251,
  352, 386, 423_; v. 4, 5, _21, 72, 486, 487, 506_; _vi. 139, 226, 270,
  339, 348, 376, 404, 477, 547_

Lansdowne, Lady, _iii. 72_

Lansdowne, Granville George, Lord, _Inscription for a Figure
  representing the God of Love_, _v. 633_

Lansdowne, Henry Petty, 3rd Marquis of, i. _319_, 340; iv. 472

Lanskoï, Catherine II.'s favourite, vi. _388_, 389, 391, 412

Lanzi, ii. 490

Laocoon, ii. 445; vi. 200

Laos river, ii. 134, 182

La Peña, Captain-General, _i. 469_

Lapland, i. 489

La Plata, _ii. 82_

_Lara_, iii. _188_, 219, 323-371, 443, _477, 508_; _vi. 235_

Lardner and Co., _i. 307_

La Rousse, _ii. 415_

Las Cases, _Mémorial de Ste. Hélène_, v. 537

Lascy, General de, vi. 340, 347

_Last Words on Greece_, vii. 85

Latour, Major A. La Carrière, _Historical Memoirs of the War in W.
  Florida and Louisiana_, _iii. 298_

Lauderdale, Lord, _iii. 45_; iv. 472; _vi. 67_

Laugier, Sig. Abate, _Istoria della Repubblica di Venezia_, iv. 332, 335

Laura, Petrarch's, vi. 145

Laurence, Richard, translation of _The Book of Enoch_, v. 281, _302_

Lausanne, _iv. 53_

Lavater, _ii. 107_

Laverne, L.M.P. Tranchant de, _The Life of Field-Marshal Souvarof_, _vi.
  222, 320-322_

Lawler, C.F., the pseudo-Peter Pindar, ii. 213

Lawrence, Sir Thomas, i. 389; iv. 565

_Lawrence_ v. _Smith_, v. 204

_Lay of the Last Minstrel_, i. 309, 310; _ii. 19_; _iii. 96, 472_; vi.
  406, 458, 560

Layard, Sir A.H., _Handbook of Painting_, _iv. 163_

Lazzarino, Vittorio, _Marino Faliero avant il Dogado_, _iv. 331, 403_;
  _Marino Faliero, La Congiura_, iv. 325, _332, 333, 346, 349, 351, 356,
  365, 383, 384, 432, 439, 448, 462_

Leacroft, Julia, i. _38_, 41

Leake, William Martin, _Researches in Greece_, ii. 174, 204

Leander, iii. 13, 178

Lear, i. 26, 400

Le Chevalier, Jean Baptiste, _Voyage de la Propontide, etc._, _iii. 13,
  179, 210_

Leckie, G.F., _i. 349_

Lecky, W.E.H., _History of England in the Eighteenth Century_, _iv. 513_

Le Clercq, Miss Rosa, actress, iv. 78

Lee, Harriet, _Kruitzner; or, The German's Tale_, v. 325, 326, 328-332,
  337, _349, 418_

Lee, Lady Margaret, _vi. 146_

Lee, Sophia, _The Young Lady's Tale; The Clergyman's Tale_, v. 337

Lee, Sophia and Harriet, _Canterbury Tales_, v. 325, 326, _381-384,
  446_; _vii. 33_

Leeds, Duchess of, _i. 443_

Leeds, Duke of, _ii. 23_

Leen river, _vi. 495_

Leeuwarden, _ii. 407_

Lefanu, Alicia, _Memoirs of Mrs. F. Sheridan_, vii. 33

Lefebvre, Marshal, ii. 94.

Leigh, Colonel George, _ii. 23_

Leigh, Hon. Mrs. George (Augusta Byron), _i. 283_; ii. 23, 212, 247,
  248, _288_; iii. _31, 32, 540_, 544; iv. 80; _vi. 22, 30, 410, 541_;
  _Stanzas to Augusta_, iv. 54; Epistle to Augusta, iv. 57; _Journal_ of
  Byron's Swiss tour, _iv. 95_

Leipzig (Leipsic), Fairs of, i. 489; battle of, v. _371_, 553; _vi. 50_;
  vii. 22, 23

Lely, Sir Peter, vi. _496_, 501

Le Mann, _vi. 22_

Leman, Lake, ii. 257, 269; iv. 17, 53

Lemprière, i. 437

Lenclos, Ninon de, _iv. 212_; vi. 246

Lens, Mr. Serjeant, _vii. 22_

Lentulus Spinther, _ii. 405_

Lenzoni, Marchioness, ii. 499

Leo X., Pope, ii. 489; iii. 367-369; _iv. 273_

Leoben, Treaty of, ii. 297

Leochares, _ii. 446_

Leon, Don Rodrigo Ponce de, _iv. 530_

Leone, Port, ii. 94

Leoni, Michele, Italian translation of _Childe Harold_, and of _Lament
  of Tasso_, _iv. 244_; of _Don Juan_, _vi. 8_

Leonidas, iii. 21; vi. 331

Leonora, Tasso's, iv. 145, 147

Leopardi, Alessandro, _iv. 336_

Leopold of Saxe-Coburg, _ii. 450_

Lepanto, battle of, ii. 126, 178, 340

Lepidus, _ii. 492_

Leptinus, Furius, ii. 520

Le Roux de Lincy, A.J.V., _Recuel de Chants historiques français_, v.
  472

Le Sage, _Diable Boiteux_, i. 56; _iv. 516_

Lesbia, i. 72

L'Espinasse, Mdlle. Claire Françoise, _ii. 209_

Lestrange, Sir R., _iv. 484_; _vi. 550_

Le Sur, Charles Louis, _Histoire des Kosaques_, _iv. 211_

Lethe, vi. 184

Letronne, J.A., _La Statue vocale de Memnon_, _v. 497_

_Letter to the Editor of My Grandmother's Review_, vi. 76

_Lettere di Torquato Tasso_, _iv. 143, 144, 146, 150_

Leucadia, now Santa Maura, ii. 126, 178

Leucadia's Cape (Cape Ducato), ii. 125

Leuctra, battle of, ii. 294

le Vasseur, Theresa, _ii. 266_

Levati, Professor Ambrogio, _Viaggi di Francesco Petrarca_, iv. 469

Levett, Ellis, _vi. 410_

Lewis, Matthew Gregory ("Monk" Lewis), i. _305_, 307, 346, _356_, 369;
  _iii. 473_; iv. _53_, 80-82, 325, 337, 342; _Tales of Terror_, i. 309,
  317; short account of, i. 317; _Tales of Wonder_; _Ambrosio the Monk_,
  _ibid._; _The Castle Spectre_, i. 317, 409, _489_; _Life and
  Correspondence of_, _i. 318_; _Romantic Tales_, _iii. 389_; _The Wood
  Demon_, v. 474

Lewtas, Matthew, _ii. 36_

_Lexicon Universelle_, _iv. 174_; _vi. 259_

Lezze, Luga da, _iv. 432_

Liakura mountain (Parnassus), i. 426; ii. 60, 62, 92, 186; iii. 113, 464

_Liberal, The_, iv. 281, 478, 479, _495, 518, 520_, 570; v. 279, 471,
  540; _vi. 266_; vii. 75, 76, 81

Libochabo, ii. 174, 177

Libokhoro, _ii. 134_

Licensing Act, _i. 415_

Licenza village, ii. 523

Licinus (Cæsar's barber), _i. 422_

Licoo, Tonga, v. 601

Lido, the, ii. 470

Lie, lye, or ley, solution of potassium salts, vi. 505

Lieven, Count de, _vii. 32_

Lieven, Countess de, i. 476; _vii. 32_

_Life, Writings, Times, and Opinions of Lord Byron_, _vii. 12_

Lincoln, Bishop of, _i. 356_

Lincoln Cathedral, vi. 596

Lincy, A.J.V. Le Roux de, _Recueil de Chants historiques français_, v.
  472

Lindenau, _vii. 83_

Lindsay, Lady Anne, _ii. 288_

Lindsay, Lord, _ii. 288_

Lightning, ii. 360, 488

Ligne, Charles, Prince de, vi. 333

Ligne, Charles Joseph, Prince de, vi. 312; _Mélanges Militaires, etc._,
  _vi. 313, 333_; _Memoirs_, _vi. 414_

Ligny, _vi. 345_

_Lines addressed by Lord Byron to Mr. Hobhouse on his Election for
  Westminster_, iii. xx; vii. 69

_Lines addressed to a Young Lady_, i. 70

_Lines addressed to George Anson Byron_ (spurious?), iii. xxi; vii. 41

_Lines addressed to the Rev. J.T. Beecher, etc._, i. 112

_Lines composed during a Thunderstorm_, _ii. 119, 130_

_Lines found in the Travellers' Book at Chamouni_ (spurious), iii. xxi

_Lines in the Travellers' Book at Orchomenus_, iii. 15

_Lines inscribed upon a Cup formed from a Skull_, i. 276; _iii. 129_

_Lines on hearing that Lady Byron was Ill_, _ii. 429_; iv. 63

_Lines on the Bust of Helen by Canova_, _ii. 370_

_Lines to a Lady Weeping_, iii. 45

_Lines to Mr. Hodgson. Written on board the Lisbon Packet_, vii. 4

_Lines to the Countess of Blessington_, _iv. 62, 64_; _v. 346_

_Lines written beneath a Picture_, iii. 19

_Lines written beneath an Elm in the Churchyard of Harrow_, i. 208

_Lines written in an Album at Malta_, iii. 4

_Lines written in "Letters of an Italian Nun, etc." by Rousseau_, i. 15

_Lines written in the Bible_ (spurious), iii. xx

_Lines written on a blank leaf of "The Pleasures of Memory"_, iii. 50

Lintot, Barnaby Bernard, publisher of Pope's _Iliad and Odyssey_, vi. 56

Lioni, Niccolo, iv. 465

_Lippincott's Magazine_, iv. 32

Lipsius, Justus, ii. 299; _Saturn. Sermon._, ii. 520, 521

Lisbon, ii. 32; assassinations in, ii. 36, 86

Lissa, naval battle of, _iii. 25_; _iv. 456, 457_

Liszt, Franz, Mazeppa the "symphonic poem," iv. 203

_Literary Chronicle_, iv. 571; v. 540, 584

_Literary Fund_, _i. 448_

_Literary Gazette_, _iii. 280_; iv. 478, 571; v. _196_, 540, 584; vi. xx

_Literary Panorama_, ii. xiv; iii. 444, 500

_Literary Register_, iv. 571, _580_

_Literary Souvenir_, iv. 314

_Literature_, v. 333

Litta, Conte Pompeo, _Celebri Famiglie Italiane_, _iii. 507_

Liverpool, Robert Bankes Jenkinson, 2nd Earl of, i. 496, _497_; _vi.
  374_; vii. 14, 20, 28

Lividia, Point, _iii. 248, 349_

Livingstone, David, _vi. 497_

Livy, ii. _372, 377, 391_, 392, _413, 496_, 505, 510, _512, 513_; _iv.
  251_; _v. 607_

Lloyd, Charles, _Poems on the Death of Priscilla Farmer_, i. 368

Lloyd, Robert, Odes to _Obscurity_ and _Oblivion_, i. 220

Loch na Garr, i. 238

Locke, John, i. 425; _ii. 353, 504_; _v. 615_; vi. 548, 610; _vii. 12_

Lockhart, John Gibson, _Life of Scott_, _i. 318, 397_; _ii. 88_; iii.
  443; _v. 206_; Lang's _Life of_, iii. 532; _A Sketch_, _v. 206_

Lodge, G.H., _Rosalynd_, ii. 293; _History of Ancient Art_, _ii. 431_

Lodi, battle of, _vi. 14_

Lofft, Capel, i. 359, 441

Logotheti, Signor, ii. 176

Lombardy, _ii. 342_; Venetian, iv. 197

London, _Don Juan's_ description of, vi. 425

_London Gazette Extraordinary_, _ii. 40_; _vi. 336_

_London Magazine_, iii. 535; _iv. 42_; v. 472; _vi. 188_

_London Review_, _i. 403_

Londonderry, Robert Stewart, Lord, iv. 560; v. 568, _569, 570_; vi. 307

Londos, Andreas, _vi. 168, 169_

Long, Edward Noel ("Cleon"), i. 101

Long, Sir Tylney, Bart., _i. 485_

Longfellow, translation of _Dante's Paradiso_, _iv. 247_

Longinus, _On the Sublime_, vi. 26, 74, 551

Longman, i. xii, _234_, 427; ii. x; v. 280; vii. 9

Longwood controversy, the, v. 538, _544_

Lonsdale, James, 1st Earl, _iv. 586_

Lonsdale, William, 2nd Earl, iv. _341, 582_, 585; vi. 5

_Lord Byron's Verses on Sam Rogers_, iv. 538

_Lord of the Isles_, _ii. 244_

Loredano, iv. 377

Loredano, Jacopo, _v. 123, 195_

Loredano, Marco, _v. 123_

Loredano, Pietro, Admiral of the Venetian fleet, v. 123

Lorraine, Claude, _ii. 168_; vi. 502

Lorraine, François Mercy de, ii. 186

Louis Philippe, _vi. 425_

Louis XII., _vi. 212_

Louis XIV., _i. 402_; _ii. 453_; iv. 334, _514_

Louis XV., _ii. 282_

Louis XVI., iv. _13_, 493

Louis XVIII., v. 539; _vi. 313, 333, 374_; _Letters d'Artwell_, v. 566

Louisiana, _iii. 296-298_

Louvel, _v. 567_

_Love and Death_, vii. 84

_Love and Gold_, iii. 411

Lovelace, Lady (Augusta Ada Byron), ii. 215, _287, 289_; _vi. 274_

Lovelace, Ralph Gordon Noel, 2nd Earl of, i. _262, 264_, 387; _ii. 215_;
  _MS._, _i. 265-267, 271-273, 277, 278, 387, 389, 391-397, 399, 400,
  402, 404-408, 410-413, 416, 418-430, 433, 434, 436, 438, 440, 443,
  444, 446-450_

Lovelace, Richard, _Orpheus to Beasts_, _iii. 165_; _To Althea--From
  Prison_, _iv. 28_

Lovelace, William King Noel, 1st Earl of, _ii. 215_

Lovell, Robert, _iv. 521_

_Love's Labour's Lost_, _vi. 87_

_Love's Last Adieu_, i. 109

Lowe, Sir Hudson, Governor of St. Helena, _ii. 239_; _v. 544, 545_; vi.
  444

Lowe, John Hudson, surgeon in the Army, _v. 545_

Lowertz, _iv. 97_

Lozère, _v. 549_

Lucan, _Pharsalia_, _ii. 156, 246, 372_

Lucanus, Ocellus, _De Universi Naturâ_, ii. 198

Lucian, _Veræ Historiæ_, _iv. 43_; _De Syriâ Deâ_, _iv. 115_;
  _Hermotimus_, _v. 396_

_Lucietta. A Fragment_, vii. 81

Lucifer, Byron's conception of, v. 199-203, 210; vi. 183

Lucius Faunus, _De Antiq. Urb. Rom._, ii. 510-513

Lucretia, iv. 334

_Lucretius_, _i. 485_; ii. 93, _121, 367_; iii. 57; _De Rerum Nat._, vi.
  604

Lucullus, L., vi. 563

Lud, General Ned, _vii. 42_

Luddites, the, vii. 42

_Ludus Coventriæ_, v. 200, _207_

Ludwig, Otto, iv. 329

Luis, Maria José, Regent of Portugal, _ii. 43_

Lunéville, Treaty of, ii. 297

Lupercalia, the, ii. 512

Lusieri, Don Battista, ii. _109_, 168, _171_, 172, 190

Luther, vi. 303, _380_

Lutherans, the, v. 520

Lutraki, or Utraikey, ii. _142_, 143

Luttrell, H., _vi. 175_

Lutzen, battle of, _iii. 431_; v. _371_, 553

Lycanthropy, vi. 380

Lyceum Theatre, _Werner_ at, v. 324; Moore's _M.P.; or, The Blue
  Stocking_ at, _vii. 12_

Lycophron, _Cassandra or Alexandra_, iv. 243

Lycurgus, i. 29

Lynedoch, Thomas, Lord, _i. 469_

Lyons, Gulf of, vi. 92

Lysander, _ii. 336_

Lysippus, _ii. 336_

Lyttleton, Lord, _iii. 209_

Lytton, Bulwer (_The Last of the Tribunes_), _ii. 415_; _vi._ 567



M

Macassar oil, vi. 19

Macaulay, Lord, _Lays of Ancient Rome_, _ii. 391_; Byron "singled out as
  an expiatory sacrifice," iii. 534; _Critical and Historical Essays_,
  iv. 72; _v. 542_

_Macbeth_, i. 84, _131_, 401, 408, 432; ii. _50, 57, 244_, 291, 307, _423,
  452_; _iii. 280, 346, 476, 480, 483, 510_; iv. 44, 157, 181, _338_,
  341, _386, 388, 401, 451_; _v. 393, 611_; vi. _12, 184, 199, 202, 203,
  265, 281_, 375, 441, 453, 505, 559, 578, 590, 594

Macchiavelli, ii. 369, 493

Macdonald of Rineton, Captain, _i. 192_

Macdonell, Sir James ("Jack Jargon"), vi. 508

Macdonough, Commodore, _vi. 508_

Macfarlane, Charles, _Constantinople in 1828_, _iii. 207_

Machiavelli, Niccolò, _The Prince_ (_Il Principe_), vi. 303, 424

Maciejowice, battle of, _v. 551_

Mackenzie, Sir Alexander Campbell, "Incidental Music to _Manfred_," iv.
  78

Mackenzie, Henry, _Julia de Roubigné_, _iii. 510_

Mackinnon, Daniel, _vi. 69, 276_

Mackinnon, Henry, _vi. 69_

Mackintosh, Sir James ("Dick Dubious"), iii. 535; vi. 507; _Vindiciæ
  Gallicæ_; _Introductory Discourse_; lecture in _The Law of Nature and
  Nations_, vii. 32

Macklin, _Love à la Mode_, _i. 464_

Maclise, Daniel, _iv. 540_; his portrait of Macready as "Werner," v. 324

McMahon, Colonel, _vii. 27_

Mac-Murchad, Dermot, king of Leinster, iv. 334

Macneil, Hector, _Scotland's Skaith, etc._; _The Waes of War_, i. 362;
  iv. 182

Macpherson, James, _Ossian_, i. 177, _183_; _iii. 26_

Macready, as "Pierre" in _Venice Preserved_, ii. 331; "the Doge" in
  _Marino Faliero_, iv. 324; as "Sardanapalus," v. 2; _Reminiscences_,
  v. 2, 114, 324; as "Francis Foscari," v. 114; "Werner," v. 324

Macri, Catinco or Katinka, _iii. 16_; _vi. 280_

Macri, Mariana, _iii. 16_

Macri, Theodora, ii. 176; _iii. 15_

Macri, Theresa (afterwards Black), "Maid of Athens," ii. _75_, 176; iii.
  15, 16

_Madame Lavalette_ (spurious), iii. xx

Madden, _i. 470_

Madison, President, _iii. 298_

Madrid, taken by the French, v. 550; its clime, vi. 409

Mæcenas, _ii. 409_

Maffei, _ii. 431_

Mafra, the Escurial of Portugal, ii. 37, 43, 87

Magarenses, the, _ii. 431_

_Magasin Encyclopédique_, _v. 302_

_Magazine of History_ (American), _iii. 298_

Magdalen College, Oxford, _vi. 496_

Magdeburg, siege of, v. 416

Maggior Consiglio (Great Council, Venice), _iv. 361, 382, 399, 427, 438_

Maghinard of Cavalcanti, Marshal, _ii. 501_

Maginn, William, _John Gilpin_ and _Mazeppa_, iv. 203; _Miscellanies_,
  v. 326, 329

Mahala, Cain's wife, v. 209

Maharbal, ii. 508

Mahmout Pasha, ii. 206

Mahomet (Macon), iv. 296; vi. 139

Mahomet II., ii. 201

Maï, Cardinal Angelo, ii. 324

Maid of Saragoza, ii. 58, 91

Maimonides, Moses, _Porta Mosis_, _iii. 109, 121_

Mainotes (or Mainates), ii. _169_, 193; iii. 83, 94, _132, 134_

Maitland, Captain F.L., of the _Bellerophon_, _v. 546_

Maitland, G., printer, i. 478

Majorian, Emperor, _iii. 251_

Malamani, _Isabella Teotochi, I suoi amici_, _iv. 457_

Malatesta, Parisina, _ii. 354_

Mal bigatto (silkworm), term of contempt and reproach, iv. 389

Malcolm, Colonel, _ii. 50_

Malcolm, Sir John, _History of Persia_, vii. 49

Malespini, Celio de', _alias_ Orazio, _iv. 144_

Malipiero, Doge Pasquale, v. 118

Mallet, i. 326

Malone, Edmund, editor of Spence's _Anecdotes_, _vii. 53_

Malo-yaroslavetz, battle of, _vi. 351_

Malplaquet, _iv. 262_

Malta, iii. 24;

Maltby, Harriet (Mrs. Nichols), i. 129, 263

Malthus, Thomas Robert, vi. 436, 459, 461, 555

Malthus, Mrs. T.R. (_née_ Eckersall), _vi. 461_

Malvern Hills, _v. 609_

Mamonoff, Dmitrief, Catherine II.'s favourite, vi. 389

Mamurra, vii. 17

Man in the Iron Mask (Man in the Black Velvet Mask), iv. 514

Mandeville's _Tales_, i. 314

Manetti, Giannozzo, _iv. 253_

_Manfred_, _ii. 122, 218, 223, 254, 286, 383, 424, 426_; iv. _15, 21,
  41, 48, 51, 52, 63-65_, 77-136, 325, 327, _340_; v. 199, 200, _223,
  227, 286_, 332, _385_, 469, _480, 500_; vi. xvi, _129, 198_; _vii. 55_

Manfrini Palace, _iv. 162_

Manichæans, the, v. 202, _209, 216, 232_

Manicheism, Byron's, v. _206_, 209, _254_

Manilius, _Astronomicon_, _v. 554_

Manin, Doge Lodovico, _iv. 457_

Manley, Mrs., _Secret Memoirs and Manners of several Persons of Quality,
  of Both Sexes, from the New Atalantis_, _vi. 453_

Manlius, M., _ii. 413_

Mann, Sir Horace, _iv. 339_

Manners, George, editor of _The Satirist_, _vi. 69_

Manners, Katherine Sophia (Lady Heathcote), vii. 17

Mannheim, vi. 419

Manoncourt, Sonnini de, _Voyage en Grèce et en Turquie_, ii. 191, 194

Mansel, Dr. William Lort, Bishop of Bristol ("Magnus"), i. 28

Mansfeld, _v. 340_

Mansfield, Lord, _vi. 247_

Mansion House, the, vi. 435

Mansour Effendi, _iii. 145_

Mantinea, ii. 294

Mantua, Ferdinando Carlo Gonzaga, Duke of, _iv. 514_

Manurza, Arab General, _v. 558_

Mar, Countess of, _vi. 246_

Marangoni, _Delle memorie sacre e profane dell' Anfiteatro Flavin_, _ii.
  521_

Marat, Jean Paul, vi. 13

Marathon, ii. _75, 99_, 102, 157, 158, 187, 255, 294; vi. 169

Marceau, General François Sévérin Desgravins, ii. 251, 296, 297; vi. 14

Marcello, Andrea, _v. 134_

Marcello, Giovanni, _iv. 432_

Marcellus, Nonius, _De Compt. Doct._, ii. 92

Marchetti degli Angelini, Conte Giovanni, _Discorso ... della prima e
  principale Allegoria del Poema di Dante_, iv. 237, 245

Marciana Library, Venice, _iv. 457_

Marengo, battle of, iii. 313; v. 538; _vi. 14_

Mareschalchi Gallery, Bologna, _iv. 162_

Maria I., Queen of Portugal, ii. 43

Maria da Gloria, of Portugal, _ii. 11_

Maria José Luis, Regent of Portugal, _ii. 43_

Marialva, Marchese, ii. 38, 86

Mariamne, wife of Herod the Great, iii. 400

Mariana, _Hist._, _iv. 523_

Marie Antoinette, ii. 7; _iii. 513_; iv. _13_, 334

Marie Louise, of Austria (Archduchess of Parma), wife of Napoleon,
  afterwards Madame de Neipperg, _iii. 311_; v. _498_, 539, 576

Marignano, battle of, _v. 498_

Mariner, William, _Account of the Tonga Islands_, v. 581, 584, 598-601,
  609, 639-631; _vi. 577_.

Marinet, or Nicholle, M., vi. 373, _374_

_Marino Faliero_, _ii. 337; iii. 485_; iv. 323-472; v. 3, _40_, 115,
  _139, 148, 158_, 332, _389_, 469, _479_; _vi. 24, 443_; _vii. 63_

Marius, Caius, _ii. 393_; iv. 251; vi. 477

Markland, J.H., editor of the Roxburgh Club issue of _Chester
  Mysteries_, _vi. 551_

Markow, General, vi. 333

Marlborough, John, Duke of, _i. 107, 493_; iii. 57; iv. _262_, 334; vi.
  174

Marlianus, _Urb. Rom. Topograph._, ii. 510

Marlowe, _The Tragical History of Dr. Faustus_, iv. 80, 81; v. 470, 483;
  _Edward II._, iv. 80; _Tamburlaine the Great, v. 489_

Marly, or malái, a grass plat for public ceremonies, Tonga, v. 600

Marmarotouri, ii. 199, 208

_Marmion_, i. _309_, 310, _311_, 312, 371; _ii. 360_; _iii. 289, 329,
  461, 475, 518_; _iv. 13_; _v. 542_; vi. 426

Marmont, _v. 553_

Marsden, Mary, _iv. 38_

Marshall, Frank, v. 324

Marshall, John, _Royal Naval Biog._, _v. 589_

Marston, Westland, _Our Recent Actors_, v. 324

Marston Moor, battle of, i. 2

Martia, Cato's wife, vi. 270

Martial, _Epig._, _ii. 410, 412_; _iii. 16_; _v. 613_; vi. 27, 550; vii.
  74

Martin, Henry, the regicide, iv. 477, 482

Martin, Isaac, _v. 593_

Martin, Dr. John, _Mariner's Account, etc._, v. 581, 584, _598-601_

Martin, Lady. _See_ Faucit, Helen

Martin, Sir Theodore, _iii. 32_

Martin, R. Montgomery, _The Indian Empire_, _vi. 384_

Mary, Queen of Scots, _ii. 453_; _v. 605_; vi. 246, 396

Masham, Lady, _ii. 353_

Masham, Mrs., iv. 334

Mason, Monck, _Massinger_, i. 220, _304_

Massena, ii. 89

Massingberd, Mrs., _vi. 100_

Massinger, i. 292, _304_, 345; _The Two Noble Kinsmen_, _ii. 217_;
  _Unnatural Combat_, iii. 219; _iv. 35_; _A New Way to Pay Old Debts_,
  iv. _436_, 525; _vi. 393_

Masson, C.F.P., _Mémoires Secrets sur la Russie_, _vi. 321, 351, 388,
  399, 412_

Massorites, the, _v. 219_

Matapan, Cape, vi. 147

Mathews, Charles, _Memoirs_, _v. 477_

Mathias, J.T., _Pursuits of Literature_, i. 294, _374, 383_

Matten, _iv. 119_

Matthews, Charles Skinner, ii. x, xi, 16, 95; _vi. 153_; vii. 9

Matthews, Henry, _Diary of an Invalid_, _iv. 131_

Mattioli, Count Ercole Antonio (Man in the Iron Mask), iv. 514

Maturin, Charles, iii. 444; _Bertram_, _iv. 338_; vi. xiii, _4_;
  _Manuel_, vii. _45_, 48

Matz, F., _Antike Bildwerke in Rom._, _ii. 395_

Maugabree, Moorish mercenaries, iii. 168

Maupertius, President of the Berlin Academy, _ii. 282_

Maurice, Rev. Thomas, _History of Ancient and Modern Hindostan_;
  _Richmond Hill_; _Memoirs_, i. 330

Mauritania, ii. 114

Mawman, J., i. xii

Maxwell, Sir Herbert, Bart., _The Life of the Duke of Wellington_, _vi.
  345_

Maxwell, John, Lord, ii. 4, 25

Maxwell, W.H., _Life of the Duke of Wellington_, _vi. 345_

Maypo, battle on the plains of, _v. 556_

Mazarin, Cardinal, _vi. 317_

_Mazeppa_, iii. xix; iv. _193, 198_, 201-233, _423_; _vi. 124, 162, 246,
  262_

Mazeppa, or Mazepa, Ivan Stepánovitch, iv. 201, 327

Meadley, G.W., _Two Pairs of Historical Portraits_, _ii. 415_

Meadowbank, Lord, _i. 436_

_Measure for Measure_, ii. _102_, 166, _367_; _iii. 90_; _v. 541_

Mecca, ii. 151, 186

Mecklenburg, Albrecht Wenceslaus Eusebius, Count of Waldstein, Duke of,
  v. 371

Medea, i. 170; vi. 177, 536

Medes, v. 4

Medici, Cosmo de', ii. _365_, 503

Medici, Giovanni de', _ii. 365_

Medici, Giuliano de', _ii. 375_

Medici, Julian de', _ii. 489_

Medici, Lorenzo de', _ii. 365, 375_; iv. 280

Medici, Venus of, ii. 489

Medici, the, ii. _355_, 503

Medici Chapel, _ii. 375_

Medici Gallery, Florence, _iv. 162_

Medinah, ii. 151, 186

Mediterranean, _ii. 460_

Medwin, _Conversations with Lord Byron_, _i. 93, 189, 276, 355_; iii.
  xx, _17, 59_, 76, _90_, 443, _472_; iv. _39, 40_, 81, 238, 326, _410_,
  478, _545, 555_; v. 119, 279, 281, _296, 321_, 331, _348_, 469-471;
  _vi. 22, 138, 188_; vii. _58, 64_, 71, 75, 77, _78_ _Angler in Wales_,
  _iv. 539_

Mee, Mrs. Anne, a miniature-painter, vii. 37

Megara, ii. 362

Meillerie, ii. 303-306; _iv. 18, 107_

Meineke, Augustus, editor of _Menandri et Philemonis reliquæ_, _vi. 186_

Meiner, Christopher, _History of the Female Sex_, i. 489

_Mejnoun and Leila_ (the _Romeo and Juliet_ of the East), iii. 160

Meknop, General, vi. 306, 354

Melancthon, vi. 380

Melbourne, Elizabeth, Lady (née Milbanke), _i. 300, 301_

Melbourne, Viscount (Sir Peniston Lamb), i. _300_, 380; _vii. 15_

Meleager, _Epitaphium in Heliodoram_, _iii. 32_

Meletius of Janina, Archbishop of Athens, _Ancient and Modern
  Geography_, ii. 198; _Eccles. Hist._, ii. 208

Melton Mowbray, vi. 504

_Melville's Mantle, etc._, i. 294, 356

Memmo, Jacopo, _v. 170_

Memmo, Marco, v. 120

Memmo, Marin, _v. 170_

Memnon, statue of, v. 497; vi. 500

_Mémoires de Trévoux_, iv. 578

_Memorials of Coleorton_, _iv. 585_

Menabrea, F.L., _Notices sur le machine Analytique de Mr. Babbage_, _ii.
  215_

Menander, ii. 178; _vi. 186_

Menard, Claud, _Histoire de Messire Bertrand du Guesclin_, _v. 549_

Mendeli, the ancient Pentelicus, ii. 186

Mender river, _vi. 204, 211_

Mendoza, _i. 433_

Menelaus, king, vi. 535

Mengeaud, Napoleon's surgeon, _v. 546_

Menken, Adah Isaacs, iv. 203

_Merchant of Venice_, ii. 331, 342; iv. _166, 273, 436_, 473; vi. 472

_Mercure de France_, vi. xx, _387_

Meretrici, in Venice, _iv. 456_

Merivale, Charles, Dean of Ely, the historian, _iv. 283_

Merivale, Herman, Under-Secretary for India, _iv. 283_

Merivale, J.H., _Greek Anthology_, _i. 367_; _iii. 32_; _Orlando in
  Roncesvalles_, iv. 156, 279, 283; _The Two First Cantos of
  Richardetto_, iv. 156

Merry, Robert, i. 358, _441_

_Merry Wives of Windsor_, _i. 496_; _v. 388, 410_; vi. 484

Meschinello, G., _La Chiesa Ducale_, _iv. 390_

Mesihi, _iii. 86, 105_

Mestri, _vii. 72_

Metastasio, _iv. 264_

Metella, Cecilia, tomb of, ii. 402-405

Methodism, ii. 302

Metsovo, Monte (Pindus), ii. 126, 129

Metternich, Prince, v. 539, 575; _vii. 39_

Mexico, _ii. 82_; gulf of, _iii. 296_

Meyer of Aaru, the brothers, _iv. 109_

Meyer, F.J.L., _Voyage en Italie_, _iv. 470_

Mezzofanti, Giuseppe, ii. 324

Michael Angelo, ii. 369, _375, 376, 432, 435, 446_; iv. 270, 280; his
  "Last Judgment," iv. 272; his "Moses," iv. 271, _273_; _vi. 262_

Michaelis, A., _Ancient Marbles in Great Britain_, i. 455

Michaelis, Professor Johann David, _iv. 498_

Michie, Rev. J., _i. 192_

Michiel, Madame Giustina Renier, translation of _Shakespeare_; _Origine
  delle Feste Veneziane_, _iv. 456, 457_

Midas, v. 573

Middleton, Dr. Conyers, _Life of Cicero_, ii. _362, 408_, 523

_Midsummer Night's Dream_, _iv. 21_; _v. 408_; vi. 535

Migne, _Opera Cassiodori_, _iii. 306_; _Patrologiæ Cursus_, _vi. 168_

Miguel, Dom, of Portugal, _ii. 11_

Milan, Filippo Visconti, Duke of, v. 116, 133

Milbanke, Lady, _i. 437, 443_

Milbanke, Miss. _See_ Byron, Lady

Milbanke, Sir Ralph, _i. 301_

Milbourne, Rev. Luke, _Notes on Dryden's Virgil_, i. 220

_Milit. Dict._, _vi. 305, 343, 353_

Milky Way, the, ii. 439

Mill, James, _vi. 480_

Millbank Penitentiary, vii. 34

Miller, William, publisher, i. 311; ii. x

Miller, Mr. (U.S.A.), _iii. 307_

Miller, "Joe," i. 301

Milliard, vi. 542

Millin, A.L., _Voyage dans le Milanais_, _ii. 507_

Milman, Dean, _History of Latin Christianity_, _ii. 336, 338_;
  _Belvidere Apollo_, _ii. 447_; _History of the Jews_, _iii. 400_;
  _Fall of Jerusalem_, iv. 339; "Cybele's priest," vi. 445;
  "poet-priest," vii. 76

Milner, Joseph, _ii. 283_

Milo and the Oak, iii. 307

Miltiades, vi. 171

Milton, John, _Paradise Lost_, i. 312, 313, _397, 404_; _ii. 64_; iii.
  111; iv. _133, 135_, 245, _274_, 504, 506; v. 203, 204, 208, _216,
  234, 255, 262, 272_; vi. 6, _183_, 518; Hayley's _Biography of_, _i.
  321_; "deigns to doze," i. 428; _Lycidas_, i. 446; _iii. 480_; iv.
  _227_, 241; _Sonnets_, _ii. 364_; _Samson Agonistes_, ii. 422; his
  lyric measure, _iii. 128_; _Comus_, _iii. 209_; his blank verse, iii.
  224; _Morning of Christ's Nativity_ (_The Hymn_), _iv. 115_;
  "pratticke," _iv. 167_; his _terza rima_, iv. 239; his Satan, v. 201;
  use of "shook," _v. 135_; "thou shalt believe in," vi. 74; his first
  wife, vi. 146, 174; "the Prince of Poets," vi. 174; Lord Thurlow on,
  _vii. 20_

Milton, Mrs. John (_née_ Powell), vi. 146, 174

Minden, battle of, _vi. 12_

Minerva, i. _447_, 457-474

Minetto, Giacomo, iii. 442

Mingrelia, _vi. 279_

Minos, _iv. 518_

Minotaur, fable of the, vi. 125

Minotti, iii. 448, 458

_Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border_, ii. 4

Minturnæ, iv. 251

Mira, La, _ii. 349_

Mirabeau, Honoré Gabriel Riquetti, Comte de, _v. 548_; vi. 13

_Mirror_, the, iv. 32

_Miscellaneous Poems_, vii. 69

Misers, vi. 48, 455

Mississippi river, _iii. 196_

Missouri, _vi. 349_

_Mistère du Viel Testament_, v. 200, _207, 226_

Misti Consiglio X., _iv. 447_

Mitford, Miss, _Christina, the Maid of the South Seas_, v. 582

Mitford, William, _Greece_, _iv. 566_; _v. 16, 24_; vi. 460

Mithridates, king of Pontus, _ii. 393_; iv. 40

Mobility (_mobilité_) defined, vi. 600

Mocenigo, Giovanni, _iv. 432_

Mocenigo, Doge Tomaso, v. 118

_Modern British Drama_, _iii. 200_

_Modern Universal History_, _ii. 82_; _iv. 211, 258, 523_; _v. 499_

Mohammed II., _ii. 173_

Mohammed Ben Abd-el-Wahab, ii. 151

Mohammed Pasha, _ii. 140_

Moira, Francis Rawdon, Lord (1st Marquis of Hastings), _i. 497_; _iii.
  45_

Molière, vi. _246_, 510; _Dom Juan, on Le Festin de Pierre_, vi. xvi,
  _11_

Molina, Tirso de (Gabriel Tellez), _El Burlador de Sevilla y Convidado
  de Piedra_, vi. xvi

Molinari, Signor, _vi. 205_

Mollett, John W., _Life of Sir D. Wilkie_, ii. 92

Mollwitz, battle of, vi. 337

Momus, the god of cruel mockery, v. 396

Monaci, Lorenzo de, _iv. 349, 356_

Monbron, Fougeret de, _Le Cosmopolite, ou le Citoyen du Monde_, ii. 1

Moncey, ii. 94

_Moniteur, Le_, i. 489; v. _562_, 575; vi. 12; _vii. 41_

_Moniteur Universel_, _v. 552_

Monk, General, ii. 292

_Monk of Athos, The_, ii. xiii

Monkir and Nekir, inquisitors of the dead, iii. 121

Monmouth Street, noted for sale of second-hand clothes, iv. 160

_Monody on the Death of the Right Hon. R.B. Sheridan_, iv. 69-75, 79; v.
  537

Mont Blanc, iv. 87

Montagu, Lady Mary Wortley, _vi. 151_; _Letters_, _vi. 219, 246_

Montague, Mrs., _iv. 573_

Montaigne, ii. 345; vi. 379

Montanti, Antonio, sculptor and architect of Florence, _iv. 272_

Montanvert, iv. 475

Montebello, battle of, _vi. 14_

Montecuccoli, Raimondo, _iv. 262_

Montemajor, Jorge de, _Diana_, _i. 44_

Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat, Baron de, _Considérations ... de la
  Grandeur des Romains, etc._, _ii. 393_

Montfauçon, _Diarium Italic._, _ii. 431_, 511, 515

Montford, Colonel, _vii. 24_

Montgomery, James, _The Wanderer of Switzerland, etc._, i. 107, _305_,
  330, _331_, 370; _ii. 450_

_Monthly Literary Recreations_, _i. 234_

_Monthly Magazine_, i. 441; iv. 156, 229, _367_; v. 540; _vi. 87_

_Monthly Review_, _i. 379_; iii. 444, 499; iv. 82, 158, _165_, 203, 240;
  v. 472, 540, 584; vi. xx

Montholon, Count, _v. 548_

Monti, Vincenzo, ii. 324, 496; iv. 245, 325

Monticolo, G., _Le Vite dei Dogi di Marin Sanudo_, _iv. 462_

Montmartre, heights of, v. 553

Montmorenci, Jean Mathieu Felicité, Duc de, v. 539, _573_, 575

Montorsoli, _ii. 446_

Montpensier, Comte de, Charles V., Dauphin d'Auvergne, _ii. 390_; iv.
  258; v. _495_, 498, 515-518, _520_

_Montreal Herald_, _vi. 508_

Montrond, Casimir, Comte de (Byron's "preux Chevalier de la Ruse"), vi.
  507

Montrose, Marquis of, _iv. 338_

Montucci, A., _Tragedie di Alfieri_, _iv. 368_

Mooa, capital of an island (Tonga), v. 600

Moor, Charles de, _iii. 296_

Moore, Dr. John, _Letters to Burns_, _i. 118_; _Zeluco_; _Various Views
  of Human Nature, etc._, ii. 8; _A View of the Society and Manners in
  Italy_, iv. 333-335, 469; _History of Ireland_, _iv. 334_

Moore, Sir John, _ii. 8_

Moore, Thomas, _Life of Lord Byron_, i. xii, xiii, _2, 4, 5, 15, 21, 25,
  26, 33, 45, 78, 84, 88, 89, 93, 98, 119, 128, 184, 192, 205, 210, 213,
  222, 224, 257, 259, 261, 280, 303, 304, 310, 325, 327, 347, 349, 368,
  387, 411_, 475, _497, 499_; ii. xii, _16, 20, 34, 65, 118, 139, 187,
  236, 258, 304, 322, 324, 352, 369, 387, 461_; iii. xix, xx, _15, 16,
  25, 30_, 75, _90, 103, 109, 128, 272, 280_, 304, 319, 320, _329, 331_,
  376, _415_, 443, 444, _477_, 531, 535, _537_; iv. 3, 31, 32, _35, 36,
  39, 58, 61, 63, 74, 92, 213, 267, 308, 340, 447, 489, 545, 587_; v.
  _82, 210, 348_, 470, 471, _477, 489, 610_; _vi. 21, 128, 143, 297,
  578, 601_; _viii. 12, 18, 19, 21, 71, 82_; _Poetical Works of the late
  Thomas Little_, i. _78_, 202, _305_, 307, 319, 324, 325, 333, _431_;
  vi. 43; Byron's letters to, _i. 195_; _ii. 30, 238, 351, 447_; iii.
  _69_, 75, 77, 149, 219, _249, 255_, 303, 319, 320, 376, _413, 417,
  423, 433, 496_; iv. _53, 64_, 69, 157, _159, 169, 176, 178, 214, 279_,
  411, _478, 520, 538, 555, 558, 561_, 570, _578_; v. 202, 204, _242,
  255_, 470, _561_; vi. xvii, _24, 149, 227, 302, 373, 403, 578_; _vii.
  35, 37, 42, 46, 48, 70, 71, 73, 74_; and Jeffrey, i. _203, 305_,
  333-335; referred to in _English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers_, i. 321,
  370; "Anacreon," _i. 374_; _Intercepted Letters; or, The Twopenny
  Post-Bag, by Thomas Brown the Younger_, _i. 496_; iv. 158, _555_; vii.
  16, _22, 27, 29, 30_; the stanza on Beckford, in _Childe Harold_, _ii.
  37_; _The Meeting of the Waters_, _ii. 246_; _Irish Melodies_, iii.
  73; _Lalla Rookh_, _iii. 87, 181, 186_; _iv. 176, 587_; _vi. 230_; on
  _The Corsair_, iii. 217; _Corsair_ dedicated to, iii. 223; _Notices,
  etc._, _iv. 63_; _Life of Sheridan_, iv. 69, 73; _Lines on the Death
  of Sh-r-d-n_, _iv. 74_; referred to in _Beppo_, iv. 183; Byron's
  exclusiveness, _iv. 472_; calls Madame de Staël the Begum of
  Literature, iv. 570; "Tracy" of _The Blues_, _ibid._; _M.P.; or, The
  Blue Stocking_, _iv. 573_; _vii. 12_; on _Cain_, v. 204; _Loves of the
  Angels_, v. 280, 281; _Fables for the Holy Alliance_, _v. 563_; "the
  question of posterity," vi. 6; "flirtation with the muse of," vi. 75;
  "Oft in the Stilly Night," _vi. 234_; _Fudge Family in Paris_, _vi.
  243_; _Fum and Hum, the Two Birds of Royalty_, _vi. 389, 451_;
  "reigned before and after me," vi. 444; "Here's the Bower she lov'd so
  much," vi. 447; on Byron's first rhymes, _vii. 1_; Byron's _Jeux
  d'Esprit_ on, vii. 12, 16; his _noms de plume_, vii. 12; the "When
  Rogers" incident, _vii. 17, 18_; on _The Devil's Drive_, _vii. 21_;
  "Epigram," _vii. 22_; at Venice, _vii. 72_

Moors, expelled from Granada, ii. 47; Cadiz captured from, _ii. 77_

Moorzuk, _vi. 474_

Morat, battle of, ii. 255, 297; bones, ii. 298

Moravians, the, i. _305_, 322

Mordaunt, Miss, as "Ida" in _Werner_, v. 324

More, Mrs. Hannah, _Bas Bleu_, _iv. 176, 573_; _Coelebs in Search of a
  Wife_, vi. 18

More, Sir Thomas, _iii. 265_

Morea, the, i. 457; iii. 83, 270, 447

Moreau, Jean Victor, vi. 14

Morelli, Cosimo, ii. 324

Morelli, Giacomo, ii. 324

Morelli, Abbate Jacopo, _Chronica iadratina seu historia obsidionis
  Jaderæ_, _iv. 331_; _Monumenti Veneziani_, iv. 332, _456, 457_

Morena, ii. 55

Moreotes, the, _v. 556_

Morgan, Sydney, Lady (_née_ Owenson), _Woman, or Ida of Athens_;
  _France_; _Italy_, ii. 187; _v. 158_; vi. 233; _Memoirs_, _iv. 587_

_Morgante Maggiore_, iv. 157, 279-309; vi. xvi, _184_

Morghen, Raphael, _iii. 314_

Moriah, the goddess of folly, _i. 82_

Morier, James, _A Journey through Persia_, i. 492, _500_

Morley, John, _Rousseau_, _ii. 266_

_Morning Chronicle_, _i. 319, 347, 444, 445, 489_; ii. xii, 212; iii.
  _45, 46, 51, 55, 57, 58_, 79, 80, 151, 304, _315_, 377, _419, 431,
  435_, 532-534; _iv. 74, 177, 555-557, 559, 560_; v. _130_, 203, 539,
  540, _553, 556, 572, 578, 602_; _vi. 11, 437, 451_; vii. _13_, 14,
  _23, 28, 32, 41, 86_, 88

_Morning Herald_, _vi. 179_

_Morning Post_, i. _31_, 34, _308, 309, 350, 351, 357, 358_, 441, _485_,
  489, 499; _ii. 397, 401_; iii. 534; _v. 544_; vi. 175, 452, 494; vii.
  _6, 21_, 44, _66_

Mornington, Lady (Catherine Long), _i. 485_

Mornington, William Wellesley Pole, 3rd Earl of, _ii. 79_

Mornington, William Pole-Wellesley, 4th Earl of, i. 484

Morocco, vi. 198

Morosini, Conte Domenico, _Medea in Corinto_; _Giulio Sabino_, _iv. 456,
  457_

Morosini, Doge Francesco, ii. 165; _iv. 459_

Morrison, James, boatswain's mate on the _Bounty_, _Journal_, _v. 588,
  594, 622_

Morritt, J.B.S., _ii. 88_

Morven, Mount, i. 182, 191

Moscow, i. 487; Napoleon's retreat from, iv. 207; v. 551; _vi. 351_; its
  clime, vi. 409

Moses, Michael Angelo's statue of, iv. 271, _273_; vi. 380

Moses, Henry, engraver of Canova's Works, _iv. 536_

Mossop, Henry, tragedian, i. 26

Mosti, Agostino (Tasso's gaoler), _iv. 146_

Mottley, John, _i. 301_

Moussine-Pousckine, Count Alexis Iwanowitch, vi. 307

Moustoxides (or Moustoxudes), Andreas, ii. 324; iv. _456_, 457; _Su i
  Quattro Cavalli della Basilica di S. Marco in Venezia_, ii. 472

Moxon, _iv. 485_

Mozart, iii. 376; _vi. 586_; _Don Giovanni_, vi. xvi

Muchtar, or Mukhtar, Pasha, of Berat, ii. 148; iii. 144; _vi. 244_

Mucia, Pompey's third wife, _vi. 139_

Mules, Italian name of bastards and foundlings, vi. 609

Muley, Abul Hacen, king of Granada, _iv. 530_

Mulgrave, John Sheffield, Earl of, i. 354

Müller, the artist, _vi. 321_

Müller, F. Max, _Sacred Books of the East_, _iii. 110_

Müllinen, _iv. 119_

Muncker, Thomas, Notes on the _Fabulæ_ of Hyginus, _vi. 535_

Munster, Duchess of, _iii. 299_

Müntz, Professor E., _ii. 424_; _Raphael_, _iv. 174_

Murad Effendi (Franz von Werner), iv. 329

Murat, Joachim, king of Naples and the Two Sicilies, ii. 90; iii. 432;
  _v. 550_

Muratori, ii. 502; _Nov. Thes, Inscr. Vet._, _ii. 519_; _Italic. Rerum
  Scriptores_, _iv. 332, 349, 352, 462_; _v. 134_

Murin, Tio, ii. 94

Murphy, Arthur, _Apprentice_, _vi. 601_

Murray, Dr. A.S., _History of Greek Sculpture_, _ii. 432, 441_

Murray, Joe, _i. 280_; _ii. 27, 52_; vii. 6

Murray, Rev. William, _i. 347_

Murray, A.H. Hallam, _iii. 60_; MS. of _Ich Dien_, vii. 36

Murray, John, I., _ii. 169_

Murray, John, II., Byron's letters to, i. _21, 208_, 293, _325, 411,
  421, 422_, 453, 475; ii. xii, _11, 15, 16, 22, 187_, 211, 212, _215,
  287, 304, 305_, 307, 311, 313, _324, 334, 343, 344, 359, 366, 369,
  370, 375, 381, 429, 453, 460, 461_; iii. xx, _32_, 75, 76, _102, 128,
  137_, 151, 155, _181, 187, 197-199, 206, 210, 270, 301_, 303, _308,
  312, 324, 435_, 443, _449, 468, 488, 519, 540, 544_; iv. 3, _21_, 31,
  _36, 54_, 70, 79-81, _107, 126, 136_, 157, _162, 163, 165, 168, 174,
  182, 198, 214_, 237, 239, _245, 259_, 279, 280, 285, _304, 308_, 313,
  325-328, _332, 339, 340, 362, 366, 367, 431, 436, 447, 471_, 475, 478,
  479, _490, 536, 539, 542, 545, 549, 555_, 569; v. 3, _15, 64_, 115,
  201, 202, 204, _271, 272_, 279, 331, _367_; vi. xvi, xvii, _3, 4, 8,
  18, 52, 70, 75, 76, 87, 142, 153_, 160, _175, 210, 260, 263, 294,
  428_; _vii. 45, 47, 48, 62, 66, 69, 72, 77_; Byron's copy of
  _Catullus_, _i. 75_; Byron's copy of _English Bards, and Scotch
  Reviewers_, i. 291, 294; Byron on _Edinburgh Review_ of _English
  Bards, and Scotch Reviewers_, i. 293; _Marmion_, i. _310_, 311; MS.
  of:--_English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers_, _i. 354_; _Hints from
  Horace_, i. 387, _390, 391-394, 397, 399, 405, 406, 408, 411, 412,
  414, 416, 418, 421, 426, 429, 430, 439-444, 448, 449_; _The Waltz_,
  _i. 487, 488, 490, 492, 493, 496, 498, 501_; _Childe Harold_, ii. xvi,
  xvii, _11, 71, 249, 327-330, 332-337, 339, 341-346, 352-354, 357-359,
  361, 363, 365, 368, 370, 371, 375, 377-382, 385, 388, 389, 391, 392,
  394, 398-401, 403, 404, 406, 407, 409, 410, 413, 415, 418, 427, 429,
  431-434, 436, 438-446, 448, 449, 453-456, 458-462_; _Poems of
  1809-1813_, _iii. 1, 2-4, 6, 12, 23, 24, 28, 61, 64, 65, 67-72_;
  _Lara_, _iii. 335_; _Hebrew Melodies_, _iii. 382, 383, 388, 389_;
  _Poems of the Separation_, _iii. 532, 540, 545_; _The Giaour_, iii.
  78; _Fare Thee Well_, iii. 532; _Morgante Maggiore_, iv. 281;
  _Sardanapalus_, _v. 14, 15, 17, 19, 21, 31, 34, 38, 43, 47, 49, 52,
  54, 56, 58, 60, 66, 68, 70-72, 75, 76, 78, 84, 88, 89, 91, 93, 95, 97,
  102, 103, 109, 110_; _Two Foscari_, _v. 124-127, 132, 135, 137, 138,
  141, 148, 149, 159, 160-162, 165, 171, 175, 188, 192-194_; _Cain_, _v.
  219, 220, 228-230, 233, 234, 239, 240, 246, 252, 265_; _Werner_, _v.
  339, 368, 391, 406, 407_; _Age of Bronze_, _v. 571, 577_; _Don Juan_,
  _vi. 35, 53, 58, 71, 72, 87, 159_; _La Revanche_, vii. 16; _E Nihilo
  Nihil_, vii. 56; _The Ballad_, vii. 60; _Another Simple Ballat_, vii.
  62; _Lucietta_, vii. 81; _Song to the Suliotes_, vii. 84; accepts
  _Childe Harold_, ii. x, xi; suppression of stanzas in _Childe Harold_,
  _ii. 65_; Byron on _Quarterly Review_ and Lady Morgan's _France_, _ii.
  187_; Shelley and the _Childe Harold_ MS., ii. 211; purchase of
  _Childe Harold, Canto III._, ii. 212; his compliment to Lady Byron,
  _ii. 288_; the Morat bones, ii. 298; Byron's autograph MSS., _iii.
  411, 419, 425_; bears testimony to Byron's genius, iii. 444; Scott's
  letter on _Cain_ dedication, _v. 206_; declines _Don Juan_, vi. xvi;
  the stanzas on Castlereagh in _Don Juan_, _vi. 8_; copyright of _Don
  Juan, Canto XVII._, _vi. 608_; Hammond his "chief 4-o'clock man,"
  _vii. 49_; the offer of Madame de Staël's _Considérations sur la
  Révolution Française_, _vii. 49_; his share in _Blackwood's Edinburgh
  Magazine_, vii. 51, 57; his "columns," vii. 55; _Navy List_, vii. 57;
  Mrs. Rundell's _Domestic Cookery_, _ibid._; bookseller to the
  Admiralty, and the Board of Longitude, vii. 58; Gally Knight, vii. 59,
  62; his offer of £2000 to Byron, _vii. 77_

Murray, John, III., dedication of _Marino Faliero_ to Goethe, iv. 328,
  _340_; MS. of _Werner_, v. 326

Murray, John, IV., _iii. 66_

Murray, Sir George, _vi. 374_

_Murray_ v. _Benbow and Another_, v. 204

Murray's Handbooks--_Central Italy_, _ii. 373, 380_; _iv. 275_;
  _Constantinople_, _vi. 220_; _Greece_, _ii. 117, 125, 157, 166, 189_;
  _Northern Italy_, _ii. 372_; _iv. 336, 392, 430_; _Rome_, _ii. 389,
  403_; _iv. 271, 273_; _Switzerland_, ii. 306; _iv. 98_

_Murray's Magazine_, _ii. 229_; iii. 319, _324_; vii. 10, 69, 85, 86

_Musæ Etonenses_, _i. 336_

Musæus, _De Herone atque Leandro_, _iii. 178_

Musca, ii. 89

Musk-bull, vi. 478

Mussulmans, Albanian, ii. 144; their devotion, ii. 302

Musters, John, _i. 210_

Musters, Mrs. Chaworth. _See_ Chaworth, Mary Anne

_My Boy Hobbie O._, vii. 66

_My Epitaph_, _iii. 38_; vii. 10

_My Grandmother's Review_, _iv. 578_

Myrina, Queen of the Amazons, v. 5

Myrrha, a character in _Sardanapalus_, v. 12

_My soul is dark_, iii. 389

_Mystery Plays_, v. 207



N

Nabopolassar, _v. 107_

Nadir Shah, or Thamas Kouli Khan, vi. 384

Naef, A., _Guide to the Castle of Chillon_, _iv. 14, 15, 19_

Nahum, _v. 4_

Naldi, Giuseppe, i. 346

Nani, Bartolommeo, v. 115

Nani, Maria or Marina, v. 115

Napier, _History of the Peninsular War_, _i. 469, 470_; ii. _53, 54_,
  87, 90-94

Napoleon Buonaparte, his snuff-box, _i. 355_; vii. 77 mentioned in
  _Hints from Horace_, i. 410; the affair of Copenhagen, _i. 468_;
  "Buonaparte's fiat," i. 487; fall of Hamburg, _i. 488_; "then flamed
  of Austerlitz the blest despatch," _i. 489_; unwhiskered, _i. 493_;
  repulsed at Vimiera, _ii. 39_; "to swell one bloated chiefs
  unwholesome reign," ii. 56; abdication of Ferdinand VII., _ii. 78_;
  invasion of Spain, ii. _82_, 90; blockade of Corfu, _ii. 193_;
  Shelley's _Feelings of a Republican on the Fall of Buonaparte_, _ii.
  227_; "there sunk the greatest, nor the worst of men," etc. (_Childe
  Harold_), ii. 238-241, 294; his star, ii. 270; the Horses of St. Mark,
  _ii. 336_; the Venus de' Medici, _ii. 365_; Coleridge on, _ii. 397_;
  described by Pitt as "the child and champion of Jacobinism," etc.,
  _ii. 400_; v. 544; a prisoner, _ii. 453_; "Waterloo," _ii. 459_; vi.
  539; and Mrs. Spencer Smith, _iii. 4_; his abdication, iii. 303; _Ode
  to_, iii. 305-315; his _Farewell_, iii. 427, 428; "crushed by the
  Northern Thor," iv. 179; the retreat from Moscow, _iv. 207_; vi.
  _351_, 352; _Werther, v._, _iv. 342_; his reply to the Venetian
  envoys, iv. 456; Scott's _Life of_, _iv. 456_; crowned king of Italy,
  iv. 458; his death, iv. 489; Hazlitt on, iv. 570; at St. Helena, v.
  537, 538 (see also _The Age of Bronze_); his grave, v. 548; his wife
  Marie Louise, _v. 576_; causes his soldiers to be vaccinated, _vi.
  50_; takes Missouri from the Spaniards, _vi. 349_; and the sculptor
  Bartolini, _vi. 360_; in _Don Juan_, vi. 377; his cancer, vi. 378;
  "Ceres fell with Buonaparte," vi. 383; his blue eyes, vi. 396; "Ah! my
  old Guard," vi. 418; "Where is Napoleon the Grand?" vi. 450; "shrink
  to a Saturn," vi. 452; and the Comte de Montrond, _vi. 507_; "Ausu
  Romano, ære Veneto," _vi. 590_; his escape from Elba, vii. 41

_Napoleon Buonaparte, Ode to_, _ii. 187, 238_; iii. 305-315; iv. 49,
  269; vi. 12

_Napoleon's farewell_, iii. 427; _iv. 111_

_Napoleon's Snuff-Box_, vii. 77

Napoli di Romania, iii. 447

Nardini, F., _Roma Vetus_, ii. _510_, 511, _513, 515_, 517

Nash, the architect, _i. 349_

Nash, Edward, artist, iv. 475

Nasoni, Giovanni Gradenigo, iv. 465

Nathan, Isaac (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 375; _Fugitive Pieces_, iii.
  376, _381, 383, 387, 388, 390, 400_

National Gallery, _i. 472_

_National Intelligencer_ (U.S.A.), _iii. 297_

Nauck, A., _Incert. Fab. Fragm._; _Trag. Græc. Fragm._, _iv. 264_

Naupli, Gulf of, _i. 457_

Navagero, Andrea, _Storia della Republica Veneziana_, iv. 326, 332,
  _349, 463_; v. 115

Neapolitan Government, v. 574

Nebuchadnezzar, Nabuchadonosor, vi. 235, _236_

Nectanebus II., _v. 543_

Negropont, the, iii. 173

Neipperg, Count Albert Adam de, _iii. 311_; v. 539, 576

Nekir and Monkir, inquisitors of the dead, iii. 121

Nelson, vi. 14

Nemesis, ii. 426, 518, 519

Nemi, village of, ii. 454

Nemours, Gaston de Foix, Duc de, _i. 107_; vi. 212

Neoptolemus, or Pyrrhus, v. 577

Nepos, Cornelius, _Epam._, _vi. 376_

Nepos, Emperor, iii. 301

Neptune, v. 616; vi. 130

Nereus, iv. 243

Nero, Emperor, _i. 349_; ii. _408, 409_, 472; iv. 124; v. 606; vi. 181

Nero, the Consul, v. 606

Nerva, _ii. 412_

Nervii, the, _vi. 339_

Nesselrode, Count, v. 539; _vii. 39_

Nessus, robe of, vi. 447, 575

Neuhaus, _iv. 119_

Neuman, Johannes Christiaan (A. van Amstel), iv. 5

Neumann, i. 476

Neva, _vi. 475_

_New English Dictionary_, _i. 314_; ii. _4, 57, 70, 122, 146_, 172, 181,
  _205_, 294, _325, 385_; _iii. 113, 157_; _iv. 13, 166, 171, 172, 445_;
  _v._ 228; _vi. 68, 208, 316, 473, 487, 550, 567_

New Grenada, _v. 555_

_New Monthly Magazine_, i. 452, 453; _ii. 366_; _iv. 65, 552, 564_; v.
  282, 584; vi. xx

New Orleans, _iii. 296_

_New Plan of the Town of Nottingham, A_, _vii. 1_

New South Wales, insurrection (1805) in, _v. 588_

_New Testament_, v. 208

_New Vicar of Bray, The_, vii. 78

Newbury, battle of, _i. 3, 121_

Newcastle, Duke of, _i. 457_

_Newcastle Herald_, _i. 373_

Newstead Abbey, i. 1, 116, 256, _280_; _ii. 16_; iii. 27; the lake at,
  iv. 60; description of, vi. 495

_Newstead MS._, _i. 47, 79, 82, 87, 91, 129, 130, 147-150, 153, 155,
  159-162, 164-168, 174-178, 181, 182, 185-188, 212, 213, 217, 220, 226,
  228, 229, 231, 233, 240, 242, 244, 247, 253-256, 258, 262, 263_

Newton, Professor A., _iii. 130_

Newton, Sir Isaac, iv. 47; vi. _303_, 400

Newton, D.D., Thomas, _Life of Milton_, _vi. 146_

Ney, Michel, Duke of Elchingen, _vi. 373_

Nicholas III., iii. 503

Nicholle, or Marinet, M., vi. 373, _374_

Nicholls, Colonel E., _iii. 298_

Nichols, John, editor of Hardinge's _Miscellaneous Works_, _vi. 508_

Nichols, Mrs. (Harriet Maltby), i. 129, 263

_Nicnac_, iii. xxi; vii. _41_, 42

Nicolo III. (d'Este) of Tuscany, _ii. 354_

Nicopolis, ii. 128, _148_, 179

Niebuhr, _vi. 122_

Niger, delta of the, iv. 515

Nightingale and the rose, iii. 86; v. 428, 612

Niketas, Greek general, _v. 556_

Nile, v. 550

Nimrod, v. 14, 18, 28, 36, 58; vi. 235, _236_

_Nineteenth Century_, iv. 5; v. 326, 329

Nineveh, fall of, v. _4, 13_, 25; vi. 348

Ninus, king of Assyria, _v. 11_

Ninya, _v. 79_

Niobe, ii. 389

Nisbet, Mary (Lady Elgin), _i. 463_

Nisbet, William Hamilton, _i. 463_

Nisus, _i. 151, 175_; _ii. 387_

Nitrous oxide gas, _i. 307_

Nizam Gedidd, new Turkish ordinance, ii. 207

Noah, i. 325; v. 284

Noble, Rev. Mark, continuation of Granger's _Biographical History of
  England_, _iii. 298_

Noel, Captain the Hon. F.L. King, _iv. 159_

Noel, Lady, vi. 274; vii. 75

Noel, Lady Anna Isabella (Scawen Blunt), _ii. 215_

Noel, Hon. Elizabeth, _i. 437_

Noel, Hon. Roden, _Life of Lord Byron_, ii. xiii; _ii. 117_; _iii. 18_

Nogaret, _v. 554_

Nonius Marcellus, ii. 92

Norbury, Mr., private secretary to Lord Granville, _vii. 36_

Norbury, Hon. Mrs., _vii. 36_

Nordlingen, battle of, _ii. 186_

Norfolk, Charles Howard, 11th Duke of ("Jockey of Norfolk"), vii. 28

Normanby, John Sheffield, Marquis of, i. 354

North, Lord, _i. 500_

Norton, Mrs., _i. 343_

Nossa Señora da Peña, Convent of, ii. 35, 85

Notaras, ii. 203

_Notes and Queries_, _ii. 430, 460_; _iii. 72_; _iv. 15, 46, 75, 530,
  533_; _vi. 483_; _vii. 59_

Nott, Dr. George Frederick, Prebendary of Winchester and Salisbury, vii.
  78

Notti, Signori di, iv. 465

_Nouveau Dictionnaire de l'Économie Politique_, _vi. 461_

_Nouvelle Biographie Universelle_, _iii. 311_; _v. 499_

_Novelists Magazine_, _iv. 519_

Novi, battle of, _vi. 14_

Nugent, _vi. 175_

Numa Pompilius, _ii. 416_; vi. 24

_Numbers_, _ii. 271_

Nunez, translation of de Quevedo's _Sueños, etc._, _iv. 484_

_Nuovo Archivio Veneto_, iv. 327, _331, 332, 349, 403, 462_

Nympholepsy, ii. 415


O

Oakes, Major-General Hildebrand, iii. 25

Oaths, British and Continental, vi. 440

_Observations upon Observations_, v. 537; _vii. 75_

_Observer_, _i. 414_

_Occasional Pieces_ (_Poems_, 1809-1813; _Poems_, 1814-1816), _ii. 37_;
  iii. xix

_Occasional Poems_, _iii. 449_

_Occasional Prologue previous to the Performance of the Wheel of
  Fortune_, i. 45

Ocellus Lucanus, _De Universi Naturâ_, ii. 198

Ochakof, siege of, _vi. 313_

Ockham, Viscount, _ii. 215_

O'Connell, Daniel, iv. 559

Odalisques, ladies of the Seraglio, vi. 277

_Ode from the French_, _ii. 227_; iii. 431; _iv. 110_; _vi. 266, 373_

_Ode on the Death of Sir Peter Parker_, iii. xix, 417

_Ode on Venice_, _ii. 338_; iii. xix; iv. 193, 203, _458_

_Ode to a Lady whose lover was killed by a ball, which at the same time
  shattered a portrait next his heart_, iv. 552; _vi. 144_

_Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte_, _ii. 187, 238_; iii. 305-315; _iv. 49,
  269_; _v. 519_; _vi. 12, 348_

_Ode to the Framers of the Frame Bill_, vii. 13

_Ode to the Isle of St. Helena_ (spurious), iii. xx

Oder, river, v. 348

Odessa, vi. 264

O'Doherty, parody of the "Pisa letter," v. 204; _Miscellanies_, v. 326

Odysseus, _iii. 272_

OEdipus, ii. 93, _431_

Ogilvy, _i. 314, 403_

Ogle, Sir Chaloner, _vii. 48_

_Oh, Shame to thee, Land of the Gaul_ (spurious), iii. xx

_Oh! snatched away in beauty's bloom_, iii. 388

_Oh! weep for those_, iii. 385

_Old Testament_, _iii. 187_; v. 199, 279

Oliphant, Mrs., _Annals of a Publishing House_, iii. 444

Olivier, G.A., _iii. 13_; _Voyage dans l'Empire Othoman_, _iii. 188_

Ollah, a Turkish cry, iii. 168

Olympias, mother of Alexander the Great, _ii. 123_; _v. 543_

Olympieion, Temple of Zeus Olympius, _i. 462_; ii. 167

Olympus, Mount, ii. 286

Olytsika, Mount (ancient Tomarus), ii. _132_, 182

Omar Khayyám, Rubáîyát, _iii. 87, 109_

Ombre, the game of, iv. 507

O'Meara, Dr. Barry Edward, _Napoleon in Exile, or a Voice from St.
  Helena_, v. 537, 540, _544-547_

_Omegarus and Syderia_, _iv. 42, 43_

_On a change of Masters at a Great Public School_, i. 16, _84, 91_

_On a Cornelian heart which was broken_, iii. 48

_On a distant view of the village and school of Harrow-on-the-Hill_, i.
  25

_On a Royal Visit to the Vaults_ (_Windsor Poetics_), vii. 36

_On being asked what was the "Origin of Love"_, iii. 65

_On finding a Fan_, i. 253

_On Jordan's banks_, iii. 386

_On leaving Newstead Abbey_, i. 1; _vi. 499_

_On Lord Thurlow's Poems_, vii. 17

_On Moore's last Operatic Farce or Farcical Opera_, vii. 12

_On my Thirty-Third Birthday_, vii. 73

_On my Wedding-Day_, _ii. 322_; vii. 64

_On Napoleon's Escape from Elba_, vii. 41

_On Parting_, iii. 23

_On revisiting Harrow_, i. 259

_On the Birth of John William Rizzo Hoppner_, vii. 54

_On the Bust of Helen by Canova_, iv. 536

_On the day of the Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus_, iii. 401

_On the death of a Young Lady, Cousin to the Author, and very dear to
  Him_, i. 5

_On the death of Mr. Fox_, i. 34

_On the death of the Duke of Dorset_, iii. xxi, 425

_On the eyes of Miss A---- H----_, i. 244

_On the Morning of my Daughter's Birth_ (spurious), iii. xx

_On the Quotation "And my true faith can alter never, / Though thou art
  gone perhaps for ever"_, ii. xxi, 65

_On the Star of "The Legion of Honour"_, iii. 436

_On this day I complete my thirty-sixth year_, vii. 86

_One struggle more, and I am free_, iii. _31, 32_, 36

O'Neill, Miss Elizabeth (afterwards Lady Becher), actress, _ii. 331_;
  _iv. 338_; vii. 50

Opera Comique, _i. 413_

Opie, Mrs., _The Warrior's Return_, _iii. 424_

_Oracle, The_, _i. 358_

Orange, Prince of, _iv. 197_

Orazio, _alias_ Celio de' Malespini, _iv. 144_

Orbe, Madame, ii. 304

Orchomenus, iii. 15

O'Reilly, Count Alexander, vi. 56

Orestes, _i. 175_; ii. 427

Orford, Lord (Horace Walpole), _Reminiscences_; _Works_, _iii. 209_;
  _iv. 340_; _Memoirs ... of George II._, vii. 76

_Oriental Antiquities_, _ii. 136_

Orla, i. 177

Orleans, Duke of, _ii. 282_; iv. 334

Orlow (Orloff), General, _vi. 314, 353, 354_

Ormsby, John, translation of _Don Quixote_, ii. 178

Orosius, _Hist._, ii. 179, _392_, 512

Orpheus, i. 437, 484; ii. 11; vi. 173

Orsini, the, _v. 576_

O'Ruarc, Dervogilla, iv. 334

O'Ruarc, Tiernan, _iv. 334_

Orthodoxy, _vi. 267_

_Oscar of Alva_, i. 131; _ii. 343_

Ossian, _Poems_, i. 1, 116, 177, _183, 191_, 229; _iii. 100, 115, 389,
  416, 426_; _iv. 126_; vii. 2

_Ossian's Address to the Sun in "Carthon"_, i. 229; _iv. 126_; vii. 2

Ossory, John, 1st Earl of, _i. 500_

Otaheite (Tahiti), v. 582-584, _588_

_Othello_, i. _340_, 342; iii. _131_, 313, 540; _iv. 164_; vi. 271,
  _379, 502_, 543

Otho, _v. 63, 64_

Otway (_Venice Preserved_), i. 306, 345; ii. 331, 342; iv. 325, 326,
  _454_; _vii. 57_

Ouchy, iv. 3

Oude, Begum of, iv. 72

Outalissi, _i. 430_

Ovid, i. 437; _v. 573_; vi. 26, 139, 218; _Metamorph._, _ii. 13_; _iii.
  199_; _v. 570_; vi. 38, _177, 235_, 273, _535_; _vii. 9_; _Amor._, ii.
  _31, 367_, 509; _v. 289_ _Fasti_, _ii. 255_, 515; _iv. 164_
  _Heroïdes_, iii. 178; _vi. 447, 575_

Owen, Rev. E.C. Everard, _ii. 82, 157_, 172, _335_

Oxenstiern, Chanc. Axel, vi. 531

Oxenstiern, John, _vi. 531_

Oxford and Mortimer, Edward, 5th Earl of, _ii. 11_

"Oxoniensis" (Rev. J.H. Todd), v. 202

_Oziosi_, the, a literary society at Florence, _i. 358_



P

Pacchierotti, _vi. 207_

Pacciaudi, ii. 472

Pactolus, v. 487

Padua, _iv. 262, 386_

Page, Mrs. Anne, _vi. 442_

Paine, Tom, vii. 65

Palæopolis, _iii. 184_

Palafox, ii. 78, 94

Palampore, a flowered shawl, iii. 117

Palatine, Rome, ii. 407; iv. 257

Palazzi, _Fasti Ducales_, _v. 124, 195_

Paley, _vii. 32_

Palgrave, Sir Francis (formerly Cohen), translation of _Old Chronicle_
  (Marino Faliero); _Rise and Progress of the English Constitution_;
  _History of the Anglo-Saxons_, iv. 462

Palikar, general name for Greek and Albanese soldiers, ii. 144, 183

Pallas Athene, vii. 12

Palmer, E.H., _Sacred Books of the East_--translation of the Qu'rân,
  _iii. 110, 181, 195, 206_

Palmerston, Lady (Cowper), _i. 301_

Palmerston, Lord, i. 57, 476

Pambotis, lake of Yanina, ii. 179

Pan, vi. 130

Pandion, king of Attica, _iv. 287_

Pandora, i. 285

_Pandora_, wreck of the, _vi. 96_

Panizzi, Preface to the _Orlando Innamorato_ of Boïardo, iv. 281

Pantaloni, nickname of the Venetians, _ii. 339_

Pantheon, Rome, ii. 435

Pantisocracy, iv. 521; vi. 174

Panvinius, _ii. 392_

Paphos, ii. 19, 63

Paracelsus, _v. 208_

Parcæ, the, vi. 220

_Parenthetical Address_, iii. 55

Parga, pirates of, ii. _145_, 146, 147; vi. 171, _172_

Paris, Treaties of, ii. _342_, 402; _v. 550, 576_; Allied Army in, _iii.
  431_; v. 553

_Parisina_, _ii. 113, 288, 354_; iii. 377, 443, 505-548; _iv. 35_, 141,
  215; v. 326

Park, Mungo, _Journal of a Mission to the Interior of Africa_, _v. 631_

Park Theatre, New York, _Werner_ at, v. 324

Parker, Charlotte Augusta (_née_ Byron), _iii. 417_

Parker, Christopher, _iii_. 417

Parker, Margaret, i. 5

Parker, Rev. J., translation of Dionysius' _Celestial Hierarchy_, _v.
  286_

Parker, Bart., Sir Peter, _i. 5_; iii. 417

Parkins, Miss Fanny, _vi. 578_

_Parliamentary Debates_, _i. 412_; _v. 545_; _vi. 69, 506, 549_

_Parliamentary History_, _i. 412_

Parma, Alessandro Farnese, Duke of, _iv. 262_

Parma, University of, _ii. 354_

Parnassus (Liakura), i. 426; ii. 60-62, 92, 129, 186; iii. 113, 464

Parnell, _Vigil of Venus_, _i. 317_; _ii. 279_

Paros, island, iii. 273

Parrot, Professor Friedrich, _Journey to Ararat_, _v. 294_

Parry, Sir Edward, _Voyage in 1819-1820 in Search of a North-West
  Passage_, iv. 496; vi. 51, _478_, 491, 521

Parsons, William, _i. 358_

Parthenon, Athens, i. 454, 455, _462, 463_; ii. 166, 172

Parthians, the, _ii. 412_

Parton, James, _Life and Times of Benjamin Franklin_, _v. 554_

Pascal, _vi. 379_

Pasiphae, vi. 126

Pasqualigo, Nicolò, _iv. 456, 457_

Pasqualigo, Orio, _iv. 432_

Pasqualino, _iv. 171_

Pasquin, v. 471

Passavant, J.D., _Raphael of Urbino_, _iv. 174_

Paswan Oglou, iii. 188

Paterculus, C. Vell., _Hist._, _ii. 492_

Paternoster Row, iv. 574; vii. 9

Paterson, Sir John, _iii. 301_

Patras, ii. _124_, 178

Patroclus, _i. 175_; _ii. 462_; _vi. 117_, 204

Patterson, Commander Daniel, _iii. 298_

Paul, Czar, _vi. 333_

Paul III., Pope, _ii. 411_; _iii. 122_; _iv. 270_

Pausanias, king of Sparta, and Cleonice, iv. 108

Pausanias, the Sophist, ii. 85; _Laconica_, _iv. 108, 566_; _Descriptio
  Gratiæ_, _v. 526_

Pauw, Cornelius de, _Recherches philosophiques sur les Grecs_, _i. 414_;
  ii. 191, 194-196

Pavia, battle of, _v. 503_

Payne, J., _i. 356_

Paxos, _ii. 193_

Pazig, Christianus, _Magic Incantations_, _v. 289_

Peachey, or Peachie, _i. 208_

Peacock, "that royal bird, whose tail's a diadem," vi. 326

Peacock, Thomas Love, _ii. 355_; iv. 3, _18_, 475; _Melincourt_, iv.
  569, _574_; _Nightmare Abbey_, iv. 569

Pearson, John, _vii. 14_

Pearson's _Cautions, etc._, _i. 417_

Pedro III., Portugal, _ii. 43_

Peel, Sir Robert, _v. 572_

_Peggy_, wreck of the American ship, _vi. 103_

Pelagius, ii. 89

Pelayo, ii. 46; v. 558

Peleus, _v. 488_

Pelican, the, iii. 130

Pellegrino, _Caraffa_, _ii. 486_

Pemberton, _vi. 400_

Peña, Convent of Nossa Señora da, ii. 35, 85

Penelope, ii. 124

Peninsular War, i. 469; _iii. 416_

Pennant, Thomas, _Some Account of London_, _vi. 435_

Pentelicus, Mount (Mount Mendeli), ii. 186

Penthesilea, Queen of the Amazons, v. 526

Perceval, Spencer, i. _28, 471_, 472, _496_, 497; _ii. 79_; _vii. 28_

Percy's _Reliques_, _i. 317_; _ii. 22_

Pericles, i. 462; ii. 190

Perkinean Institution, London, _i. 308_

Perkins, Benjamin Charles, his metallic tractors, _vi. 50_

Perrier, M. Casimir, _Opinions et Discours_, _v. 566_

Perry, editor of _Morning Chronicle_, iii. 532; vii. _37_, 44

Persians, capture Teos, _vi. 171_; "taught three useful things," vi. 572

_Persius_, _i. 304_; _ii. 201_

Peru, Independence of, _v. 556_; vi. 457

Pescara, Ferdinando Francesco dagli Avalos, Marquis of, _iv. 262_

Peter the Great, iv. 202; _v. 564_; vi. 381

Peter III., vi. 388

Peter Pindar. _See_ Wolcot, Dr.

Peterborough, Lord, _i. 484_; _v. 576_

Peterborow, Henry Mordaunt, Earl of, _iv. 504_

Peterwaradin, battle of, _iii. 455_

Petrarch, i. 108; ii. 350-353, _365_, 371, 372, _415, 424_, 478,
  501-503; iv. 239, 265; and Laura, ii. 480-484; vi. 145; on the
  conspiracy of Marino Faliero, iv. 468; "the Platonic pimp of all
  posterity," vi. 218

Petronius, "Arbiter Elegantiarum" to Nero, i. 349; _Satyricôn_, vi.
  _380_, 602

Pettigrew, T.J., _vi. 497_

Petty, Lord Henry (afterwards Marquis of Lansdowne), i. 31, 57, 340,
  _471_

Peucker, Dr. Karl, _Griechenland_, ii. xxiv

Phædra, vi. 254

Pharnaces II., _ii. 398_

Phelps, as "Jaffier" in _Venice Preserved_, ii. 331; as "Manfred," iv.
  78; as "The Doge" in _Marino Faliero_, iv. 324; as "Werner," v. 324

Phelps, Edmund, as "Ulric" in _Werner_, v. 324

Phidias, i. _378_, 454; iv. 270

_Philadelphia Record_, vii. 62

Philanthes, _ii. 485_

_Philanthropist, The_, _ii. 554_

Philemon, _vi. 186_

Philip of Macedon, i. 56; ii. 166; _v. 543_

Philip II. of Spain, ii. 504; _iii. 299, 309_

Philippi, battle of, _iv. 386_

Philips, Ambrose, _Epistle to the Earl of Dorset_; _Pastorals_, i. 418

Phillips, Josiah, printer and publisher of _The Authentic Memoirs of
  the Court of England for the last Seventy Years_, _vii. 31_

Phillips, J.O. Halliwell, reprints _Ludus Coventriæ_, _v. 207_

Phillips, Miss, as "Zarina" in _Sardanapalus_, v. 2

Phillips, Sir Richard, _Personal Tour through the United Kingdom_, iv.
  32

Philo, v. 281

Philo Byzantius, _De Septem Orbis Miraculis_, _ii. 441_

Philomela, iv. 287

"Philo-Milton," _Vindication of Paradise Lost from the charge of
  exculpating Cain_, v. 202

Phingari, the moon, iii. 108

Phocas, column of, ii. 410

Phoenix, _vi. 117_

Phrosine or Frosini, _iii. 145_

Phyle, Fort, ii. 150, 185, 189

Piazza, the, Covent Garden, iv. 160

"Pibroch" confused with "bagpipe," i. 133, 134, 136, 140

Picadores, horsemen, _ii. 68_

Pickersgill, Junior, Joshua, _The Three Brothers_, v. 469, 470, 473

Picton, General, ii. 293

_Pignus Amoris_, i. 231, _240, 241_; _ii. 458_; _iii. 48_

Pigot, Miss Elizabeth B., i. _41, 45_, 47, _66, 129, 210, 233, 258,
  264_, 293, _406_

Pigot, Mrs., _i. 239_; vii. 8

Pigot, J.M.B., i. xi, xiv, _45_, 63, _213_; _vi. 30_

_Pilgrimage to the Holy Land_ (spurious), iii. xx

Pilgrim's Oak at Newstead Abbey, _vi. 497_

Pillans, Professor James, i. _306_, 337

Pilsen, _v. 340_

Pindar, i. _337_, 465, _490_; ii. 93; vi. 168

Pindemonte, Ippolito, ii. 324; iv. 245, _457_; v. 562

Pindus mount (Monte Metsovo), ii. 126, 129; iii. 7

Pinel, M., _Sur l'Insanité_, _ii. 447_

Pineta of Ravenna, the, vi. 178, 180

Piombi, the (Venice prisons), iv. 363; _v. 148_

Piozzi, Mrs., _i. 358_

Piræus, ii. 362

Pisa, Byron's household at, _v. 348_

Pisani, Nicolò, _iv. 356_

Pisani, Vettor, ii. 477, 497

Pisistratus, ii. 167

Pisse Vache, or Salanfe, _ii. 383_

Pitcairn Island, v. 582-584. _See_ also _Island, The_

Pitiscus, _ii. 509_

Pitt, William, appoints Mansel Master of Trinity College, Cambridge, _i.
  28_; "rules the hour," i. 31; "expired in plenitude of power," i. 34,
  _57_; Sayer's _Elijah's Mantle_, i. 294, _356_; mentioned in _English
  Bards, and Scotch Reviewers_, i. 377; in _Hints from Horace_, i. 395;
  "heaven-born," i. 486; the "heavy news" of Austerlitz, _i. 489_; his
  description of Napoleon, _ii. 400_; _v. 544_; Sheridan's speech on the
  Begum of Oude, _iv. 72_; one of "the wondrous _Three_," iv. 75; George
  III. and Catholic Emancipation, _iv. 503_, "with Fox's lard was
  basting William Pitt," iv. 511; his grave in Westminster Abbey, v.
  541; "The Pilot that weathered the storm," v. 568; _vi. 482_, refusal
  to accept £100,000 from the merchants of London, vi. 376; "Chatham
  gone," vi. 478; "so like his friend Billy," vii. 28; Byron's _Epitaph
  for_, vii. 64

Pitt and Grenville Acts, the, iv. 512

Pius VII., Pope, Napoleon's snuff-box, _vii. 78_

Pizarro, Francisco, ii. 81; v. 555

Pizarro, Hernando, ii. 81

Pizarro, Juan Gonzalo, ii. 81

Plancus, _ii. 492_

Platæa, battle of, ii. 294; _iv. 108_

Plato, i. 414; _ii. 169, 196, 325_; _v. 485_, vi. 46, 303, 568, 585

Plato, the comic poet, _iii. 85_

Plato's _Epitaph_, i. 18; iii. 136

Platonic love, vi. 396, 397

Platow (Platoff), General, _vi. 353_; _vii. 39_

Plattsburg Bay, battle of, _vi. 508_

Plautus, _Truculentus_, vi. 548

Playfair, Dr., _vii. 52_

Pliny, _Hist. Nat._, _ii. 31, 378, 379, 384, 432, 437, 441, 445, 488_;
  _vi. 220, 236, 563_; _Epist._, _ii. 380_; _Panegyricus_, _ii. 412_

Plum, a, = £100,000, i. 425

Plumptre, E.H., D.D., _Commedia, etc._, _v. 562_

Plumptre, E.J., and Gallehault, _iv. 320_

Plunket, Catholic Emancipation Bills, _v. 569_

Plutarch, _Lives_, _i. 467_; ii. 123, 179, _341, 393, 405, 518_; _iii.
  85, 180, 311_; _iv. 108, 251, 264, 339, 352, 386, 423, 446_; v. 4, 5,
  _21, 72, 486, 487, 506_; _vi. 139, 226, 339, 348, 376, 404, 461, 477,
  547_; _Scripta Moralia, etc._, _ii. 335_; _v. 619_; _vi. 479_

Po, the river, iv. 545

Pococke, Edward, _Notæ Miscellaneæ_, _iii. 109, 121_

_Poems 1814-1816_, iii. 409-438

_Poems 1816-1823_, iv. 529-566

_Poems of July-September, 1816_, iv. 29-65

_Poems of the Separation_, iii. 537-546

_Poems on his Domestic Circumstances_, i. 452, 453; iii. xx, _24_

_Poems on Various Occasions_, i. xi, xii, _1, 3, 18, 20-22, 27, 29, 31,
  32, 38, 41, 46, 47, 52-54, 57, 58, 60, 62, 63, 65, 70, 74_, 76-116,
  _82-84, 89, 91, 96, 99, 101, 102, 104, 110, 112, 113, 115, 116, 118,
  122, 123, 125, 151, 152_

_Poems Original and Translated_, i. xii, _31, 126, 127, 147, 149, 168,
  171, 184, 187, 189_, 191-208, _354, 374_; iv. 281

Poet's Corner at Newstead Abbey, _vi. 498_

Poggio, _De Fort. Var._, _ii. 364, 365, 403_

Point Lividia, _iii. 248, 249_

Pola, battle of, ii. 476

Poland, partition of, v. 500, 551; and Alexander I., _v. 563_

Polenta, Guido Novello da, ii. _371_, 494

Polenta, Guido Vecchio da, Lord of Ravenna, _iv. 316_

Polidori, Dr. J.W., _i. 318_; _iv. 40_; vii. 47

Polidori, G., _iv. 143_

_Political Eclogues_, _i. 395_

Political Economy Club, vi. 480

_Political Miscellanies_, _i. 395_

_Political Ode by Lord Byron, hitherto unknown as his production_, _vii.
  14_

Polixena, v. 488

Poliziano, _ii. 365_; iv. 280

Polozk (Polouzki), vi. 354

Poltáva, battle of, iv. 207, _233_

Polybius, _Hist._, ii. _377_, 506

Polycrates, of Samos, ii. 519; vi. 171

Polynices, v. 403

Polyphontes, the herald, _ii. 431_

Polyzois, an Albanian poet, ii. 198

Pombal, _ii. 43_

Pompadour, Madame de, iv. 334

Pompeia, Cæsar's third wife, _i. 351_; iv. 352; _vi. 139_

Pompey, _i. 422_; ii. 395, _492_; _iv. 264_; vi. 139; statue of, ii.
  508; pillar of, v. 548

Pompignan, Franc de, _ii. 282_

Poniatowsky, Prince, _vii. 24_

Ponsonby, Lady Caroline. _See_ Lamb, Lady Caroline

Ponsonby, William, v. 329

Ponte, Antonio da, _ii. 327_

Poole, Thomas, _and his Friends_, _i. 437_

Pope, Alexander, _Prologue to the Satires_, _i. 91, 392_; vi. 519, 602;
  on Earl of Dorset, _i. 198_; _Dunciad_, i. 220, 294, _321, 326_, 327,
  397; _iv. 161_; vi. 494; _Essay on Criticism_, i. 289; _ii. 13_; iv.
  481; mentioned in _English Bards, and Scotch Reviewers_, i. 304-306,
  312, _368, 371_; his advice to Wycherley, _i. 322_; _Essay on Man_, i.
  361; _v. 593_; mentioned in _Hints from Horace_, i. 395, 397, _441,
  449_; his youthful _Eclogues_, i. 418, 421; and Homer, _i. 427_; his
  "prescription," i. 430; "blest paper credit," i. 470; and Wellington,
  _i. 484_; _Imitations of Horace_, ii. 188; _iv. 484_; v. 576; vi. 247;
  the Egerian grots, ii. 517; _Windsor forest_, _iii. 227_; letter to
  Steele, _iii. 348_; _Satires_, iii. 439; _Works_, _iii. 452_; _vi.
  555_; "These be good rhymes," iv. 139; depreciated, _iv. 342_; _Rape
  of the Lock_, _iv. 507_; vi. 18, _454_; his "delicious
  lobster-nights," _iv. 587_; Byron's _English Bards_, in the style of,
  v. 537; _Moral Essays_, _v. 606_; vi. 350, 358; _January and May_,
  _vi. 62_; "Thou shalt believe in," vi. 74; Lady M.W. Montagu's letter
  to, _vi. 151, 219_; on Crashaw, _vi. 166_; _Eloïsa to Abelard_, vi.
  395; use of the word "gynocracy," _vi. 473_; and "commence," _vi.
  567_; "Lady Adeline" on, vi. 587; Homer's _Iliad_ and _Odyssey_, _vii.
  57_

Porphyry, _ii. 78_

Porson, Richard, i. 30, _313, 438_; _ii. 283_; _iii. 402_; _The Devil's
  Walk_ attributed to, _vii. 21_

Porta Capena, ii. _416_, 516

Porter, Jane, _Thaddeus of Warsaw_, _iv. 166_

_Portfolio, The_, iii. 321; iv. 6

_Portfolio_ (Philadelphia), v. 5

Portinari, Beatrice, iv. 247, 248, 251

Portinari, Folco, _iv. 248_

Portland, William Henry Cavendish, 3rd Duke of, i. 377, _471_; _iv. 513_

Porto Bello taken by Admiral Vernon, _vi. 12_

Portogallo, _Semiramide_, _i. 347_

Portsmouth, Lady (Mary Anne Hanson), _vi. 569_

Portsmouth, Lord, _vi. 569_

Portuguese, Byron's estimate of the, i. 469; ii. 33, 45, 87

Potemkin, Prince Gregor Alexandrovitch, ii. 200; vi. _313_, 314, _316,
  317, 370_, 412

Potiphar's wife (Zuleika), _iii. 187_; vi. 254

Pouqueville, Dr., _Travels_; _Voyage en Morée_, ii. 179, 180, 194, _195_

Poussin, Nicholas, _vi. 152_

Powell, A., i. 350, _432_

Powell, Mary, Milton's first wife, vi. 146

Power, publisher, _iii. 423_

Powerscourt, Richard, 4th Viscount, _i. 96_

Pozzi, the Venice state dungeons, _ii. 465_; iv. 363; _v. 148, 153_

Pozzo di Borgo, Count, v. 539

Pradt, M. Dufour de, _Narrative of an Embassy to Warsaw_, _v. 551, 552_

Praed, _The Belle of the Ball-Room_, _i. 347_; _vii. 12_

Prague, Treaty of, v. _340_, 423; battle of, _v. 371_

Pratt, Lord Chief Justice, _iv. 510_

Pratt, Samuel Jackson (Courtney Melmoth), _Gleanings_, i. 322, _323,
  442_; _Blacket's Remains_, _i. 359, 443_

Praxiteles, _ii. 236_

_Prayer of Nature, The_, i. 224

Predestination, Byron's belief in, iv. 58

Pregadi, Venetian Senate, iv. 441

Presle, Mdlle., i. _347_, 348

_Pretty Miss Jaqueline_, _i. 361_

Prevesa, ii. _125_, 148, 185

Prevost, Sir George ("General Fireface"), Governor-General of British
  North America, vi. 508

Priam, v. 488

Priestley, Joseph, _ii. 283_

Prince's Theatre, Manchester, _Manfred_ at, iv. 78

Princess's Theatre Royal, _Manfred_ at, iv. 78; _Sardanapalus_ at, v. 2

_Printer's Devil, The_, _i. 495_

Prior, Matthew, _i. 198_; iv. 158; vi. xviii, 210; _Solomon_, _ii. 76_;
  _Paulo Purganti_; _Hans Carvel_, _vi. 62_

_Prisoner of Chillon_, ii. 212, 214; iii. xix, 499; iv. 3-28, _63_, 79,
  _92, 182, 194_; _v. 152, 423, 494_; _vi. 129, 475_

Priuli, Andrea, v. 115

Priuli, Maria, v. 115

Probus, Emperor, _i. 375_

Procne, iv. 287

Procter, Bryan W. (Barry Cornwall), "Euphues," v. 114; _A Sicilian
  Story_, _vi. 445_

Prometheus, ii. 448; iii. 312; v. 554; vi. 49

_Prometheus_, iv. 48, _118, 269_

Propertius, _Eleg._, _vi. 445_

_Prophecy of Dante_, _ii. 441_; _iv. 7, 26, 49, 144, 237-276, 313, 329_;
  v. 471; vii. xvi, _146, 212_

Protasoff, Miss, the "Protassova," vi. 399

Protesilaus, vi. 204

Protestant League, _v. 371_

Prussian troops at Leipsic, vii. 23

Pruth, river, _v. 551_; Treaty of, _v. 564_

Psalidas, Athanasius, _True Felicity_, ii. 198, 202

_Psalms_, i. 208; _ii. 398, 458_; _iii. 193_; vi. 166, 401

Pseudo-Callisthenes, _v. 543_

Psyche, vi. 165, 387

Ptolemæus Cocces, _v. 542_

Ptolemæus Soter, _v. 542_

Ptolemy, _i. 402_; _iv. 523_; _v. 487_

Ptolemy Philadelphus, _iv. 243_

_Public Characters of 1799-1800_, _vi. 175_

Publius Syrus, _i. 414_

Pückler, Herman Fürst von, iv. 81

Puffend, _Hist. Gen._, _iv. 211_

Pugilistic Club, _i. 434_

Pulci, G., ed. of _Morgante Maggiore_, _iv. 309_

Pulci, Luigi, _Morgante Maggiore_, iv. 156, 279-309, 325, 484; vi. xvi,
  _156_, 184, 505

Pulk, Polish for "regiment," v. 564

Pulteney, Sir James, Bart., i. 347

Pultency Hotel, Piccadilly, _vii. 39_

"Pultowa's Day," iv. 202, 207

Purgstall, J. von Hammer-, _Hist. de l'Empire Othoman_, iii. _166, 312_,
  441, _454, 455_

Purple, Tyrian, vi. 574

Purvis, Admiral, ii. 93

Pushkin, _Poltava_, iv. 203

Puttenham, _Art of Poesie_, iv. 239

Pye, Henry James, poet-laureate, i. 305, _314, 329, 404, 435_; iv. 519

Pygmalion, vi. 281, 390

Pylades, i. 175

Pym, _iv. 519_

Pyramus, vi. 235

Pyrenees, the, ii. 45

Pyrrhic war-dance, Pyrrhica, vi. 151, 171

Pyrrho, master of the Pyrrhonists or Sceptics, vi. 379

Pyrrhus (or Neoptolemus), ii. 174; v. 577

Pythagoras, i. 59; vi. 610

Pythian Oracle, the, i. 56

Pythias, _i. 175_



Q


Quarantia Criminale (Council of Forty), iv. 333, 345

_Quarterly Review_, _i. 304, 321_; ii. xiii, xv, _5, 139, 187_, 212,
  213, _266_, 299, 315, _325, 356_; iii. 77, 151, 219, _225_, 321; iv.
  _6, 37, 42, 46, 57_, 156, _166, 244_, 281, 313, 327, 329, _514, 575_;
  v. 5, _111_, 119, 204, _205, 544, 552_, 582, _613_; vi. xx, 76, _79_,
  360, _445, 456, 508_; vii. 49, 57, 76

Quebec, siege of, _vi. 12_

Queensberry, William Douglas, 3rd Earl of March, and 4th Duke of ("Old
  Q."), i. 500

_Quem Deus vult perdere prius dementat_, vii. 45

Quercetanus, Andreas, notes to _Historia Calamitatum Abælardi_, _v. 634_

_Queries to Casuists_, i. 262

Querini, Alvisi (Ormildo Emeressio), _L'Ammiraglio dell' Indie_, _iv.
  456, 457_

_Question and Answer_, iv. 538

Quevedo of Villegas, Francisco Gomez de, _Sueños_, iv. 484; _Dream of
  Skulls_, _iv. 496_

Quiberon Bay, French fleet defeated by Hawke in, _vi. 12_

Quinctilian, _iv. 270_; _vi. 16_

Quincy, De, _Confessions of an English Opium-Eater_, _vi. 188_

Quirini, Angelo, _ii. 389_

Quito, capital of Ecuador, ii. 81

_Quotidienne, La_, _v. 566, 573, 577_


R

Rabbe, _Biographie des Contemporains_, _ii. 168_

Rabelais, _Life of Gargantua, etc._, _v. 354_

Rack, or arrack, punch, vi. 197

Radcliffe, Mrs. Ann, _Mysteries of Udolpho_, ii. _327_, 342; _iii. 89,
  351_; _iv. 364, 413_

Rae, W. Fraser, _Life of Sheridan_, _iv. 74_; _Wilkes, Sheridan, Fox_,
  _iv. 511_; articles in _Athenæum_ on _Junius' Letters_, _iv. 513_

Rag Fair or Rosemary Lane (now Royal Mint Street), _iv. 161_

Raikes, Thomas, _Personal Reminiscences_, i. 476; _v. 563_; _A Portion
  of the Journal, etc._, _vi. 507_

Rainbow described, vi. 108

Rajna, Pio, iv. 280; _Ricerche sui Reali di Francia_, _iv. 309_

Ralph the rhymester, i. 326

Ralston, W.R.S., _Russian Folk-Tales_, _iii. 123_

Ramassieh (Alexandria), battle of, _ii. 108_

Ramazân, or Turkish Lent, ii. _134_, 137; iii. 96

Rambaud, M., _History of Russia_, _v. 563_

Ramsay, the artist, _vi. 496_

Ramsay, Chevalier, _vi. 303_

Ramsden, Rev.----, _i. 431_

Rangoni, Aldobrandino, _iii. 506_

Ranke, Leopold, _The Popes of Rome_, _v. 520_

Ransom and Morland, vi. 546

"Ranz des Vaches," v. 159

Raphael, Archangel, v. 281

Raphael, _ii. 437_; iv. 174; his "Transfiguration," vi. 548

Rapp, George, the harmonist, vi. 554

_Rapresentatione di Abel et di Caino, La_, _v. 264_

Raschid, iii. 441

Rasponi, Countess Clelia, iv. 547

_Rasselas_, _iii. 145_

Ravenna, _ii. 372_; iv. 237, 238, 243; v. 138; battle of, vi. 212

Ravenna, Cardinal of, _v. 516_

Ravenna, Guido Vecchio da Polenta, Lord of, _iv. 316_

Raven-stone (_rabenstein_), a German stone gibbet, _iv. 122_; v. 385

Ravignani, Benintendi de, Grand Chancellor, iv. 431

Rawlinson, Canon, _The Five Great Monarchies, etc._, _v. 24, 107_

Rayet, Olivier, _Monuments de l'Art Antique_, _ii. 396_

Read, General Meredith, _Historic Studies in Vaud, Berne, and Savoy_,
  ii. 299, _303_, 307

Read, T., _i. 301_

Reade, Sir Thomas, _v. 544_

Rebeck, fiddle, ii. 53

Red Sea, the, vi. 122

Reeve, Henry, _Petrarch_, _ii. 351, 372_; _Greville Memoirs_, _vi. 451_

Reeves, John, _The Rothschilds_, _v. 574_

Reformadoes, vi. 404

Regent, Prince. _See_ George IV.

Regnier, General of Saxons at Leipsic, _v. 553_

Rehnskjöld, Swedish General, _iv. 207_

Reichenbach, Falls of, _ii. 383_

Reichstadt, Napoleon François Charles Joseph, Duke of, v. _545_, 576;
  _vi. 590_

Reid, _vii. 32_

Reinagle, R.R., _ii. 226_; _iv. 425_

_Rejected Addresses_, i. _462_, 481, _485_; _iii. 55_

Rembrandt, vi. 502

_Remember him, whom Passion's power_, iii. 67

_Remember thee! Remember thee!_ iii. xx, 59

_Remembrance_, i. 211

_Remind me not, remind me not_, i. 268

Renault, _iv. 454_

Rendlesham, Lord, _i. 471_

Renegado, renegade, ii. 488

Rennes, siege of, _v. 549_

_Reply to some Verses of J.M.B. Pigot, Esq., on the Cruelty of his
  Mistress_, i. xi, 53

_Repository of Arts, Literature, Commerce, Manufactures, Fashions, and
  Politics_, iv. 178

Retz, Cardinal de, _Mémoires du_, _iv. 338_; _vi. 93, 94_

Retzsch, illustrations to Goethe's _Faust_, _v. 493_

_Revanche, La_, vii. 15

_Revelation_, _ii. 271_; iii. 432; iv. 102; _v. 499_

Revilliod, Gustave, ed. of _Advis, etc._, iv. 5

_Revue Arch._, _ii. 424_

_Revue des Deux Mondes_, iv. 5

_Revue de Paris, La_, _vi. 507_

_Revue Encyclopédique_, vi. xx

_Revue Historique_, _iv. 514_

Reynolds, Frederick, _i. 306, 353_; _The Caravan; or, The Driver and his
  Dog_, i. 342; _Life and Times_, _i. 416_

Reynolds, Sir Joshua, _i. 389_; _Discourses_, _iv. 271_

Rheinfeld, battle of, _v. 372_

Rhianus, the Alexandrian poet, _iv. 566_

Rhigas, or Rigas, Constantine, ii. 199; _iii. 29, 194_

Rhine, the, i. 249, 353; vi. 418; Confederation of, i. 486

Rhodes, iv. 400; vi. 111

Rhoeteum, _ii. 99_

Rhone, the, ii. 261, 300; _iv. 18, 26, 120_

Rialto (Rivo alto), Venice, ii. 331; iv. 165

Ribas, Admiral Josef de, vi. _313, 319, 359_, 366

Ribaupierre, General, vi. 352

Ricardo, David, _vi. 480_

Ricci's monument to Dante, _ii. 375_

Rich, Claudius James, _Memoir on the Ruins of Babylon_, _vi. 236_

_Richard II._, _iii. 517_; vi. 210

_Richard III._, _iv. 391_; vi. _392_, 570

Richards, Rev. George, _The Aboriginal Britons_, _i. 306, 376_

Richardson, _iii. 109_

Richelieu, Armand Emanuel du Plessis, Duc de, _Journal de mon Voyage en
  Allemagne_, vi. 264, _317_, 333, _340, 347, 358, 359_

Richelieu, Louis François, Duc de, Marshal of France, _vi. 333_

Richmond, Duchess of, _ii. 228_

Richmond, Duke of, _ii. 229, 230_

Richmond Hill, ii. 66

Ricimer, a Sueve, _ii. 390_

Ridge, S. and J., i. xi, xii, xiv, _234_

Ridgeway, bookseller, iv. 482

Ridotto, iv. 178, 180

Rienzi, or Rienzo (commonly called Cola di' Rienzi), Nicolas Gabrino
  di', ii. 414

Riese, _Varro. Satur. Menipp. Rel._, ii. 92

Rigadoon, the, i. 491

Rimini, Francesca da (_née_ da Polenta), iv. 316

Rimini, Malatesta da Verrucchio, Lord of, _iv. 316_

Rinaldo and Armida, vi. 34

Riots, O.P., at Covent Garden, _i. 347_

Rivington, F. and C., i. xii; their _Annual Register_, _q.v._

Rivoli, battle of, _vi. 14_

Rizzo, Antonio, iv. 336

Roberts, William, _iv. 578_

Roberts, W. Rhys, _Longinus on the Sublime_, _vi. 26_

Robertson, James, _i. 192_

Robertson, J.L., _Burns' Selected Poems_, _iii. 449_

Robertson, Mary, i. 192

Robertson, Dr. William, _Charles V._, _iii. 309_; v. 471, _560_

Robespierre, iv. 476; _vi. 13, 14_

Robinson, H. Crabb, _Diary_, i. _337_, 475; ii. x, _74_; iv. 475. 478,
  479, _492, 512, 538, 556_; v. 199, 281, 470, _614_; _vi. 444_

Robinson, editor of _Morning Post_, _i. 358_

Robinson, Mrs., "Perdita" (_née_ Darby), _The Mistletoe_, _i. 358_

Rocca, Giovane, ii. 523; vii. 50

Rochefoucauld, _Maximes_, ii. 307, _419_ _Réflexions_, iv. 552; vi.
  _144, 246_, 303

Rochester, John Wilmot, Earl of, _Poems_, i. 218

Rodd, Thomas, _Ancient Ballads from the Civil Wars of Granada_, _iv.
  529, 530_

Roderick the Goth, ii. 89

Rogers, Samuel, Byron's withdrawal of _English Bards, and Scotch
  Reviewers_, i. 294; "a true poet," _i. 306_; _Recollections of the
  Table Talk of_, i. _329_, 429; _iv. 539_; _vi. 17_; Byron and Lord
  Carlisle, _i. 355_; _Pleasures of Memory_, i. 361; iii. 50, 207;
  _Italy_, ii. _329, 343, 353, 372, 376-378, 407_; _iv. 539_; _v. 130_;
  Byron's opinion of, iii. 50; _Voyage of Columbus_, iii. 76; _Giaour_
  dedicated to, iii. 81; _Jacqueline_, iii. 319, 320, _323_; Byron's
  letters to, _iii. 545_; iv. 80; _vi. 83, 173_; and Byron's _Dream_,
  iv. 31; first meeting of Byron and Sheridan at his house, iv. 69;
  Sheridan's appeal to, _iv. 73_; _Brides of Venice_, _iv. 166_;
  referred to in _Beppo_, iv. 183; translation of Zappi's _Sonetto_,
  _iv. 271_; Byron's verses on (_Question and Answer_), iv. 538; _Human
  Life_, _iv. 539, 574_; at Sir George Beaumont's, iv. 570; in _Don
  Juan_, vi. 6; "I wished to learn the Art of forgetting," _vi. 17_;
  "Thou shalt not steal from," vi. 75; "have deserted," vii. 17; Lord
  Thurlow's _An Epistle to a Friend_, vii. 18-20

Roland, v. 553

Rolland (d'Erceville), M. le Président, _Recherches sur les Prérogatives
  des Dames chez les Gaulois sur les Cours d'Amours_, ii. 6; _Foscari_,
  _v. 130_

_Rolliad_, i. 294, _319, 395, 500_

Romaika, kerchief-waving dance, i. 492; vi. 151

_Romance Muy Doloroso_, iv. 529

Romanceros, the, ii. 47

Romanelli, Dr., ii. 175; vii. 11

Romanin, S., _Documentata Storia di Venezia_, v. 116, 117, 119, _121,
  144, 171, 172, 178, 179, 195_

Rome, i. 376; ii. 312, 388; v. 158; vi. 348; siege and sack of, v. 471

Romeï, Laodamia, _iii. 507_

_Romeo and Juliet_, _vi. 540_

Romilly, Sir Samuel, ii. 213; v. 181; vi. 17, 451

Romney, _i. 321_

Romuald of Salermo, ii. 473-476

Ronalds, Sir Francis, _iv. 505_

Ronco river, _vi. 212_

Ronda, mount, _ii. 54_

Roque, M., ii. 190

Ros, Georgiana, Lady de (Lennox), _Personal Recollections of the Great
  Duke of Wellington_, _ii. 229_

Rosa, _ii. 425_

Rosbach, battle of, iv. 334

_Rosciad_, i. 294

Roscoe, _Life and Pontificate of Leo Tenth_, _iii. 369_

Roscommon, Wentworth Dillon, 4th Earl of, i. 354

Rose and nightingale, iii. 86; v. 428, 612

Rose, George, Treasurer of the Navy, vii. 30; _Diaries, etc._, _vii. 31_

Rose, Sir William Stewart ("Parthenopex Puff" of _Vivian Grey_), _Court
  and Parliament of Beasts, etc._, iv. 156; _vi. 506_; vii. 55

Rosebery, Earl of, _iv. 163_; _Napoleon, The Last Phase_, _v. 547_;
  _Pitt_, _vi. 377_

Rosetta Stone, _ii. 108_

Ross, Sir John, _A Voyage of Discovery ... for the purpose of exploring
  Baffin's Bay_, _vi. 51_

Rossberg, or Rufiberg. fall of the, iv. 97

Rosse, Sir Laurence Parsons, 2nd Earl of, _Defence of the Antient
  History of Ireland_, _vi. 337_

Rossetti, D.G., _Dante and his Circle_, _iv. 248_; _Dante at Verona_,
  _v. 562_

Rossi, Professor V., _iv. 309_

Rossini, _v. 562_; _vi. 586_; _Armida and Rinaldo_, _vi. 34_;
  _L'Italiana in Algieri_, _vi. 205_

Rostopchin, General, _i. 488_

Rothen, _iv. 97_

Rothschild, Baron Anselm (of Frankfort), _v. 573_

Rothschild, Baron Charles (of Naples), _v. 573_

Rothschild, Baron James (of Paris), _v. 573_; reprints _Le Mistère du
  Viel Testament_, _v. 207_

Rothschild, Baron Nathan Mayer (of London), _v. 573_; vi. 456

Rothschild, Baron Salomon (of Vienna), v. 573

Rousseau, J.J., i. 15; ii. _260_, 264-267; _v. 548_; vi. 303;
  _Confessions_, ii. _280_, 300, 302; iv. 53; _Julie, ou La Nouvelle
  Héloïse_, ii. _277, 278_, 303; _iv. 18_; vi. 536 on the Ranz des
  Vaches, _v. 159_

Roux-Fazillac, M., _iv. 514_

Rovere, Francis Maria II., Duke of, ii. 498

Rowfant Library, _iv. 508_

Rowland, Junior, Alexander, _An Historical, Philosophical, and Practical
  Essay on the Human Hair_, _vi. 19_

Rowlandson's caricatures, _iv. 509_

Roxburgh Club, v. 200; reprints the _Chester Plays, or Mysteries_, _v.
  207_; _vi. 551_

Royal Alexandra Theatre, Liverpool, _Manfred_ at, iv. 78; _Sardanapalus_
  at, v. 2

Royal Amphitheatre, Westminster Bridge, iv. 203; _vii. 59_

Royal Caledonian Asylum, _iii. 415_

Royal Institution, _vi. 16_

Royalty Theatre, Goodman's Fields, _Don Juan; or, The Libertine
  Destroyed_ at, _vi. 11_

Royston, Philip Yorke, Viscount, translation of Lycophron's _Cassandra_,
  _iv. 243_

Ruffin, Marshal, _i. 469_; _vi. 261_

Rufinus, the præfect, ii. 518

Rulhière, Claude Carloman de, _vi. 395_; _Anecdotes sur la révolution de
  Russie en l'année 1762_; _Histoire de l'anarchic de Pologne, etc._,
  vii. 62

Rundell, Mrs., _Domestic Cookery_, vii. 57

Runic, Byron's use of the word, iv. 241

Rushton, Robert, ii. 26, _52_; vii. 6

Ruskin, John, _Stones of Venice_, _ii. 327_; _Modern Painters_, _iv. 18,
  26_

Russell, Lord John, _ii. 352_; iv. 314; _Moore Memoirs_, iv. 587; v. 5,
  280

Russia, her intrigues in Greece, v. 557

Russians _v._ Swedes, _iv. 207, 233_; "rushing from hot baths to snows,"
  vi. 475; at Leipsic battle, vii. 23

Rustica (the Ustica of Horace), valley of, ii. 523

Rusticucci, Jacopo, _iv. 254_

Rycquius, Just., _De Capit. Roman. Comm_., ii. 511, 512

Ryder, Mrs., as "Ida" in _Werner_, v. 324

Ryder, Richard, Home Secretary, vii. 13



S

Sabellicus, Marcus Antonius Coccius, _De Venetæ Urbis Situ Narratio_,
  _ii. 328_; _v. 179_

Sabina, Empress, _i. 493_

Sabio, Alonso el, _ii. 77_

Sackville, Lord George, _iv. 513_

Sacy, Silvestre de, _Notice du Libre d' Enoch_, _v. 302_

Sadducees, the, ii. 104

Sade, Abbé de, _Mémoires pour la Vie de François Pétrarque_, ii. _350_,
  479, _480_, 481

Sade, Hugo de, ii. _350_, 480

Sade, Laura de (_née_ de Noves), Petrarch's Laura, ii. 350, 479

Sa'di, _The Gulistan, or Rose Garden_, _i. 353_; iii. 160

Sadler's Wells Theatre, _Werner_ at, v. 324; _Don Juan; or, The
  Libertine Destroyed_ at, _vi. 11_

Safety-lamp, Sir H. Davy's, vi. 51

Saick, a Levantine barque, iii. 252

St. Albans, Duke of, _iv. 541_

St. Aldegonde, i. 476

St. Angelo, castle of, ii. 439

St. Anthony, vi. 32

St. Augustine, _ii. 480_; _v. 209_, vi. 573; _De Civitate Dei_, _v.
  235_; _Confessions_, vi. 28; _Epist._, _vi. 168_; Black Canons of,
  _vi. 495_

St. Bartholomew, iv. 494; vi. 230

St. Bernard, Convent of, ii. 306

St. Christopher, of Paris, _vi. 93_

St. Domingo Island, ii. 90; _iii. 296_

Saint-Evremond, _vi. 246_

St. Francis of Assisi, vi. _32, 33_, 273

St. Gingolph, ii. 304; _iv. 18_

St. Helena, v. 544

St. Honorius, ii. 35, 86

St. James of Compostella, _ii. 206_

St. Jean, Mount, ii. 293, 325

St. Jerome, vi. 28

St. John, i. 326

St. John, Knights of, _iv. 400_

St. Jules, Caroline Rosalie Adelaide (Hon. Mrs. George Lamb), _i. 301_;
  vii. 15

St. Lambert, ii. 300

St. Lorenzo, Church of, Florence, ii. _375_, 503

St. Mark's, Venice, horses, ii. 336; lions, ii. 471; bells, iv. 363;
  Doges buried at, _iv. 366_

St. Maurice, iv. 120

S. Nicola in Carcere, Church of, Rome, ii. 437

St. Pantaleon, of Nicomedia, _ii. 339_

St. Peter's, Rome, ii. _376_, 440, _et seq._; iv. 270

St. Petersburg, "that pleasant capital of painted snows," vi. 386

St. Preux, ii. _260_, 305

St. Sophia's, Constantinople, ii. 152, 176, 442

St. Thomas Aquinas, vi. 572

St. Ursula, _vi. 419_

St. Victor, Monastery of, iv. 4

St. Vincent, Lord, vi. 14

Sainte Croix, Guilhem de Clermont Lodève, Baron de, _Examen Critique,
  etc._, _vi. 226_

Sainte-Palaye, De la Curne de, _Mémoires sur l'Ancienne Chevalerie_, ii.
  6

Salakhora, _ii. 145, 148_

Salam aleikoum! aleikoum salam! Moslem salutation, iii. 104

Salamanca, battle of, i. 496

Salamis, battle of, i. 458; iii. 91, 270, _273_; vi. 169

Salanfe, or Pisse-Vache, _ii. 383_

Sale, _Preliminary Discourse to the Koran_, _iii. 110, 121, 197_
  translation of the _Koran_, vii. 9

Sale, Alberto dal, _iii. 506_

Salemenes, a character in _Sardanapalus_, v. 12

Salisbury, Countess of, ii. 7

Sallust, _Catilina_, _vi. 299_

_Salsette_ frigate, _ii. 13, 205_

Salt-mines, Poland, iv. 212

Saluces, Marquis de, v. 471

Salvator Rosa, vi. 502

Salviati, Lionardo, ii. _357_, 485

Salvo, Marquis de, _Travels in the Year 1806, etc._, _iii. 4_

Samoïlovitch, president of the Eastern Ukraine, iv. 201

Samos, vi. 171

San Caetano, Ignatio de, _ii. 43_

San Liberatore alla Majella, Benedictine Monastery of, iv. 288

San Martin, General José de, _v. 556_

San Zanipolo, Church of, iv. 336

Sanadon, Père, _v. 567_

Sancho Panza, i. 490

Sandall, Prior William, vi. 496

Sandasarmū, of Cilicia, v. 4

Sandford, Francis, _History of the Coronation of James the Second_, _iv.
  504_

Sandford, Mrs., _Thomas Poole and his Friends_, _i. 437_

Sandi, Vettor, _Principi di Storia civile della Repubb. di Venezia_, iv.
  326, 332

Sandwich, Lord, _vi. 267_

Sandys, translation of _Ovid_, _iii. 199_

Sanguinetto river, ii. 379, 507

Sansovino, F., _Venetia cittá nobilissima_, _iv. 166, 390_

Sant' Anna, Hospital of, Ferrari, _ii. 355_; iv. 139, 141, _143, 144,
  147_

Santa Croce, Church of, ii. 369, 374, 375, 490

Santa Maura (Leucadia), ii. 126, 178

Santi Giovanno e Paolo (or San Zanipolo), Church of, Venice, iv. 336

Sanudo, or Sanuto, Marin, _Vitæ Ducum Venetorum_, _ii. 475_; iv. 326,
  331, _347, 349, 352, 357, 363, 384, 431, 435, 450, 452, 461, 462_; v.
  115, _134_

Sapienza, island of, iv. 356, 365

Sappho, ii. 125, 178; vi. 26, 139, _180_

Saracus, last king of Assyria, v. _107_

Saragoza, Augustina, Maid of, ii. 58, 91

Saragoza, siege of, ii. 58, 91, 94

Saratoga, battle of, _vi. 12_

_Sardanapalus_, _iii. 493_; v. 3-112, 115, 199, 203, 204, _243_, 279,
  469; vi. 140, _461, 538_; _vii. 77_

Sardi, _iii. 505_

Saronic Gulf, _ii. 362_

Sassi, the brothers, _ii. 389_

Satan, v. 201

Satanic School of Poetry, iv. 477, 481, 483; _v. 196_

Satibarzanes, the eunuch, _v. 72_

_Satirist, The_, i. _373, 374_, 383; _vi. 69_

Saul, iii. 392

Saussure, Horace Bénédict de, _Essai sur Hygrométrie_, inventor of the
  cyanometer, _vi. 216_

Savage, Richard, _The Wanderer_, _iii. 261_

Savary, Marshal, _iii. 428_

Savelli family, the, _ii. 403_

Savini, Guido, _ii. 487_

Savioli, Conte Ludovico, _iv. 250_

Savoie, Louis de (wife of Louis XVIII.), _v. 498, 566_

Savoy, Charles III., Duke of, _iii. 299_; iv. 4, 10

Savoy-Carignan, François Eugene, Prince of, _iv. 262_

Sawbridge, _vi. 100_

Saya, or basquiña, the outer petticoat, vi. 116

Sayer, Elizabeth Price, translation of Dante's _Il Convito_, _iv. 253,
  256_

Sayer, James, _Elijah's Mantle_, i. 294, _356_

Saxe, Count, _i. 107_

Saxe-Cobourg, Leopold of, _ii. 450_

Saxe-Weimar, Bernhard, Duke of, v. 371

Saxons, the, v. _371_, 553

Saxony, John George, Elector of, _v. 373_

Sbergo, or usbergo, _iv. 308_

Sbirri, Venetian policemen, iv. 383

Scalanova, Port, Asia Minor, iii. 252

Scaliger, J.J., v. 281, _302_

Scaligers, tombs of the, v. _561_, 562

Scamander river, ii. 182

Scanderberg, or Scander Bey (George Castriota), ii. 124, 173

Scarron, _vi. 246_

Sceptics, or Pyrrhonists, _vi. 379_

Schaffhausen, _ii. 383_

Schaffner, Alfred, _Lord Byron's Cain und Seine Quellen_, v. 200

Schaumburg, _v. 371_

Scheible, _Das Kloster_, vi. xx

Scheremetov, Count Boris Petrowitch, Russian General, vi. 307

Schiavoni, Giorgio, _iii. 368_

Schiller, iii. 503; _Armenian, or the Ghost-Seer_ (_Der Geisterseher_),
  _i. 131_; ii. 342; _Bride of Messina_, iii. 150; _Wilhelm Tell_, _ii.
  385_; _Piccolomini_, _iv. 566_

Schipper, Dr. J., _Englische Metrik_, iv. 239

Schlegel, Friedrich, ii. 472; iv. 237, 238, _341, 342_; vii. 50

Schlegel, J.S.B., _Tagebuch, etc._, _vi. 605_

Schlick, M., _Corr. of_, iv. 470

Schoene, A., _v. 107_

Schroepfer, Johann Georg, _vi. 605_

Schultz, Hans, _Der Sacco di Roma_, _v. 520_

Schumann, R., Music to Byron's _Manfred_, iv. 78

Schuyler, Eugene, _Peter the Great_, iv. 203, 207, _233_

Scio island, iii. 252

Scipio Africanus, _i. 493_; ii. 371, _389, 459_, 496; (II.), _v. 512_

Scipio Barbatus, _ii. 389_

Scipio, Lucius, _ii. 389_

Scipio, Metellus, _iv. 264_

Scipios, tomb of the, ii. 389

Semelet, W., _iii. 160_

_Scorpion, The_, iii. 107

Scotland, vi. 405

_Scot's Magazine_, iv. 139; v. 329, 470, 540

Scott, John, iii. 532, 535; iv. 472

Scott, Sir Walter, _i. 303, 305, 306, 331_, 384; vi. 6; _The Wild
  Huntsman_, _i. 117, 317_; mentioned in _English Bards, and Scotch
  Reviewers_, i. 309-312, 319, 337, 369; _Lay of the Last Minstrel_, i.
  309, 310; _iii. 472_; vi. 406, 458, 560; contributes to Monk Lewis'
  _Tales of Wonder_, _i. 317, 318_; _The Fire King_; _Glenfinlas_; _The
  Eve of St. John_; _Frederick and Alice_, _i. 317_; _Marmion_, i. 310,
  371; _ii. 360_; _iii. 474_; _iv. 13_; _v. 542_; vi. 426; _Fortunes of
  Nigel_, _i. 351_; in _Hints from Horace_, i. 395, 419; his amanuensis,
  W.H. Weber, _i. 396_; _Antiquary_, _i. 413_; _iv. 524_; _v. 377_; and
  Ballantyne, _i. 435_; _The Vision of Don Roderick_, _i. 436_; ii. _4,
  51, 88_, 89; _Border Minstrelsy_, ii. 4, 295; _Young Lochinvar_, _ii.
  70_; Nossa Señora da Peña, ii. 86; _Sir Tristrem_, ii. 203; reviews
  _Childe Harold_ in _Quarterly Review_, ii. 213, 315, _325_; iv. 6;
  _Lord of the Isles_, _ii. 244_; _The Dance of Death_, ii. 292; _Field
  of Waterloo_, ii. 292; iii. 434; _vi. 266_; the "Ariosto of the
  North," ii. 311, 359; _Tales of a Grandfather_, _ii. 337_; _vi. 12_;
  _Lady of the Lake_, _ii. 347_; Byron accused of copying, _iii. 128_;
  octosyllabic verse, iii. 224; _The Corsair_, _iii. 225_; Byron's
  present of a silver urn, _iii. 301_; Coleridge's _Christabel_, iii.
  443, _472_; Byron and Wordsworth, iii. 533; reviews _Prisoner of
  Chillon_ in _Quarterly Review_, iv. 6; article in _Q.R._ on _The
  Dream_, _iv. 37_; on _Darkness_, _iv. 42_; on Coleridge's imagination,
  _ibid._; on _Churchill's Grave_, _iv. 46_; referred to in _Beppo_, iv.
  183; _Tales of my Landlord_, iv. 284; _Life of Napoleon Buonaparte_,
  _iv. 456_; _v. 546_; _vi. 418_; _Guy Mannering_, _iv. 566_; meets
  Byron frequently in society, iv. 570; _Memoirs of the Life, etc._, iv.
  570, _585, 587_; _The Search after Happiness_, _iv. 574_; Lydia
  White's death, _iv. 587_; on _Cain_ and its dedication, v. 204, 205,
  _206_; _Waverley_, v. 209; _vi. 272, 404_; on Byron and Alcibiades, v.
  _485_; on _Don Juan_, vi. xix; edition of Dryden's _Works_, _vi. 178_;
  Byron's letters to, _vi. 178, 186, 405, 479_; on Byron's features,
  _vi. 360_; _Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft_, _vi. 380, 491_;
  _The Abbot_, _vi. 440_; "reigned before me," vi. 444; "my _buon
  camerado_," vi. 459; his use of "gynocracy," _vi. 473_; _Journal_,
  _vii. 25_

Scott, William, _i. 436_

_Scourge, The_, _i. 374_

Sea-coal (Newcastle coal), vi. 503

Sea-sickness, remedies for, vi. 84

Seale, John Barlow, _An Analysis of the Greek Metres, etc._, i. 59

Searment, cerecloth, or searcloth, ii. 154

Seaton, R.C., _Sir Hudson Lowe and Napoleon_, _v. 544_

Sebastiani, General François Horace Bastien, ii. 89, 200

Sedition Bill, iv. 511

Segati, Marianna, _iv. 214_

Segovia, Cardinal of, _iii. 369_

Segur, Louis Philippe, Comte de, _vi. 314_

Selictar, sword-bearer, ii. 149

Selim II., Sultan, _vi. 259_

Selim III., _ii. 207_

Sellers, E., _ii. 432_

Sellis (Sélis), Duke of Cumberland's valet, _vii. 31_

Semiramis, v. 14, 15, 19-21, 23, 36, 50, 58, 79; vi. 235, 236

Senebier, Jean, _Histoire Littéraire de Genève_, iv. 3, 11

Seneca, v. 3, _543_; _De Irâ_, vi. 292

Senger, Richard, _Die beiden Foscari_, v. 119, _121, 135, 183_

Senhouse, Humphrey, iv. 475

Sennacherib, iii. 404; v. 4, _24_

Separation, the, iii. xx

Septemberes, Septembriseurs, vi. 595

Septimius Severus, ii. _408_, 511, 520; _v. 542_

Seraphim, the, v. 228

Serassi, _La Vita di Tasso_, ii. 485, _498_

Serenissima Signoria (Venice), _iv. 345_

Servan, Joseph, _vi. 13_

Servetus, i. 417

Servius, _ii. 133_

Servius Sulpicius, ii. 362

Sesostris, v. _405_, 543

Sestos, iii. 13

Seven Towers, the, vi. 260

Severus, Sulpitius, _ii. 133_

Sévigné, Madame de, _i. 402_

Sévigné, M. de, _i. 402_; _vi. 246_

Seville (Hispalis of the Romans), ii. 52, 63, 93; vi. 15

Sextilius, Governor of Carthage, _iv. 251_

Sforza, Cardinal Ascanio, _iii. 367_

Sforza, Ludovico, _iv. 13_

Sgricci, Signor, ii. 492

Shadwell, Lancelot, Vice-Chancellor, v. 203

Shadwell, _Libertine_, vi. xvi, _4, 11_

Shaftesbury, Earl of, _vi. 482_

Shakespeare, i. 29, 37, _38, 193_, 289, 345, 399; ii. xiii, _217_; iii.
  51, 52; iv. 325, _326_; v. 3, _28, 339_; vi. 174; compared with Byron,
  _v. 205_; his use of "shook," _v. 135_; of "skirred," _v. 163_

Sharp, Richard, "Conversation," iv. 570; "Kit-Cat," vi. 511

Shaving, "a daily plague," vi. 522

Shee, Sir Martin Archer, i. 365

Shelley, P.B., _ii. 115_; translation of _Plato's Epitaph_, _i. 19_;
  letter from Byron, i. 293; witnesses Lewis' will, _i. 318_; _Peter
  Bell the Third_, _i. 416_; _Queen Mab_, _ii. 13_; _v. 75, 234, 237,
  257, 258, 268_; Byron's Albanian song, _ii. 145_; Third Canto of
  _Childe Harold_, ii. 211, 315; Wordsworth as preached by, ii. _219_,
  311; _Feelings of a Republican on the Fall of Bonaparte_, _ii. 227_;
  "the only important calumny," _ii. 248_; _iv. 63_; his companionship,
  _ii. 258_; iv. 82; _Adonais_, _ii. 260, 271_; _iii. 137_; _vi. 401,
  446_; _Letters from Abroad, etc._, ii. _305, 306_, 307; his "delicate
  spirit," ii. 315; _Prometheus Unbound_, _ii. 325, 417_; v. 281; _Lines
  written among the Euganean Hills_, _ii. 338, 343_; _Julian and
  Maddalo_, _ii. 349_; "a very decent dungeon," _ii. 355_; _Hellas_;
  _Ode to Liberty_, ii. 402; _Poetical Works_, _ii. 407_; the Castle of
  Chillon, iv. 3, _18_; _Revolt of Islam_, _iv. 38_; _v. 603_;
  translation of Calderon's _El Mágico Prodigioso_, iv. 81; _To a
  Skylark_, _iv. 96_; on _Manfred_ and incest, iv. 100; _Prince
  Athanase_; _The Woodman and the Nightingale_; _Ode to the West Wind_,
  iv. 239; _Cenci_, _iv. 367_; the entry in the travellers' album at
  Montanvert, iv. 475; on _Cain_, v. 204; Greek choruses, v. 281;
  _Prose Works_, v. 331; his death, v. 469; on _The Deformed
  Transformed, ibid.; May-Day Night_, v. 470; on _Don Juan_, vi. xix;
  his mystical affinities and divagations, _vi. 188_; on Croker's review
  of Keats, _vi. 446_; in Pisa with Byron, _vii. 78_

Shelley, Mrs. P.B., _ii. 143, 305_; iv. 320, 570; her transcript
  of:--_Werner_, v. 331; _The Deformed Transformed_, _v. 474_; _Age of
  Bronze_, v. 537; _Don Juan_, _vi. 268, 269, 272, 274, 310, 373_

Shenstone, William, _Poetical Works_, _iii. 41_, 59

Sheppard, v. 199

Sheridan, Charles, _iv. 74_

Sheridan, Mrs. Frances (_née_ Chamberlaine), _Nourjahad, etc._, _vii.
  33_

Sheridan, R.B., i. _306, 317, 343_, 500; _iii. 45, 51, 545_; iv. 561;
  vi. 450; _The Critic_, i. _343_, 383; _iv. 73, 75_; v. 113; vi. 537;
  _Pizarro_, i. 344, _489_; _iv. 73_; _The Rivals_, _i. 431, 494_; _ii.
  334_; iv. _72_, 514; _vi. 258_; his doggerel on Brunck, _i. 490_;
  _Lines on Waltzing_, _i. 499_; "ere Brinsley ceased to write," iii.
  53; _Monody, etc_., iv. 69-75; Byron's first meeting with, iv. 69;
  _The Scheming Lieutenant; The Duenna_, _iv. 72_; his Begum and Warren
  Hastings speeches, iv. 72, 75; _A Trip to Scarborough_, _iv. 73_; _A
  School for Scandal_, _iv. 73, 75, 338_; _Monologue on Garrick_, _iv.
  75_; contrasted with Brougham, iv. 195; his pasquinade on Wilkes, _iv.
  511_

Sheridan, Thomas, _iv. 74_; _Bonduca_, _i. 343_

_Sherwood, Southey_ v., v. 204

Sherwood Forest, _vi. 495_

Sherwood, Neely, and Jones, i. 478; _iii. 256_; iv. 482

"Ship of the desert," camel or dromedary, v. 606

Shipwreck, description of a, vi. 88-101

Shiraz, iii. 182

Shirley, Sir Anthony, _iii. 105_

Shooter's Hill, vi. 424, 429

Shtcherbatof, Princess, _vi. 389_

Shyness, Byron's, i. 207

Siddons, Mrs. (Sarah Kemble), i. 46, 344, _345_; iii. _51_, 52; _iv.
  338_

_Sidney_, wreck of the, _vi. 95_

Sidney, A., _Discourses concerning Government_, _ii. 504_

_Siege of Corinth_, ii. _113_, 288; iii. 449-496, _508_; _iv. 227, 230,
  423_; v. _163_, 326, _503, 626_; _vi. 111, 332, 382_

Siegendorf, Count (F. Kruitzner), v. 327

Siena, Bindo Borrichi da, _iv. 248_

Sierke, Dr. Eugen, _Schwärmer und Schwindler_, _vi. 605_

Sierra Morena, ii. _54_, 55, 91

Sigeum, _ii. 99_; Cape, vi. 204

Sigismund, king of Burgundy, _iv. 120_

Signori di notte, Venetian police, iv. _383_, 427, 467

Silius Italicus, _Pun._, _ii. 379_

Silver and Co., De, printers, i. 452, 453

Simar, or cymar, a shroud, iii. 143

Sime, J., _Sir Francis Renalds, F.R.S., and his Works in connection with
  Electric Telegraphy_, _iv. 505_

Simeon, Rev. Charles, i. 417, _431_

Simon Magus, ii. 513

Simoon, the, iii. 99; vi. 198

_Simpliciad, The_, i. 294, _316_

Simplon, the, vi. 394

Sinsariskim (Assyria), v. 4

Siria, the bitch-star, vi. 505

Sirocco, the, ii. 48; iii. 9

Sisi, Porta, _vi. 212_

Sismondi, J.C.L, Simonde de, _Histoire des Républiques Italiennes du
  Moyen Age_, _iii. 235_; iv. 332; v. 115, _138, 196_; _vi. 199, 461_

Sisyphus, i. 329; vi. 538

Sitwell, Lady, iii. 381

Sixtus V., Pope, _ii. 384, 411_; _iv. 271_

Skeat, Rev. W., _Complete Works of Chaucer_, iv. 239

Skeffington, Sir Lumley St. George, _The Maid of Honour_; _The
  Mysterious Bride_; _The Sleeping Beauty_, i. _306_, 345, 346

_Sketch, A_, iii. xix, 499, 540; _iv. 64_; _vi. 22_

Slave-market, Constantinople, vi. 216

Slavery, abolition of, _vi. 549_

Sleep, iv. 33; vi. 123

Sligo, Lord, iii. 75, 441

Slowacki, J., iv. 203

_Smalkeld articles_, _v. 520_

Small-pox and vaccination, vi. 50

Srmaragdus, the Exarch, _ii. 410_

Smedley, _Sketches from Venetian History_, _ii. 329_; _iii. 455_; _iv.
  363_; v. 115

Smiles, Dr. Samuel, _Memoir of John Murray_, _i. 310_; ii. _327_, 359;
  iii. _98_, 217, _313_, 320, 443, _488_, 499, _519_; iv. 3, 139; v.
  203; _vii. 47, 57_

Smith, Alexander, able seaman on the _Bounty_ (John Adams of Pitcairn
  Island), v. 583, _588, 605, 623_

Smith, Miss Araminta, vi. 443

Smith, Horace and James, _Horace in London_, _i. 462, 465_; _Rejected
  Addresses_, i. 481; _iii. 55_

Smith, John Spencer, Minister to Turkey, _iii. 4_

Smith, Mrs. Spencer ("Florence"), ii. xvii, _75, 110, 118_; iii. 4

Smith, Rev. Sydney, i. _302, 306_, 336; "twelve-parson power," vi. 410;
  _Peter Plymley's Letters_, vi. 596

Smith, William, M.P. for Norwich, _iii. 488_; iv. 482, _516_, 578; _vi.
  175_

Smith, Sir William, _Classical Dictionary_, _ii. 156_; _Dictionary of
  Greek and Roman Antiquities_, _ii. 424_; _Dictionary of the Bible_,
  _iv. 499_

Smith, Admiral Sir Sidney, _iii. 4_

Smollett, _History and Adventures of an Atom_, _ii. 40_; _Humphry
  Clinker_, ii. 203; _Roderick Random_, vi. 210

Smyth, Sir Harry, _vi. 153_

Smyth, Professor William, _English Lyrics_, _i. 372_

Smythe, _i. 306_

_So we'll go no more a-roving_, iv. _411_, 538

Soane, Sir John, Museum in Lincoln's Inn Fields, iv. 141

Sobieski, John, king of Poland, iii. 458

Social War, B.C. 88, _iv. 251_

_Société d'Histoire, etc., de Genève_, iv. 5

_Société Imperiale d'Histoire de Russie_, _vi. 317, 340_

Society Islands, the, v. 583

Socrates, i. 458; ii. 101, 103; iii. 271; _iv. 253_; v. 485; vi. 267,
  303, 483, 548, 567, 568, 610

Sodom, apple of, ii. 294

Soignies, wood of, ii. 293

Soissons, Bishop of, _ii. 337_

Solano, Marquis of. Commander-in-Chief at Cadiz, ii. 77, 93

Solerti, Angelo, _Vita di Torquato Tasso_, ii. 355-357; iv. 144-146

_Soliloquy of a Bard in the Country_, i. 217

Solitude, ii. 116, 272, 457; vi. 234

Sollikoff, _vi. 370_

Solomon, vi. 303

Solon, iv. 438

Solyman, ii. 201; vi. 259

Somerset, Duchess of, _i. 343_; _vi. 417_

_Sonetto di Vittorelli_, iii. xix; iv. 535

_Song_, i. 262

_Song for the Luddites_, vii. 42

_Song of Saul before his Last Battle_, iii. 393

_Song of Solomon_, _v. 491_

_Song to the Suliotes_, vii. 83

_Sonnet on Chillon_, ii. 214; iv. 7

_Sonnet on the Nuptials of the Marquis Antonio Cavalli with the Countess
  Clelia Rasponi of Ravenna_, iv. 547

_Sonnet--To Genevra_, ii. _67_, 70, 71, _390_

_Sonnet to Lake Leman_, iv. 53

_Sonnet to the Prince Regent_ (on the repeal of Lord Edward Fitzgerald's
  forfeiture), iv. 548

Sophia, Princess, _vi. 18_

Sophia, Tzarina, iv. 202

Sophie of Russia, Princess, _vi. 425_

Sophocles, _iv. 264_; _Ajax_, _vi. 172_

Sophron, _Mimes_, i. 414

Soracte, ii. 386, 388

Soranzo, Marco, iv. 384

Sotheby, William ("Botherby"), iv. 182, 569, 570; vi. 75; _Saul_, i.
  362; vii. 59; _Oberon_, i. 362; _iii. 263_; _v. 496_; _Ivan_, _iii.
  280_; _iv. 338_; vii. 48; _Five Unpublished Tragedies_, _iii. 280_;
  iv. 578, 584; vii. 48, 70; _Constance de Castile_, _iii. 348_; "a
  bore," iv. 580; _The Blues_, vii. 17; _Orestes_; _The Death of
  Darnley_, vii. 48; _Farewell to Italy_; _Occasional Poems_, vii. 52;
  "sate sweating behind her," vii. 61

Sotheby, Wilkinson, and Hodges, iii. 537

Soudan, _vi. 474_

Soult, _ii. 51, 77_

South, Dr., vi. 128

Southcott, Joanna, _Book of Wonders_, iv. 497; vi. 176, 452

Southey, Robert, _i. 331, 443_; _ii. 56_; iii. 402; _v. 613, 614_; vi.
  166; _The Devil's Walk_, _i. 31_; _vii. 21_; _Letters from Spain_, _i.
  44_; _ii. 43_; _Letters, Life, and Correspondence_, _i. 303, 344, 359,
  396_; ii. _34_, 87; iv. _225_, 476, 482; vi. _3, 4, 175_, 350;
  "notable remarks on," _i. 305_; "Southey's epics cram the creaking
  shelves," i. 307; "soaring," i. 308; _Epics of the Ton_ on, _i. 311_;
  "the Ballad-monger," i. 313; _Thalaba_, i. 313, 434; _iii. 121, 472_;
  _iv. 24_; _Joan of Arc_, i. 313, 437; _Madoc_, i. 313, 314, 437; vi.
  215; _The Old Woman of Berkeley_, i. 315, _317_; on Hayley, _i. 321_;
  _iv. 244_; on _Pizarro_, _i. 344_; _Life of Henry Kirke White_, _i.
  363_; iv. _521_, 522; his followers, Lamb and Lloyd, _i. 368_; "his
  teeming muse," i. 369; his epic bathos, _i. 403_; "sink to Southey's
  level in a trice," i. 404; _Curse of Kehama_, i. 435, _436_; v. _271_,
  281, 469; _History of the Peninsular War_, ii. _43_, 91, 92, 94;
  _Roderick_, _ii. 46_; _iii. 477, 496_; _v. 565_; _Poet's Pilgrimage to
  Waterloo_, _ii. 227, 234, 235_; iv. 521; _Funeral Song for the
  Princess Charlotte of Wales_, _ii. 450_; on vampires, iii. 123;
  _Carmen Triumphale_, iii. 217; vii. 39; _The Doctor_, _iii. 488_; _Wat
  Tyler_, _iii. 488_; iv. 477, 481, 482, 521; _English Eclogues_, _iv.
  47_; _The Inchcape Rock_, _iv. 428_; Byron's quarrel with, iv.
  474-485; _Vision of Judgment_, iv. 475, 476, 478, _489, 491, 495,
  497_, 508, _512_, 522, _524_; _v. 196_; _Elegy on H. Martin_, iv. 477,
  482; _Essays Moral and Political_, iv. 479, 482; _vi. 175_; his
  "quartos," iv. 516; Byron on his appearance, iv. 520; _The Pious
  Painter_, _iv. 520_; _Battle of Blenheim_, iv. 521; _Life of Wesley,
  and Rise and Progress of Methodism_, iv. 522; _Common-Place Book_,
  _iv. 529_; _Chronicle of the Cid_, _ibid._; "renegade," iv. 578; his
  indictment of the Satanic School, _v. 196_; on the "Byron Head,"
  Castle Street, v. 203; _Don Juan_ dedicated to, vi. 3; "so quaint and
  mouthy," vi. 74; _Epilogue to the Lay of the Laureate_, vi. 80;
  Coleridge's eulogy of, _vi. 168_; his marriage, vi. 175; _March to
  Moscow_, _vi. 307_; Byron's abuse of, vi. 403; "turncoat," vi. 444;
  "rogue Southey's gander," vi. 445; _Omniana_, _vi. 576_; "Who shot the
  arrow?" vii. 76

Southey, Herbert, _iv. 485_

Southey, Mrs. Robert, _iv. 521_

_Southey_ v. _Sherwood_, v. 204

Southwell, vii. 1, 8

Southwell Minster, _i. 119_

Spagnoletto, vi. 502

Spain, i. 469; revolution in, v. 537, 538; vi. 456; royalist reign of
  terror in, v. 558; the Inquisition in, _ibid._

Spalding, Lieut.-Colonel, _Suvóroff_, _vi. 320, 321, 370_

Spanish women, their style of beauty, ii. 59

Sparamizus, the eunuch, _v. 11_

Sparks, Jared, _Works_ of Benjamin Franklin, _v. 554_

Sparta, iii. 21

Spartans, ii. 195

_Spectator_, _ii. 133_; iii. 98; _vii. 57_

Spelman, _iv. 445_

Spence, Rev. Joseph, _Observations, Anecdotes, and Characters of Books
  and Men_, _vi. 303_; vii. 52

Spence, Thomas, _vi. 265_

Spencer, General, ii. 93

Spencer, William, _iv. 581_

Spenser (_Faërie Queene_), i. 395; ii. x, 4, 5, _17, 71, 72, 101, 139,
  146_; iii. 224, _474_; _vi. 592_

Spercheus, a river-god, v. 488

Sperone Speroni, ii. 498

Spinola, Ambrogio, Marchese di, _iv. 262_

Spinther, Lentulus, _ii. 405_

Spurious verses, attributed to Byron, iii. xx, xxi

Spottiswoode, William, the mathematician, vii. 56

Staël, Madame de, i. 494; _vi. 70_; _Corinne, ou L'Italie_, ii. _424_,
  490, 503; _iv. 413_; _vi. 71, 541_; vii. 32; _De L'Allemagne_, _iii.
  164_; vi. 168; vii. 32; on _Fare Thee Well_, iii. 534; on Byron's
  _Sonnet to Lake Leman_, iv. 53; attempts to reconcile the Byrons, _iv.
  63_; quizzed by Sheridan, _iv. 75_; on Goethe's _Werther_, _iv. 341_;
  "the Begum of Literature," iv. 570; _Considérations sur la Révolution
  Française_, vii. 49

Staines, Sir Thomas, v. 582

Stamboul, i. 378; ii. 152, 194

Stamp Acts, _v. 560_

Stanhope, Colonel, _iii. 272_; _vii. 86_

Stanhope, Lord, i. 452, _457, 471_; ii. 299; _Life of Pitt_, _iv. 503_

Stanislaus of Poland, iv. 202

Stanley, Dean, _Life of Arnold_, _v. 224_

_Stanzas_, iv. 549; vii. 70

_Stanzas composed during a Thunderstorm_, iii. _4_, 7

_Stanzas for Music_, iii. 413, 423, 426, 435, 438; _iv. 91, 147_

_Stanzas to a Hindoo Air_, iv. 563

_Stanzas to a Lady, on leaving England_, i. 285; _ii. 18, 29_

_Stanzas to a Lady, with the Poems of Camoëns_, i. 78

_Stanzas to Augusta_, _ii. 247, 248, 271_; iii. 544; iv. 54

_Stanzas to Jessy_, i. 234

_Stanzas to the Po_, iv. 545

_Stanzas written in passing the Ambracian Gulf_, _ii. 128_; iii. _4_, 11

_Stanzas written on the road between Florence and Pisa_, iv. 562

_Star, The_, iii. 534

Stasicrates the architect, _vi. 479_

_Statesman, The_, _i. 319_

Statius, _Thebaidos_, ii. 189

Staubbach, _ii. 383_; iv. 81, 82, _119, 124_

Steno, Michele, iv. 333, 345, 349, 463

Stefanovíc, Vuk (Wuk Stephanowitsch), _Narodne Srpske Pjesme_; _Chants
  Populaires des Servics_, iii. 188

Steinmetz, Adam, _v. 175_

Stephani, _ii. 446_; _Thesaurus_, _iv. 113_

Stephen, Leslie, _iv. 513_

Sterne, _Tristram Shandy_, ii. 176; _vi. 487_; _Sentimental Journey_,
  _vi. 214_

Sternhold and Hopkins, v. 279

Sternhold, Tom, vii. 39

Stevens, John, continuation of Dugdale's _Monasticon_, v. 200, _207_

Stevenson, Sir John, _iii. 423_

Stewart, Dugald, _Philosophical Essays_; _Outlines of Moral Philosophy_,
  _vi. 63_

Stewart, George, midshipman on the _Bounty_ ("Torquil" of _The Island_),
  v. 583, 584; short account of, _v. 605_

Stewart, Peggy, _v. 605_

Stickles, John, _i. 417_

Stilicho, _ii. 390_

Stillingfleet, Benjamin, _iv. 573_

Stirling, Edward ("Vetus"), vii. 28

Stoics, "men without a heart," vi. 225

Stole, a long loosely-flowing robe, ii. 101

Stonehenge, vi. 434

Stott, Robert ("Hafiz"), i. _306, 308_, 352, 357, _358_, 370; ii. 139

Stout, Captain Benjamin, of the American ship _Hercules_, _vi. 89_

Strabo, ii. 173, 178, 196, 204, _512_; _v. 497_; _vi. 116, 122_; _Rerum
  Geog._, _v. 21, 24, 542_

Strahan, William, publisher of Johnson's _Dictionary_, Gibbon's _Decline
  and Fall_, Cook's _Voyages_, etc., vii. 56

Stralenheim, Baron, v. 327

Strangford, Percy Clinton Sydney Smythe, 6th Viscount, _Poems from the
  Portuguese by Luis de Camoëns_, i. _78, 305_, 320, 370

Stroganoff Collection, St. Petersburg, _ii. 446_

Strutt, Joseph, _Sports and Pastimes_, _vi. 471_

Stuart, editor of _Morning Post_, _i. 31_

Stuart, Daniel, editor of _Courier_, _i. 422_

Stuart, _Personal Reminiscences of the late Miss_, _i. 423_

Stuart, Princess Annabella (Countess of Huntly), _i. 173_

Stumpf, De, _Chroniques des Ligues_, iv. 4

Styx, river, vi. 184

_Substitute for an Epitaph_, vii. 11

Suetonius, ii. 298, _409_, 488; _iv. 270_; _Vitæ C. Julius Cæsar_, ii.
  _397, 434_, 509; _v. 484_; vi. _181, 276, 575_; _Vit. August._, ii.
  488, 509, 518; _Vit. Tiberii_, ii. 488; _De XII. Cæsaribus_, _iv. 124,
  445_; _vi. 174_; _Opera Omnia_, _v. 501_; in Tiberium, _vii. 36_

Suicide, vi. 265, 517

Suleyman Aga, ii. 205; _v. 558_

Suli, district of, ii. 126, 141; vi. 171

Suliotes, the, ii. 129, 146, 180; vii. 83

Sulla, _iv. 251_; vi. 348

Sulpicius Servius, ii. 362

Sulpitius Severus, _ii. 133_

_Sun of the Sleepless!_ iii. 399

_Sunday News_, ii. 535

Sunium, vi. 172

_Supernaculum_, v. 354

Superstition, ii. 128

Surrey, Henry Howard, Earl of, iv. 239

Surrey Institution, _iv. 575_; _vi. 12_

Surrey Theatre, vii. 59

_Surtees Society_, _v. 207_

Sussex, Duke of, _vi. 590_

Suwarrow (Suvóroff, Suwarof, Souvarof, Souwarrow), Field-Marshal
  Aleksandr Vasilievitch, vi. _14_, 222, 304, 315, 316, _317_, 319, 320,
  322-326, 370, 393

Swedes, _v._ Russians, _iv. 207, 233_; Bohemia evacuated by the, _v.
  371_

Swift, Dean, i. _397_, 414, 418, 419; _ii. 78_; _iv. 342_; vi. _142_,
  303; _Tale of a Tub_, iv. 484; _The South Sea Project_, _v. 159_; _The
  Journal of Stella_, _vi. 187_; _Corinna_, _vi. 454_; _Letters_, _vi.
  528_

Swimming, Byron's feats of, _ii. 461_

Swinburne, A.C., _Marino Faliero, a Tragedy_, iv. 329, _367_;
  _Selections from the Works of Lord Byron_, vi. xvi, xx

Swine Green, Nottingham, _vii. 1_

Swinton, Hon. Mrs. J.R., _A Sketch of the Life of Georgiana, Lady de
  Ros_, _ii. 229_

_Swiss Tour, Journal of Byron's_, _iv. 95, 107_

Sylla, ii. 166, 392; iii. 308; _iv. 179_

Sylvester, John, _vi. 7_

Symonds, J.A., _Renaissance in Italy_, _ii. 355, 356_; iv. 280, 281,
  _289_; _Memoirs of Count Carlo Gozzi_, _ii. 339_; translation of _Life
  of Benvenuto Cellini_, _v. 516, 518, 521_; "Evening, all things thou
  bringest," _vi. 180_

Symonds, bookseller, iv. 482

_Sympathetic Address to a Young Lady_ (_Lines to a Lady Weeping_), iii.
  45

Symplegades, the Cyanean, ii. 456, 525; v. 573; vi. 129; _vii. 10_

Syncellus, Georgius, _Chronographia_, v. 281, _302_

Syracuse, battle of, ii. 341

Syri _Sententiæ_, _ii. 420_

Syrius, Publius, _i. 414_



T

Taborite, or Hussite, Crusade, _v. 549_

Tacitus, _Annales_, ii. _242_, 293, _375, 409_; _Histor._, ii. 294, 299;
  _Agricola_, _iii. 198_

Tact, vi. 63

Tænaron, Cape, _ii. 193_

Tagus, river, ii. 31

Tahiri, Dervish, ii. 175, 176; iii. _134_, 450

Tahiti, v. 582-584, _588_

Tahiti, Queen of, _ii. 7_

Talavera, battle of, ii. xi, _39_, 49, 50, 89

_Tales_, vi. xv

_Tales of a Grandfather_, _ii. 337_; _vi. 12_

_Tales of my Landlord_, iv. 284

Talfourd, v. 114

Talleyrand, _v. 573_; _vi. 507_

Talleyrand, Dorothée, Duchesse de, _vi. 417_

Talleyrand, Edmond de Talleyrand Périgord, Duc de, _vi. 417_

Talus, the slope or inclination of a wall, vi. 343

Talvi, _Languages and Literature ofthe Slavic Nations_, _iii. 188_

Tambour, Turkish drum, iii. 160

Tambourgi, drummer, ii. 146

Tamerlane, iii. 312; v. 489

_Taming of the Shrew_, vi. 297

Tappa-cloth, or guatoo (Tonga), v. 600

Tarentum, Duke of, vii. 24

Tarik, ii. 89

Tarkū (Tirhakah), king of Ethiopia, v. 4

Tarleton, General, i. 479

Tarpeian Rock, ii. 413

Tarquins, the, iv. 334

Tarragona, British Consul, _iii. 13_

Tarsus, v. 23

Tasso, Cornelia, _iv. 146_

Tasso, Torquato, i. 313; _iv. 265_; vii. 52; _Gerusalemme Liberata_, _i.
  312_; ii. _133, 143, 246, 329_, 467, 485; iii. 215, _362_; _vi. 34_;
  _Rinaldo_, _i. 398_; "In Venice Tasso's echoes are no more," ii. 329;
  "Thy choral memory of the Bard divine," etc., ii. 342; "their glory
  and their shame," ii. 355; "Peace to Torquato's injured shade," ii.
  358; Boileau _v._, ii. 484; and the Cruscans, ii. 485; _Sonnet_, _iii.
  417_; _The Lament of_, iv. 139-152, 237

Tattersall, Rev. John Cecil ("Davus"), i. 97, 98

Tauchnitz, _ii. 335_

Taurida Palace, St. Petersburg, _vi. 386_

Tavell, Rev. G.F., i. 406

Taylor, Thomas, translation of the _Periegesis Græciæ_, _iv. 109, 566_

Tcharacovista valley, ii. _132_, 182

Tchocadar, Turkish attendant, iii. 176

Telemachus, ii. 118

Telemachus, an Eastern monk, ii. 520

Tellez, Gabriel (Tirso de Molina), _El Burlador de Sevilla y Convidado
  de Piedra_, vi. xvi

Temenos, _ii. 132_

Tempe, ii. 129, _384_

_Tempest, The_ (Shakespeare), ii. 213; _v. 478_; vi. 428

_Tempest, The_ (spurious), iii. xx

Temple, Lord, _iv. 510_

Teniers, vi. 502

Tennyson, Lord, _Palace of Art_, _ii. 123_; _Break, break, break_, _ii.
  126_; _In Memoriam_, _ii. 461_; _vi. 516_; _Locksley Hall_, iv. _43_,
  319; "Of old sat Freedom on the Heights," _iv. 196_; _Ode on the Death
  of the Duke of Wellington_, _iv. 501_; _Locksley Hall, Sixty Years
  After_, _vi. 180_

Tenorio, Don Juan, vi. xvi

Teos, birthplace of Anacreon, _vi. 171_

Tepeleni, ii. 134, 174, 202

Terence, i. 480; _Andrea_, vi. 484; _Eun._, _vi. 598_

Terentia, wife of Tully, _iv. 253_

Terentius Varro, M., ii. 92; _iv. 253_; _Rerum Rusticarum_, _vi. 348_

Tereus, _iv. 287_

Terni, the Cascata del Marmore of, ii. 383

Terpsichore, i. 483

Terrick, Richard, Bishop of London, _ii. 108_

Terry, Ellen, as "Josephine" in _Werner_, v. 324

Tertullian, _De Carne Christi_, _vi. 573_

_Terza rima_, iv. 239, 243, 244, 313

Teuman, king of Elam, v. 4

Thackeray, W.M., _Vanity Fair_, _vi. 197_

Thakombau, king, _v. 600_

Thamas Kouli Khan, Nadir Shah, vi. 384

Thames, ii. 66; vi. 434

_The Harp the Monarch Minstrel swept_, iii. 382

_The spell is broke, the charm is flown_, iii. 12

Théatre Impérial Lyrique, v. 2

Theatre Royal, Brussels, v. 2

Theatre Royal, Haymarket, _Werner_ at, v. 324

Theatre Royal, Manchester, _Sardanapalus_ at, v. 2

Thebes, ii. 93

Thellusson, Peter Isaac (Lord Rendlesham), banker, _i. 425, 471_

Themistocles, ii. 190; _iii. 85_; _iv. 423_

Theodoret, _Hist. Eccl._, ii. 521

Theodoric, _iv. 386_

Theodosius, ii. _390_, 472

_There was a time, I need not name_, i. 264

Thermia (Kythnos) island, _ii. 156_

Thermopylæ, ii. 149; iii. 21, 91

Theseus, ii. 102; _vi. 255_; Temple of, i. 459; iii. 272

Thessaly, _ii. 126_

Thetis, v. 489; vi. 184

Thibault, _Mes Souvenirs de vingt ans de Séjour à Berlin, ou Frédéric le
  Grand, etc._, _v. 637_

Thirty Years' War, the, _ii. 186_; v. 340

Thirza, Abel's wife, v. 209

Thisbe, vi. 235

Thistlewood, _vi. 67_

_Thomas_, wreck of the, _vi. 103, 110_

Thomson (_Seasons_), ii. 5, _65_, 489; iii. 224; _v. 615_; _vi. 200_;
  his use of "shook," _v. 135_; _Castle of Indolence_, v. 502;
  _Liberty_, _vi. 200_

Thomson, Ninian Hill, translation of Machiavelli's _Il Principe_, _vi.
  424_

Thornton, Thomas, _Present State of Turkey_, ii. 191, 194-196, 206

Thoroton, _History of Nottinghamshire_, _iv. 35_

Thorpe, Markham, _iii. 425_

Thorwaldsen, _vi. 79_

_Thou art not false, but thou art fickle_, iii. 64

_Thoughts suggested by a College Examination_, i. 28

Thrasybulus, ii. 150, 185; iv. 440

Thrasymene, Lake, ii. 377-379; battle of, ii. 505

Throsby, _Thornton's History of Nottinghamshire_, _iv. 35_

Thun, Lake, _iv. 119_

Thurlow, Edward Hovell, Lord, _Poems on Several Occasions_, vii. 17-19;
  _Hermilda in Palestine_, vii. 19

_Thy days are done_, iii. 391

Thyrza, iii. 30, _388_

Tiber, ii. 390

Tiberius Cæsar, ii. 374, _408_, 488

Tibullus, i. 73; _Sulpicia ad Cerinthum_, i. 74; _Eleg._, _iii. 199_

Tickell, pasquinade on Wilkes, _iv. 511_

Ticknor, George, _History of Spanish Literature_, _iv. 484, 496, 523,
  530_; _v. 207_; vi. xx, _40, 41_

Tigris, river, _v. 13_

Tilleman, Peter, his picture of Newstead Abbey, _vi. 590_

Tillotson, Archbishop, vi. 128, 303

Tilly, Johann Tserclas, Count von, v. 371, 416

Tilly, Mr., possessor of Tom Paine's bones, _vii. 65_

Timariots, the, iii. 166

Timbuctoo, vi. 51

_Times, The_, ii. xii, _11, 288, 401_; iii. 534; v. 114, 324; _vi. 275_;
  vii. 27, 28

Timoleon, iii. 452; iv. 423

Timon, ii. 8

Timophanes, iii. 452; _iv. 423_

Timor island, v. 583

Timúr Bey, or Timúr Lang (Tamerlane), iii. 312; v. 489

Tindal, Dr., _i. 449_

Tio Jorge (Jorge Ibort), v. 559

Tipaldo, _Biografia degli Italian Illustri_, _iv. 245, 457_

Tiraboschi, _Storia delta Letteratura Italiana_, ii. _481_, 486, _494_,
  496, _501_

Tiresias, vi. 535

Tirhakah (Tarkū), king of Ethiopia, v. 4

Titans, vi. 385

Tithonus, _v. 497_

Titian, iv. 141; vi. 502, 589; Venus of, iv. 162; his portrait of,
  Ariosto, _iv. 162_

Titius, _ii. 492_

Titus, ii. _392, 409_, 410, _424, 445_; iii. 401; vi. 139, 174; "Amici,
  diem perdidi," vi. 575

_Titus Andronicus_, _ii. 22_

Tlepolemus, a worker in wax, _ii. 168_

_To----_, i. 242; iv. 564

_To a beautiful Quaker_, i. 38

_To a knot of Ungenerous Critics_, i. _38_, 213

_To a Lady_, i. 189; _iv. 37_

_To a Lady, on being asked my reason for quitting England in the
  Spring_, i. 282

_To a Lady who presented the Author with the velvet band which bound her
  tresses_, i. 212, _233_

_To a Lady, who presented to the Author a lock of hair braided with his
  own, and appointed a night in December to meet him in the garden_, i.
  36

_To a vain Lady_, i. _70_, 244

_To a youthful friend_, i. 271

_To an Oak at Newstead_, i. 256

_To Anne_, i. _70_, 246, 251

_To Belshazzar_, iii. 421

_To Caroline_, i. xi, 8, 9, 21, 23

_To D----_, i. 7

_To Dives. A Fragment_, _ii. 37_; vii. 7

_To E----_, i. 4, _20_

_To Edward Noel Long_, i. _101_, 184, _244_

_To Eliza_, i. xi, 47

_To Emma_, i. 12

_To Florence_, iii. _4_, 5

_To Genevra (sonnet)_, iii. _67_, 70, 71

_To George, Earl of Delawarr_, i. _7_, 126

_To George Anson Byron_, vii. 41

_To Harriet_, i. 263

_To her who can best understand them_ (spurious), iii. xxi

_To Ianthe_, ii. 11; _iii. 65, 384_

_To Inez_, ii. _59_, 75; _iii. 1_

_To Lady Caroline Lamb_ (spurious), iii. xxi

_To Lesbia_, i. 41

_To Lord Thurlow_, vii. 19

_To M--_, i. 68

_To M.S.G._, i. 76, 79

_To Marion_, i. 129, _263_

_To Mary_, i. xi, xiii

_To Mary, on receiving her Picture_, i. 32, _192_

_To Miss Chaworth_ (spurious), iii. xx

_To Miss E.P._ [_To Eliza_], i. xi

_To Mr. Murray_, vii. 44, 56, 76

_To my dear Mary Anne_ (spurious), iii. xx

_To my Son_, i. 260; vi. 591

_To Penelope_, vii. 71

_To Romance_, i. 174

_To the Author of a Sonnet beginning, "'Sad is my Verse,' you say, 'And
  yet no tear'"_, i. 252

_To the Countess of Blessington_, iv. 565

_To the Duke of Dorset_, i. 194

_To the Earl of Clare_, i. 200

_To the Hon. Mrs. George Lamb_, vii. 15

_To the Lily of France_ (spurious), iii. xx

_To the sighing Strephon_, i. 63

_To Thomas Moore_, vii. 43, 46

_To Thomas Moore, written the Evening before his visit to Mr. Leigh Hunt
  in Horsemonger Lane Gaol, May 19, 1813_, vii. 16

_To Thyrza_, _ii. 104_; iii. 30

_To Woman_, i. 43

Toa, a drooping casuarina, v. 599

Tobacco, in praise of, v. 615

_Tobit_, _v. 286, 527_

Todd, Rev. J.H., Archdeacon of Cleveland ("Oxoniensis"), _A Remonstrance
  to Mr. John Murray respecting a Recent Publication_, v. 202

Token-flowers, iii. 17

Tolbooth prison, Edinburgh, i. 334

Toledo, Judah de, translation of Avicenna's _Works_, _iv. 523_

Tolstoi, _War and Peace_, _vi. 351_

Tomaros, Mount (Olytsika), ii. _132_, 134, 182

Tomasini, _Petrarca Redivivus_, _ii. 373_

Tonson, Jacob, publisher of _The Spectator_, _vi. 555_; vii. 56

Toobo Neuha, a Tongau chieftain, v. 609

Tooke, Andrew, _Pantheon_, _vi. 26_

Tooke, John Home (_Pantheon_), _ii. 156_; iv. _513_, 516; vi. 580

Tooke, Thomas, _vi. 480_

Tooke, W., _Life of Catherine II._, _vi. 314, 370, 386, 389, 395, 417_

Tophaike, musquet, iii. 96

Topham, Captain, editor of _The World_, _i. 353, 358_

Tornabuoni, Lucrezia, iv. 280

Torniellus, _v. 306_

Torrens. W.T. M'Cullagh, _Memoirs of Viscount Melbourne_, i. 476

Torriano, Anonimo, _iv. 332_

Torstenson, Lennart, Swedish General, v. 371

Tortoises, in the Troad, vi. 204

Tott, Baron de, _Memoirs concerning the State of the Turkish Empire_,
  vi. 261, 277

Tournefort, Joseph Pitton de, _Relation d'un Voyage du Levant_, _iii.
  121, 295_; _v. 294_; _vi. 216, 233_

Tower of London, i. 438

_Towneley Plays_, _v. 207_

Townly, i. 399

Townsend, Rev. George, Canon of Durham, _Armageddon_, _i. 403_

Townshend, Lord John, pasquinade on Wilkes, _iv. 511_

Tozer, H.F. _Geography of Greece_; _Childe Harold_, ii. _60, 62, 113,
  117, 123, 134, 139, 143_, 146, _158, 167_, 180-182, 186, _217, 271_,
  292, _344, 373, 452_

Tractors, metallic, i. 307

Trafalgar, ii. 126, 178, 459

Trajan, his column, ii. 410, 411

Tranchant de Laverne, L.M.P., _The Life of Field Marshal Souvaroff_,
  _vi. 222, 320-322_

_Translation from Adrian_, i. 20

_Translation from Anacreon_, i. 147, 149, 228

_Translation from Catullus, Ad Lesbiam_, i. 72

_Translation from Horace_, i. 81

_Translation from Prometheus Vinctus of Æschylus_, i. 14

_Translation from the Medea of Euripides_, i. 168

_Translation from Vittorelli_, iv. 535

_Translation of a Romaic Love Song_, iii. 62

_Translation of the Epitaph on Virgil and Tibullus by Domitius Marsus_,
  i. 73

_Translation of the famous Greek War Song_, [Δευτε παιδες τωv
  Ἑλλήνων] [Greek: Deute paides tôv HEllê/nôn], iii. 20

_Translation of the Nurse's Dole in the Medea of Euripides_, vii. 10

_Translation of the Romaic Song_, [Μρένω μες' τὸ περιβόλι,
  Ὡραιοτάτη Χαηδή, κ.τ.λ.] [Greek: Mre/nô mes' to\ peribo/li,
  HÔraiota/tê Chaêdê/, k.t.l.], iii. 22

Travis, Archdeacon George, _ii. 283_

Treason Bill, iv. 511

Trecentisti, the, vi. 168

Tree, Miss Ellen (afterwards Mrs. Charles Kean), iv. 78; as "Myrrha" in
  _Sardanapalus_, v. 2

Trelawny, E.T., _Records of Shelley, Byron, and the Author_, _iv. 539_;
  _vii. 78_; _Recollections, etc._, _vi. 608_

_Trévoux, Journal de_ (_Mémoires de_), iv. 578

Trimmer, Sarah, _Easy Introduction to the Study of Nature_; _History of
  the Robins_, vi. 18

Tripolitza, iii. 447

Tripp, Baron, i. 476, _499_

Triptolemus, v. 570

Tritonia, or Tritogenia, epithet of Athene, ii. 156

Troad, the, vi. 204

Trocnow, John of (surnamed Žižka, or the "One-eyed"), v. 549

_Troilus and Cressida_, _ii. 124_; _iv. 319_

Troppau, Congress at, _v. 563_

Troubadours, the, ii. 6

Troy, ii. 294; iv. _243_, 334; vi. 173, 211

Troyes, Bishop of, _ii. 338_

Tschairowsky, "_Manfred_ Symphony," iv. 78

Tubal-Cain, _v. 291_

"Tuism," vi. 575

Tullia, Cicero's daughter, _ii. 405_

Tully, _iv. 253_

Tully, Richard, _Narrative of a Ten Years' Residence in Tripoli in
  Africa, etc._, _vi. 160_

Turcomans, the, iii. 453

Turenne, Marshal, _i. 493_; _iv. 262_

Turgot, _v. 554_

Turin, Agilulf, Duke of, ii. 489

Turkey, travelling in, ii. 204

Turks, ii. 206; their hatred of the Arabs, iii. 163; defeated by Greeks
  near Lerna, _v. 556_

Turnus, i. 157, 161, 163

Turtukey, or Tutrahaw, fall of, _vi. 370_

Tuscan, "that soft bastard Latin," iv. 173

Tuscany and its Dukes, ii. 503

Tusculum, ii. 454, 522

Tweddell, _Remains of the late John_, _iii. 4_

Tweed, river, i. 334

_Twelfth Night_, vi. _268_, 272

_Two Foscari, The_, _ii. 187, 327_; iv. _364_, 477, 479; v. 3, 5, _9_,
  113-196, 199, 203, 469; _vi. 199, 586_; _vii. 77_

_Two Gentlemen of Verona_, _vi. 189_

Tyndal, N., translation of Cantemir's _Othman Empire_, _vi. 259_

Tyrants, the Thirty, vi. 446

Tyrconnel, Fanny Jennings, Duchess of, _vi. 496_

Tyre, i. 376; v. 4; vi. 348

Tyrian purple, vi. 574

Tyrwhitt, Rev. Edmund, _vii. 27_

Tyrwhitt, Thomas, editor of _Canterbury Tales_, _vii. 27_

Tyrwhitt, Sir Thomas, Private Secretary to the Prince of Wales, auditor
  of the Duchy of Cornwall, Lord Warden of the Stannaries, Gentleman
  Usher of the Black Rod, vii. 27

Tzigaras, A., _ii. 198_



U

Uberti, Fazio degli, _iv. 248_

Ude, Louis Eustache, _The French Cook_, _vi. 562_

Uffizi Gallery, Florence, _ii. 365_

Ugolino, iv. 258

Ukraine, Russian, or frontier region, iv. 201, 220

Ulysses, vi. _117_, 149

Umbrinus, ii. _416_, 516

United States of America, war with England, _i. 496_

Unspunnen, Castle of, _iv. 110, 129_

Upton, William, _Poems on Several Occasions_; _Words of the most
  Favourite Songs, Duets, etc._, vii. 59

Urban V., ii. 482

Urbino, Duke of, ii. 503

Urbino, Simone di Battista di Ciarla da, _iv. 174_

Urdamanē, king of Ethiopia, v. 4

Urlichs, Dr. H.S., _The Elder Pliny's Chapters on the History of Art_,
  _ii. 432_

Urquhart, translation of Rabelais' _Gargantua_, _v. 354_

Ursinus, Fulvius, ii. 510, 517

Usbergo, or sbergo, _iv. 308_

Ushant, battle of, _vi. 12_

Uticans, the, _v. 506_

Utraikey, or Lutraki, ii. _142_, 143

Utrecht, Peace of, iv. 334



V

Vacca, Flaminius, ii. 508, 509, 511, 515

Vaccination, i. 307; vi. 50

Vaga, Pierrin del, _ii. 437_

Valentia, George Annesley, Viscount, _Voyages and Travels, etc._, _i.
  378, 379_

Valenza, Cardinal of, _ii. 367_

Valerianus, I.P., _De fulminum significationibus Declamatio_, _ii. 489_

Valerius Flaccus, _Argonaut_, i. 200

Valerius Maximus, _Factorum Dictorumque Memorabilia_, _ii. 437_; iii.
  307; _v. 543_; _vi. 46_

Valetta, iii. 24

Valid, son of Abdalmalek, _iii. 120_

Vallance, General Charles, R.E., _Essay on the Celtic Language_, _vi.
  337_

Vallaresso, Ermolao, _v. 134_

Valley of Sweet Waters, _ii. 153_

Valori, _vi. 337_

Valpy, A.J., _ii. 437_

Vampires, iii. 121-123

Vanbrugh, _The Provoked Husband_, _i. 399_

Vandals, the, iii. 235, 251

Vansittart, _i. 471_

Varchi, _Ercolano_, _ii. 495_

Varro, M. Terentius, ii. 92; _iv. 253_; _Rerum Rusticarum_, _vi. 348_

Vasari, _iv. 163_

Vasilly the Albanian, _ii. 75, 130_

_Vathek_ (W. Beckford), ii. 37; iii. _59_, 76, _87, 105, 109, 110, 121,
  145, 478_; iv. _45, 89, 113_, 244

Vauban, _vi. 344_

Vaughan, Charles Richard, _Narrative of the Siege of Saragoza_, ii. 91,
  94

Vaughan, Taylor, _A Familiar Epistle, etc._, _i. 445_; _iv. 74_

_Vault, The_, _vii. 35_

Vaux, James Hardy, _Vocabulary of the Flash Language_, _vi. 431_

Velinus, Lake, ii. 382, _384_

Vely Pasha, Vizier of the Morea, ii. 203, 205

Vendôme Column, v. 548

Vendoti, Georgie (Bentotes, or Bendotes), ii. 197; _iii. 121_

Venetian Institute, the, _iv. 457_

Venetian Lombardy, iv. 197

Venetians, besiege Athens, ii. 165; their love of music and poetry, ii.
  471; their society and manners, iv. 469

Veneziano, Luca, _iv. 283_

Venezuela, _v. 555_

Venice, ii. 327; decline of, ii. 477; iv. 193-198, 456; Alamanni's
  prophecy, _iv. 459_

_Venice, a Fragment_, iv. 537

Veniero, Sebastian, _ii. 340_

Venturi, _iv. 318_

Venus de' Medici, ii. _365_, 489; vi. 200

Venus, cestus of, ii. 272

_Venus and Adonis_, _vi. 487_

Venuti, Ab. R., _Accurata et Succincta Descrizione di Roma moderna_, ii.
  _513_, 517

Vercingetorix, _iv. 331_

Vernet, vi. 502

Vernon, Admiral Edward, vi. 12

Vernon, Lady, _Journal of Mary Frampton_, _vii. 40_

Veroccio, Andrea, _iv. 336_

Verona, Congress at, v. _537-539_, 562, _573_, 574, _575, 576_; vi. 453;
  amphitheatre at, v. 561

Verres, i. 455; ii. 168, 170

Verrucchio, Gianciotto da, _iv. 316_

Verrucchio, Malatesta da, Lord of Rimini, _iv. 316_

Verrucchio, Paolo da, _iv. 316_

_Verses addressed in the Year 1812 to the Hon. Mrs. George Lamb_, _iii.
  32_

_Verses found in a Summer-house at Hales-Owen_, iii. 59

_Versicles_, vii. 45

_Version of Ossian's Address to the Sun, A_, vii. 2

_Very mournful Ballad on the Siege and Conquest of Alhama, A_, iii. xix;
  iv. 529

Vespasian, ii. 298, _392, 408, 410_, 512, 524

Vespucci, Amerigo, _iv. 262_

Vestris, _i. 347_

Vesuvius, v. 552

Vevey, ii. 277, 303

Vianolo, _L'Histoire Vénitienne_, _v. 124_

Vicovaro, village of, ii. 523

Vienna, Congress of, ii. 402; v. 538, _550, 562_; _vi. 399_; Siege of,
  iii. 458; taken by the French, v. 550; Treaty of, _v. 550_

Villa Ludovisi, _ii. 432_

Villani, P., _Liber de Florentiæ Famosis Civibus_, _iv. 309_

Villanuova, Alberti di, _Dizzionario Universale_, _iv. 309_

Villari, Professor, _ii. 415_

Villehardouin, _ii. 329_

Villêle, M. de, _v. 575_

Villeneuve, town, iv. _18_, 26, _120_

Villeneuve, Jérôme Petion de, Mayor of Paris, vi. 13

Villiers, De, _Le Festin de Pierre, ou le fils criminel_, vi. xvi

Vimercato, Augustino, _Canzoni di Dante, etc._, _iv. 248_

Vimiera, battle of, _ii. 39_

Virgil, iv. 319; vi. 73, _478_; _Æneid_, i. xii, 25, 151, _372_, 382,
  451, _477_; ii. _64, 71, 133, 143, 189, 384, 396_, 407, 510, 514; vi.
  521, _526_; Domitius Marsus' epitaph on, i. 73; "and Maro sang," i.
  312; _Georgics_, _i. 362, 440_; _ii. 379_; _vi. 323_; "forced no more
  to groan O'er Virgil's devilish verses," i. 405; Heyne's edition of,
  _i. 490_; "Alas, for Virgil's lay," ii. 392; Petrarch's, ii. 480;
  Mantua his birthplace, ii. 507; _Eclogues_, iv. 567; _v. 289_; vi. 26,
  _185_, 492

Visconti, Ennius Quirinus, ii. 324, _518_

Visconti, Filippo, Duke of Milan, v. 116

_Vision of Belshazzar_, iii. 397

_Vision of Don Roderick_, _i. 436_; _ii. 4, 51_

_Vision of Judgment_, _i. 305_; iv. 280, 473-525, _579_; _v. 196_; vi.
  xvi, _4, 75, 338, 445_

Vitellius, ii. 299

Vitepsk, battle of, _iv. 207_

Vitiges, a Dalmatian, _ii. 390_

Vittorelli, Jacopo, iv. 535

Vittoria, battle of, _iii. 416_

Vittoria Colonna, _iv. 262_

Vivian, General, _ii. 234_

Viviani, Vincenzo, _ii. 369_

Vlack (Wallachia), Bey of, ii. 199

_Vocabolario Italiano-Latino_, _iv. 308_

Vogüé, Viscount E. Melchior de, _Le Fils de Pierre Le Grand_, _Mazeppa_,
  etc., iv. 203, _220_

Voïart, Madame Elise, _Chants Populaires des Servics_, _iii. 188_

Volondorako, _ii. 142_

Voltaire, François Marie Arouet de, _Pucelle_, i. 437; _Candide, ou
  l'Optimisme_, ii. _41_, 89, _281_; vi. 226; Rousseau and, _ii. 266_;
  imprisoned in the Bastille, ii. 282; his Ferney Estate, ii. 306;
  _Henriade_, _iii. 361_; _Mariamne_, _iii. 400_; Benjamin Brue, iii.
  442; Byron's _Sonnet to Lake Leman_, iv. 53; Wordsworth and Coleridge
  _v._, _iv. 184_; _vi. 363_; _Histoire de Charles XII._, iv. 201, 205,
  _220_; _OEuvres_, _iv. 212_; on Venice, _iv. 456_; _La Bible enfin
  expliquée, etc._, _v. 208_; _Dieu et les Hommes_, _v. 210_; his grave,
  _v. 548_; _Essai sur les Moeurs et L'Esprit des Nations_, v. 549; Nino
  de Lenclos' bequest, _vi. 246_; Byron's two quotations from, vi. 266;
  and Frederick the Great, _vi. 337_; _Correspondence avec L'Emperatrice
  de Russie_, vi. 381; _Éléments de la Philosophie de Newton_, _vi.
  400_; "la bonne société régle tout," _vi. 470_

_Volume of Nonsense, A_, vii. 70

von Duhn, F., _ii. 395_

von Ranke, Leopold, _History of Servia_, _iii. 188_

von Stolberg, Louise, _ii. 369_

von Talvi, _Volkslieder der Serben_, _iii. 188_

Vopiscus, ii. 520

Vórskla river, _iv. 208, 233_

Vossius, I., _De Ant. Urb. Rom. Mag._, ii. 516

Vostizza, _ii. 60_

Voygoux, Louis Charles Antoine Desaix de, vi. 14

Vuilliemin, _Chillon Étude Historique_, iv. 5

Vuillier, G. (Heinemann), _History of Dancing_, _i. 492_



W

Waddington, Samuel Ferrand, _A Key to a Delicate Investigation. An
  Address to the People of the United Kingdom_, vi. 265

Wagner, Richard, _Rienzi_, _ii. 415_

Wahabees, the, ii. 151, 186

Waithman, Sir Robert ("Bobby"), M.P. for the City of London, _vii. 67,
  68_

Wake, Kyd, _iv. 511_

Walcheren Expedition, the, _vii. 29_

Waldegrave, James Earl, _Memoirs_, vii. 76

Waldie, Miss Jane, _iii. 313_; _Sketches Descriptive of Italy_, iv. 471

Waldstein, Albrecht Wenceslaus Eusebius, Count of, v. 371

Wales, Princess Charlotte of, _vi. 19_

Waliszewski, K., _The Story of a Throne_, _vi. 381, 389, 399, 412_;
  _Romance of an Empress_, _vi. 388_

_Walker, Wolcot_ v., v. 204

Wallace Collection, the, _iv. 461_

Wallach, J.W., as "Ulric" in _Werner_, v. 324

Wallachia (Vlack), Bey of, ii. 199; conquered by the Austrians, _vi.
  222_

Waller, _i. 306_

Walpole, Horace, _ii. 480_; _vi. 208_; _Memoirs of the Reign of King
  George II._, _iii. 299_; vii. 76; _Letters_, iv. 339, _367_; _vi.
  528_; _Castle of Otranto_; _Mysterious Mother_, iv. 339, _367_; "the
  summer has set in with its usual severity," _iv. 505_

Walpole, Sir Robert, i. 414; vii. 68

Walpole, Rev. Robert, ii. 204

Walsh, Rev. Dr. R., _Narrative of a Resident in Constantinople_, _iii.
  16_

Walton, Izaak, vi. 513

_Waltz, The_, i. 475-502; ii. _53_, 177; _iii. 251_; v. 537; _vi. 151,
  448, 451_; _vii. 33, 46_

Warburton, Bishop (_The Divine Legation of Moses, etc._), v. 209; _vi.
  487_; "orthodoxy is _my doxy_," _vi. 267_; _Works of Pope_, _vi. 453_

Ward, Hon. J.W., iii. 217, 499; vii. 49, 54

Warden, William, _Letters written on board His Majesty's Ship the
  Northumberland, and at St. Helena_, _v. 545_

Wardle, Colonel Gwyllim Lloyd, _i. 391_

Ware, ii. 66, _88_; bed of, vi. 272

Warens, Madame de, _ii. 266, 303_

Waring, Major John Scott, _ii. 7_

Warner, Mrs., as "Josephine" in _Werner_, v. 324

Warton, Dr. Joseph, _ii. 480_

Warton, Dr. Thomas, poet-laureate, _i. 305, 411_; _iii. 452, 474_; _vi.
  166_; _History of English Poetry_, v. 200, _207_

Warville, Jean Pierre Brissot de, vi. 13

Washington, George, iv. 516; v. 554; vi. 331, 376

Waterloo, ii. 226, 255, 293, _459_; iii. 429, 431; v. 538; vi. 345, 375,
  539

Watkins, Dr. John, _Memoirs, etc., of Lord Byron_, v. 203, _474_

Watson, James, a Radical agitator, vi. 265

Watson, Richard, Bishop of Llandaff, _ii. 283_; _Anecdotes of the Life
  of_, v. 208

Watts, A.A., _iii. 280_

_Waverley_, _iv. 334_; v. 209; _vi. 272, 404_

Way, Billy, _i. 348_

Webb, William Frederick, _vi. 497_

Webb, Miss Geraldine (Lady Chermside), _vi. 497_

Weber, W.H. (Scott's amanuensis), _Metrical Romances of the 13th, 14th,
  and 15th Centuries_, _i. 396_; _iii. 145_

Webster, Lady Elizabeth (afterwards Lady Holland), _ii. 80_

Webster, Lady Frances Wedderburn, iii. _67_, 69, 149, 218, 319, _390_;
  vi. _375_, 451

Webster, James Wedderburn, iii. 149, _381_; _iv. 459_ _Waterloo and
  other Poems_, vii. 45

Webster, Sir Godfrey, Bart., _ii. 80_

_Weekly Messenger_ (Boston), _iii. 297, 307_

_Weekly Political Register_, _ii. 40_

_Weekly Register_, v. 540, _572_; _vi. 266_

Weevers, John, _Funerall Monuments_, _vi. 422_

_Well! thou art happy_, i. 277; _iv. 37_

Wellesley, Marquis of, _ii. 79, 497_

Wellesley, William Pole Tylney Long, vi. 451

Wellington, Duke of, _i. 485_; v. 568, 575-577; "new victories," i. 496;
  _Childe Harold_ on, ii. xi; Convention of Cintra, ii. 39, 86; has
  enacted marvels, ii. 88; Lady de Ros, _ii. 230_; The "Holy Alliance,"
  _ii. 402_; Waterloo, _ii. 459_; vi. 345; in _Parenthetical Address_,
  iii. 57; Mrs. Boehm's masquerade, _iv. 177_; Achilles statue in Hyde
  Park inscribed to, _v. 535_; at the Vienna Congress, v. 539; "filled
  the sign-posts then, like Wellesley now," vi. 12; "great moral
  lesson," _vi. 266_; and Dan Mackinnon, _vi. 276_; _Don Juan, Canto
  IX._, vi. 373; the Kinnaird-Marinet incident, _vi. 374_; "I have seen
  a Duke turn politician stupider," vi. 452; "has but enslaved the
  whites," vi. 461

_Wellington Despatches_, _ii. 50, 51_; _vi. 345, 374_

Wells, Bishop Hugh de, _vi. 596_

Welschinger, Henri, _L'Ami de M. de Tallyrand_, _vi. 507_

Wentworth, Lord, _i. 437_

Wentworth, W.C., _A Statistical Description, etc., of N.S. Wales_, _v.
  588_

_Were my bosom as false, etc._, iii. 399

_Werner_, _i. 369_; _iii. 521_; iv. _19, 21_, 81, _122, 226_; v. 279,
  323-466, _543, 549, 611, 612_; _vi. 148_

Werner, Franz von (Murad Effendi), iv. 329

Werner, Friedrich Ludwig Zacharias, _v. 347_

Werther, i. 476, 494

Wesley, John, iv. 522; vi. 303

West, Benjamin, i. _389_, 466

West, Mrs. W., actress, iv. 324

Westall, W., A.R.A., _ii. 11_; _vi. 478_

Western, _v. 572_

Westminster, Marquis of (Lord Robert Grosvenor), i. 412

_Westminster Review_, iii. _25_, 76; _vi. 3_; vii. 86

Westmoreland, John Fane, 10th Earl of, vii. 28

Westphalia, Peace of, _v. 340, 372_; Congress of, _vi. 531_

Wharton, Henry Thornton, _Sappho_, _vi. 180_

Wheat, prices in England (1818-1822), v. 539

Wheatley, H.B., _London Past and Present_, _iv. 161_

_When coldness wraps this suffering clay_, iii. 395

_When I roved a young Highlander_, i. 191

_When we two parted_, iii. 410

Whig Club of Fox's time, its uniform of blue and buff, vi. 9

Whig Club, Cambridge, vii. _66_, 68

Whiskey, a light carriage, ii. 65

Whist, vi. 173

Whiston, _vi. 400_

Whitbread, Samuel, _iii. 54_; _iv. 75, 519_; vi. 451; vii. 30

White, Henry Kirke, i. 363; _ii. 123_; _Remains_, iv. 522

White, Miss Lydia, Sydney Smith's "Tory Virgin," iv. 569; "Miss Diddle"
  of _The Blues_, iv. 570; her death, iv. 587

Whitefield, _i. 412_

Whitworth, Earl of, _i. 195_

Wicklow, the Irish gold-mine in, i. 426

Wicksteed, Rev. Philip H., _iv. 248_

Wiel, Alethea, _Two Doges of Venice_, v. 119, _121, 133, 143, 171, 178,
  179, 183, 190, 193_

Wieland's _Oberon_, _i. 362_; _iii. 263_

Wilberforce, iv. 181; vi. 461, _549_

_Wild Gazelle, The_, iii. 384

Wilderswyl, village of, _iv. 119_

Wildman, Colonel Thomas, _i. 89, 257_; vi. _496, 497_, 589

Wilhelm, Paul, ii. 299

Wilkes, John, iv. 476, 480, 508-511

Wilkie, Dr. W., _i. 403_; _Epigoniad_, _i. 436_

Wilkie, Sir David, "The Defence of Saragossa," ii. 92

William the Conqueror, iv. 543; vi. 410

William and Mary, _vi. 496_

William I. of Germany, his "triumphant piety," _vi. 370_

William I. of Holland, _ii. 225_

William III., _i. 198_

Williams, Edward, v. 331

Williams, Hugh W., _Travels in Italy, Greece, etc._, _iii. 15, 16_

Williams (Anthony Pasquin), _i. 304_

Williams, Dr., _Theol. Lib._, iv. 479

Willis, Chief Justice, _iv. 585_

Willis, Rev. Dr. Francis, i. 416; _ii. 43_

Willis, John, _i. 416_

Willis, Margaret (Lady Beaumont), iv. 585

Willis' Rooms, _i. 347_

Wilmot, Juliana, Lady, _iii. 381_

Wilmot, Mrs. (Barberina Ogle), afterwards Lady Wilmot Horton, then Lady
  Dacre, the original of "She walks in Beauty," _iii. 381_; iv. 569,
  570; vii. 48, _54_; _Ina, a Tragedy_, _vii. 48_

Wilmot, Sir Robert John (afterwards Wilmot Horton), _iii. 381_; vii. 54

Wilmot, Sir Robert, _iii. 381_

Wilson, printer, i. 452

Wilson, John (Christopher North), ii. 315, 462; _Isle of Palms_, iii.
  230; on Moore, _iv. 61_; v. 280; on _Manfred_, iv. 80, 81; on _Marino
  Faliero_, iv. 329; _City of the Plague_, iv. 339; _Noctes Ambrosianæ_,
  iv. 570; on _Heaven and Earth_, v. 280, 282; on _Don Juan_, _vi. 213_

Wilson, Sir Robert Thomas, "Southwark's Knight," _vii. 67_

Wilson, W., _A Missionary Voyage to the South Pacific Ocean, etc._, _v.
  605_

Winckelmann, _Storia delle Arti, etc._, ii. _396, 431, 432_, 490, 509,
  511, 512, 518

_Windsor Poetics. Lines composed on the Occasion of His Royal Highness
  the Prince Regent being seen standing between the coffins of Henry
  VIII. and Charles I. in the Royal Vault at Windsor_, vii. 35

Wingfield, Hon. John, _i. 96_; ii. 81, 82, 94

Winsor, Justin, _History of America_, _iv. 198_

Wirt, William, _Life of Patrick Henry_, _v. 560_

Wolcot, Dr. John (Peter Pindar), i. 294, _304, 390, 395, 412_; iv. 158;
  _Instructions to a Laureat_, _iv. 519_; _Ode to a Margate Hoy_, _vii.
  5_

_Wolcot_ v. _Walker_, v. 204

Wolf of the Capitol, Rome, ii. 396

Wolf, F., _Primavera y Flor de Romances_, _iv. 529_

Wolfe, General James, vi. 12

Wolfe, Rev. C., _vi. 165_

Wolmar, Madame, ii. 305

Wolseley, Lord, _Decline and Fall of Napoleon_, _v. 551_

_Woman's Hair, A_, i. 233; _iii. 12_

Wood, J.T., _Modern Discoveries on the Site of Ancient Ephesus_, _ii.
  441_

Wood, the pedestrian, _i. 322_

Woodhouselee, Alexander Fraser Tytler, Lord, _Essay on Petrarch_, _ii.
  351_

Woodward, Dr. John, _Fossils of England_, _v. 632_

Worcester, battle of, _ii. 395_

Wordsworth, Miss Dorothy, _i. 422_; _iv. 585_

Wordsworth, John, captain of _The Earl of Abergavenny_, _vi. 91_

Wordsworth, William, _i. 305, 318, 331_; ii. 311; iii. 149; vi. 39, 80,
  _587_; _vii. 70_ Byron's review of his _Poems_, _i. 234_; _Lyrical
  Ballads_, i. 315, 316; _iv. 269_; Distributor of Stamps for the County
  of Westmorland, _i. 321_; iv. 582; vi. 5; "Yet let them not to vulgar
  Wordsworth stoop," etc., i. 368; "Let simple Wordsworth chime his
  childish verse," i. 369; "write but like Wordsworth--live beside a
  lake," i. 422; on Bland Burges, _i. 437_; _Concerning the Relations of
  Great Britain, Spain, and Portugal_, ii. 87; "l'acent Wordsworthien,"
  _ii. 115_; iv. 6; as preached by Shelley, _ii. 219_; _Emperors and
  Kings, etc._, _ii. 227_; "Not in the Lucid Intervals of Life," _ii.
  258_; _Tintern Abbey_, _ii. 261, 272_; _v. 613_; _Intimations of
  Immortality_, _ii. 271, 352_; _Excursion_, _ii. 272, 281_; _v. 94,
  613_; vi. 4, 176; _On the Extinction of the Venetian Republic_, _ii.
  336_; _In the Pass of Killycranky_, _ii. 337_; _Near the Lake of
  Thrasymene_, _ii. 377, 378_; _Descriptive Sketches_, _ii. 385_; "How
  clear, how keen, how marvellously bright!" iii. xx; Coleridge's _Lines
  to a Gentleman_, _iii. 336_; his quarrel with Byron, iii. 533; iv.
  479; _Song at the Feast of Brougham Castle_, _iv. 16, 27_; _Ruth_, iv.
  24; _Works_, _iv. 25, 27, 33, 220_; _A Poet's Epitaph_, _iv. 26_;
  Byron an admirer of, _iv. 47_; "Wordsworth and Co.," _iv. 182_;
  depreciates Voltaire, _iv. 184_; _Resolution and Independence_
  (originally _The Leech-gatherer_), iv. _267_, 582 _Two Addresses to
  the Freeholders of Westmorland_, _iv. 341_; _Peter Bell_, _iv. 341_;
  vi. 177; vii. 63, 64; Hazlitt on, _iv. 518_; referred to in _The
  Blues_, iv. 585; _Sonnet to a Painter_, _v. 251_; "crazed beyond all
  hope," vi. 74; "unexcised, unhired," vi. 175; _Benjamin the Waggoner_,
  vi. 177; "poet Wordy," vi. 214; _Supplement to the Preface_ (_Poems_),
  _ibid._; compared with Jacob Benmen, _vi. 268_; _Thanksgiving Ode_,
  vi. 332; "has supporters two or three," vi. 445; Mackintosh, _vii.
  32_; _The White Doe of Rylstone; or, The Fate of the Nortons, a Poem_,
  vii. 45; "the great metaquizzical poet," _vii. 72, 73_

_World, The_, _i. 358_; _vi. 525_

Wormeley, Katharine Prescott, translation of _Prince de Ligne's
  Memoirs_, _vi. 415_

Wraxall, Sir N.W., _Historical Memoirs_, _vi. 478_; _Posthumous
  Memoirs_, _vii. 29, 30_

Wren, C., i. 438

Wright, John, _ii. 217_; iii. 75, 443; _iv. 63_

Wright, Walter Rodwell, _Horæ Ionicæ_, i. 366; ii. x, _104_, 202

Wright, Professor, _Kufic Tombstones in the British Museum_, _iii. 120_

_Written after swimming from Sestos to Abydos_, iii. 13; _vi. 112_

Wul-wulleh, death-song of Turkish women, iii. 205

Wyatt, Sir Thomas, iv. 239

Wycherley, _i. 322_

Wylde, G., _i. 45_

Wynn, _iv. 520_

Wynne, iv. 476



X

Xantippe, _iv. 253_

Xeres, v. 565

Xerxes, ii. 166; iv. 259; vi. 46, 169



Y

Yakintu, king of Arvad, v. 4

Yanina, Janina, or Joannina, lake of, ii. 179, 189

Yarmouth, Maria Fagniani, Lady, _i. 501_

Yarmouth, Lord, "Red Herrings," _i. 493, 497, 501_; vii. 22

Yearsley, Ann, _i. 329_

Yesoukoï, Lieutenant-Colonel, vi. 354

Yonge, C.D., translation of Athenæus' _Deipno._, _v. 11_

York, Duchess of, _iii. 45_

York, Duke of, _i. 3, 391_; _ii. 169_; _iii. 45_; _iv. 587_; _vi. 67,
  451, 507_

Young, Edward, _Revenge_, i. 26, _409_; _iii. 158, 200_; _Night
  Thoughts_, ii. 95, _161_; _iii. 129, 262_; _vi. 186, 450_;
  _Resignation_, _vi. 450_; _Love of fame, the Universal Passion_, _vi.
  461_

Young, Rosalind A., _The Mutiny, etc._, _v. 622_

_Young Lochinvar_, _ii. 70_



Z

Zama, battle of, _ii. 459_

Zanetti, ii. 472

Zanga, a character in Young's _Revenge_, i. 26, _409_

Zappi, Giovanni Battista, _iv. 271_

Zara, siege of, iv. 331, 332

Zaragoza, Augustina, maid of, ii. 58, 91

Zarina, Queen, character in _Sardanapalus_, v. 12

Zarotti, _iv. 287_

_Zechariah_, _v. 286_

Zegri, the, a Moorish tribe, v. 558

Zela, battle of, _ii. 398_

Zeller, Dr. E., _Socrates and the Socratic Schools_, _ii. 103_

_Zend-Avesta_, _iii. 110_; _iv. 112_

Zendrini, A., _Elogio di Jacopo Morelli_, _iv. 457_

Zeno, Carlo, ii. 477, 497

Zeus Olympius, Temple of, ii. 167

Ziani, Doge Sebastian, ii. 473

Zibeon, Esau's wife, _v. 285_

Zimri, king of Israel, _v. 107_

Zitza, convent and village of, ii. 129, 174, 180; _iii. 7_

Žižka, John of Trocnow, v. 549

Zoffani, _iv. 508_

Zoili of Albemarle Street, the, vi. xix, _467_

Zonaras, _Annales_, ii. 202

Zonta of Twenty, the, _iv. 385, 441_

Zoritch, or Zovitch, Catherine II.'s favourite, _vi. 388_

Zoroaster, the creed of, vi. 491

Zosimado, ii. 197

Zosimus, _Historiæ_, ii. 172

Zoubof, Plato, Catherine II.'s favourite, _vi. 388_

Zrini, Hungarian commander, iii. 442

Zsigetvar, siege of, iii. 442

Zuccari, _ii. 437_

Zuccato, Bartolommeo, _iv. 332_

Zuleika, Persian name of Potiphar's wife, _iii. 187_; vi. 254




INDEX TO FIRST LINES.


(The first line is given of every _Poem_, and of each _Canto_ of the
  longer Poems: that of the _Plays_ is omitted.)


A noble Lady of the Italian shore (_Poems 1816-1823_), iv. 547

A Spirit passed before me: I beheld (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 406

A Year ago you swore, fond she! (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 41

Absent or present, still to thee (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 50

Adieu, adieu! my native shore (_Childe Harold_, Canto I.), ii. 26

Adieu, thou Hill! where early joy (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 237

Adieu, ye joys of La Valette (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 24

Ægle, beauty and poet, has two little crimes (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._),
  vii. 76

Ah! gentle, fleeting, wav'ring sprite (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 20

Ah, heedless girl! why thus disclose (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 244

Ah! Love was never yet without (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 62

Ah!--What should follow slips from my reflection (_Don Juan_, Canto
  XV.), vi. 544

And dost thou ask the reason of my sadness? (_Jeux of Esprit, etc._),
  vii. 41

And thou art dead, as young and fair (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. _32_, 41

And thou wert sad--yet I was not with thee (_Poems of July-September,
  1816_), iv. 63

And "thy true faith can alter never" (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 65

And wilt thou weep when I am low? (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 266

Anne's Eye is liken'd to the Sun (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 244

As by the fix'd decrees of Heaven (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 231

As o'er the cold sepulchral stone (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 4

As the Liberty lads o'er the sea (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 42

Away, away, ye notes of Woe! (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. _32_, 35

Away, away,--your flattering arts (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 15

Away with your fictions of flimsy romance (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 82

Away, ye gay landscapes, ye gardens of rose (_Hours of Idleness_), i.
  171


Behold the blessings of a lucky lot! (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 75

Belshazzar! from the banquet turn (_Poems 1814-1816_), iii. 421

Beneath Blessington's eyes (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 82

Beside the confines of the Ægean main (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 18

Bob Southey! You're a poet--Poet-Laureate (_Don Juan_, Dedication), vi.
  3

Born in a garret, in the kitchen bred (_Poems of the Separation_), iii.
  540

Breeze of the night in gentler sighs (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 262

Bright be the place of thy soul! (_Poems 1814-1816_), iii. 426

But once I dared to lift my eyes (_Poems 1816-1823_), iv. 564

By the rivers of Babylon we sat down and wept (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii.
  402


Candour compels me, Becher! to commend (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 114

Chill and mirk is the nightly blast (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 7

Come, blue-eyed Maid of Heaven!--but Thou alas! (_Childe Harold_, Canto
  II.), ii. 99

Could I remount the river of my years (_Poems of July-September, 1816_),
  iv. 51

Could Love for ever (_Poems 1816-1823_), iv. 549

Cruel Cerinthus! does the fell disease (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 74


Dear are the days of youth! (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 177

Dear Becher, you tell me to mix with mankind (_Hours of Idleness_), i.
  112

Dear Doctor, I have read your play (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 47

Dear Long, in this sequester'd scene (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 184

Dear Murray,--You ask for a "_Volume of Nonsense_" (_Jeux d'Esprit,
  etc._), vii. 70

Dear object of defeated care! (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 19

Dear simple girl, those flattering arts (_Hours of Idlaiess_), i. 15

Do you know Dr. Nott? (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 78

Dorset! whose early steps with mine have stray'd (_Hours of Idleness_),
  i. 194

Doubtless, sweet girl! the hissing lead (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 70


Eliza! What fools are the Mussulman sect! (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 47

Equal to Jove that youth must be (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 72

Ere the daughter of Brunswick is cold in her grave (_Poems 1816-1823_),
  iv. 555

Eternal Spirit of the chainless Mind (_Sonnet on Chillon_), iv. 7


Fame, Wisdom, Love, and Power were mine (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 394

Famed for the contemptuous breach of sacred ties (_Jeux d'Esprit,
  etc._), vii. 35

Famed for their civil and domestic quarrels (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._),
  vii. 36

Fare thee Well! and if for ever (_Poems of the Separation_), _ii. 274_;
  iii. 499, 537

Farewell! if ever fondest prayer (_Poems 1814-1816_), iii. 409

Farewell to the Land, where the gloom of my Glory (_Poems 1814-1816_),
  iii. 427

Father of Light, great God of Heaven (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 224

Few years have pass'd since thou and I (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 271

Fill the goblet again! for I never before (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 283

For Orford and for Waldegrave (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 76

Friend of my youth! when young we rov'd (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 200

From out the mass of never-dying ill (_Prophecy of Dante_, Canto III.),
  iv. 261

From the last hill that looks on thy once holy dome (_Hebrew Melodies_),
  iii. 401

From this emblem what variance your motto evinces! (_Jeux d'Esprit,
  etc._), vii. 36


God maddens him whom 't is his will to lose (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._),
  vii. 45

Good plays are scarce (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 12

Great Jove! to whose Almighty Throne (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 14


Harriet, to see such Circumspection (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 263

He, unto whom thou art so partial (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 74

He who, sublime, in epic numbers roll'd (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 73

Here once engaged the stranger's view (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 259

Here's a happy New Year! but with reason (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), _ii.
  322_; vii. 64

High in the midst, surrounded by his peers (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 28

Hills of Annesley, Bleak and Barren (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 210

His father's sense, his mother's grace (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 54

How came you in Hob's pound to cool? (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 66

How pleasant were the songs of Toobonai! (_Island_, Canto II.), v. 598

How sweetly shines, through azure skies (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 131

Hush'd are the winds, and still the evening gloom (_Hours of Idleness_),
  i. 5

Huzza! Hodgson, we are going (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 4


I cannot talk of Love to thee (_Poems 1814-1816_), iii. 411

I enter thy garden of roses (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 22

I had a dream, which was not all a dream (_Poems of July-September,
  1816_), iv. 42

I heard thy fate without a tear (_Poems 1814-1816_), iii. 425

I now mean to be serious;--it is time (_Don Juan_, Canto XIII.), vi. 481

I read the "Christabel" (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 45

I saw thee weep--the big bright tear (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 390

I speak not, I trace not, I breathe not thy name (_Poems 1814-1816_),
  iii. 319, 413

I stood beside the grave of him who blazed (_Poems of July-September,
  1816_), iv. 45

I stood in Venice on the "Bridge of Sighs" (_Childe Harold_, Canto IV.),
  ii. 327

I want a hero: an uncommon want (_Don Juan_, Canto I.), vi. 11

I watched thee when the foe was at our side (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._),
  vii. 84

I wish to tune my quivering lyre (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 147

I would I were a careless child (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 205

I would to Heaven that I were so much clay (_Fragment on back of MS. of
  Don Juan_, Canto I.), vi. 2

If Fate should seal my Death to-morrow (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 247

If for silver, or for gold (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 62

If from great Nature's or our own abyss (_Don Juan_, Canto XIV.), vi.
  516

If, in the month of dark December (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 13

If sometimes in the haunts of men (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 46

If that high world, which lies beyond (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 383

Ill-fated heart! and can it be (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 48

In Coron's bay floats many a galley light (_Corsair_, Canto II.), iii.
  249

In digging up your bones, Tom Paine (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 65

In hearts like thine ne'er may I hold a place (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._),
  vii. 40

In law an infant, and in years a boy (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 128

In moments to delight devoted (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 71

In Nottingham county there lives at Swan Green (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._),
  vii. 1

In one dread night our city saw and sighed (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 51

In one who felt as once he felt (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 253

In the beginning was the Word next God (_Morgante Maggiore_, Canto I.),
  iv. 285

In the dome of my Sires as the clear moonbeam falls (_Poems 1809-1813_),
  iii. 27

In the valley of waters we wept on the day (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 404

In the year since Jesus died for men (_Siege of Corinth_), iii. 449

In thee, I fondly hop'd to clasp (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 7

In this belovéd marble view (_Poems 1816-1823_), iv. 536

Is thy face like thy mother's, my fair child? (_Childe Harold_, Canto
  III.), ii. 215

It is the hour when from the boughs (_Parisina_), iii. 505

It seems that the Braziers propose soon to pass (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._),
  vii. 72


Kind Reader! take your choice to cry or laugh (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._),
  vii. 11

Know ye the land where the cypress and myrtle (_Bride of Abydos_, Canto
  I.), iii. 157


Lady! if the cold and cloudy clime (_Prophecy of Dante_, Dedication),
  iv. 241

Lady! in whose heroic port (_Poems 1816-1823_), iv. 552

Lesbia! since far from you I've rang'd (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 41

Let Folly smile to view the names (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 4

Long years!--It tries the thrilling frame to bear (_Lament of Tasso_),
  iv. 143

Lucietta, my deary (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 81


Maid of Athens, ere we part (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 15; _iv. 214_

Many are Poets who have never penned (_Prophecy of Dante_, Canto IV.),
  iv. 269

Marion! why that pensive brow? (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 129

Mingle with the genial bowl (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 228

Montgomery! true the common lot (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 107

Mrs. Wilmot sate scribbling a play (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 61

Muse of the many-twinkling feet! whose charms (_The Waltz_), i. 483

Must thou go, my glorious Chief? (_Poems 1814-1816_), iii. 428

My boat is on the Shore (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 46

My dear Mr. Murray (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 51

My hair is grey, but not with years (_Prisoner of Chillon_), iv. 13

My Sister! my sweet Sister! if a name (_Poems of July-September, 1816_),
  iv. 57

My soul is dark--Oh! quickly string (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 389


Nay, smile not at my sullen brow (_Childe Harold_, Canto I.: _To Inez_),
  ii. 75

Newstead! fast-falling, once-resplendent dome! (_Hours of Idleness_), i.
  116

Night wanes--the vapours round the mountains curled (_Lara_, Canto II.),
  iii. 348

Nisus, the guardian of the portal stood (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 151

No breath of air to break the wave (_Giaour_), iii. 85

No specious splendour of this stone (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 66

Nose and Chin that make a knocker (_Poems 1816-1823_), iv. 538

Not in those climes where I have late been staying (_Childe Harold_,
  Canto I.: _To Ianthe_), ii. 11

Nothing so difficult as a beginning (_Don Juan_, Canto IV.), vi. 183


O Love! O Glory! what are ye who fly? (_Don Juan_, Canto VII.), vi. 302

O Thou! who rollest in yon azure field (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 2

O thou yclep'd by vulgar sons of Men (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 7

O'er the glad waters of the dark blue sea (_Corsair_, Canto I.), iii.
  227

Of all the barbarous middle ages, that (_Don Juan_, Canto XII.), vi. 455

Of rhymes I printed seven volumes (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 55

Of two fair Virgins, modest, though admired (_Poems 1816-1823_), iv. 535

Oh, Anne, your offences to me have been grievous (_Hours of Idleness_),
  i. 246

"Oh banish care"--such ever be (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 28

Oh, blood and thunder! and oh! blood and wounds! (_Don Juan_, Canto
  VIII.), vi. 330

Oh! could Le Sage's demon gift (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 56

Oh! did those eyes, instead of fire (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 68

Oh, factious viper! whose envenom'd tooth (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 34

Oh, Friend! for ever lov'd, for ever dear (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 18

Oh! had my Fate been join'd with thine (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 189

Oh how I wish that an embargo (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 10

Oh Lady! when I left the shore (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 5

Oh! little lock of golden hue (_Hours of Idleness_), i. _211_, 233

Oh, Mariamne! now for thee (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 400

Oh! might I kiss those eyes of fire (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 75

Oh! my lonely--lonely--lonely--Pillow! (_Poems, 1816-1823_), iv. 563

Oh never talk again to me (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 1

Oh say not, sweet Anne, that the Fates have decreed (_Hours of
  Idleness_), i. 251

Oh! snatched away in beauty's bloom (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 388

Oh, talk not to me of a name great in story (_Poems 1816-1823_), vi. 562

Oh, thou! in Hellas deemed of heavenly birth (_Childe Harold_, Canto
  I.), ii. 15

Oh! thou that roll'st above thy glorious Fire (_Hours of Idleness_), i.
  229

Oh Venice! Venice! when thy marble walls (_Ode on Venice_), iv. 193

Oh! weep for those that wept by Babel's stream (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii.
  385

Oh well done Lord E---- n! and better done R---- r! (_Jeux d' Esprit,
  etc._), vii. 13

Oh! well I know your subtle sex (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 242

Oh! Wellington! (or "Villainton")--for Fame (_Don Juan_, Canto IX.), vi.
  373

Oh! when shall the grave hide for ever my sorrow? (_Hours of Idleness_),
  i. 21

Oh ye! who teach the ingenuous youth of nations (_Don Juan_, Canto II.),
  vi. 87

Oh! yes, I will own we were dear to each other (_Hours of Idleness_), i.
  126

Oh you, who in all names can tickle the town (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._),
  vii. 16

On Jordan's banks the Arab's camels stray (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 386

Once fairly set out on his party of pleasure (_Jeux d' Esprit, etc._),
  vii. 41

Once more in Man's frail world! which I had left (_Prophecy of Dante_,
  Canto I.), iv. 247

One struggle more, and I am free (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. _31, 32_, 36

Our life is two fold: Sleep hath its own world (_The Dream_), iv. 33


Parent of golden dreams, Romance! (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 174

Posterity will ne'er survey (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 65


Rail on, Rail on, ye heartless crew (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 213

Remember him, whom Passion's power (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 67

Remember thee! Remember thee! (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 59

Remind me not, remind me not (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 268

River, that rollest by the ancient walls (_Poems 1816-1833_), iv. 545

Rousseau--Voltaire--our Gibbon--and De Staël (_Poems of July-September,
  1816_), iv. 53


Saint Peter sat by the celestial gate (_Vision of Judgment_), iv. 487

She walks in Beauty, like the night (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 381

Since now the hour is come at last (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 12

Since our Country, our God--Oh, my Sire (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 387

Since the refinement of this polish'd age (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 45

Slow sinks, more lovely ere his race be run (_Corsair_, Canto III.),
  iii. 270

Slow sinks, more lovely ere his race be run (_The Curse of Minerva_), i.
  457

So we'll go no more a-roving (_Poems 1816-1823_), iv. _411_, 538

Sons of the Greeks, arise (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 20

Spot of my youth! whose hoary branches sigh (_Hours of Idleness_), i.
  208

Star of the brave!--whose beam hath shed (_Poems 1814-1816_), iii. 436

Start not--nor deem my spirit fled (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 276

Still must I hear?--shall hoarse Fitzgerald bawl? (_English Bards, and
  Scotch Reviewers_), i. 297

Strahan, Tonson, Lintot of the times (_Jeux d' Esprit, etc._), vii. 56

Stranger! behold interred together (_Jeux d' Esprit, etc._), vii. 11

Sun of the sleepless! melancholy star! (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 399

Sweet girl, though only once we met (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 38


Tambourgi! Tambourgi! thy 'larum afar (_Childe Harold_, Canto II.), ii.
  146

The antique Persians taught three useful things (_Don Juan_, Canto
  XVI.), vi. 572

The Assyrian came down like the wolf on the fold (_Hebrew Melodies_),
  iii. 404.

The chain I gave was fair to view (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 49

The dead have been awakened--shall I sleep? (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._),
  vii. 83

The Devil returned to Hell by two (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 21

The fight was o'er; the flashing through the gloom (_Island_, Canto
  III.), v. 618

The Gods of old are silent on their shore (_Poems 1816-1823_), iv. 566

The "good old times"--all times when old are good (_Age of Bronze_), v.
  541

The Harp the Monarch Minstrel swept (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 382

The Isles of Greece, The Isles of Greece (_Don Juan_, Canto III.), vi.
  169

The King was on his throne (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 397

The kiss, dear maid! thy lip has left (_Poems, 1809-1813_), iii. 23

The Land where I was born sits by the seas (_Francesca of Rimini_), iv.
  317

The man of firm and noble soul (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 81

The modest bard, like many a bard unknown (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 15

The Moorish King rides up and down (_Poems 1816-1823_), iv. 529

The Moralists tell us that Loving is Sinning (_Hours of Idleness_), i.
  262

The morning watch was come; the vessel lay (_Island_, Canto I.), v. 587

The Night came on the Waters--all was rest (_Poems 1814-1816_), iii. 419

The "Origin of Love"!--Ah, why (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 65

The roses of Love glad the garden of life (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 109

The sacred song that on mine ear (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), _iii. 32_;
  vii. 15

The Serfs are glad through Lara's wide domain (_Lara_, Canto I.), iii.
  323

The Son of Love and Lord of War I sing (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 82

The Spell is broke, the charm is flown (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 12

The Spirit of the fervent days of Old (_Prophecy of Dante_, Canto II.),
  iv. 255

The wild gazelle on Judah's Hills (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 384

The winds are high on Helle's wave (_Bride of Abydos_, Canto II.), iii.
  178

The world is a bundle of hay (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 65

The world is full of orphans: firstly those (_Don Juan_, Canto XVII.),
  vi. 608

There be none of Beauty's daughters (_Poems 1814-1816_), iii. 435

There is a mystic thread of life (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 234

There is a tear for all that die (_Poems 1814-1816_), iii. 417

There is a tide in the affairs of men (_Don Juan_, Canto VI.), vi. 268

There is no more for me to hope (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 15

There was a time, I need not name (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 264

There's not a joy the world can give like that it takes away (_Poems
  1814-1816_), iii. 423

There's something in a stupid ass (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 63

These locks, which fondly thus entwine (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 36

They say that Hope is happiness (_Poems 1814-1816_), iii. 438

Thine eyes' blue tenderness, thy long fair hair (_Poems 1809-1813_),
  iii. 70, _390_

Think'st thou I saw thy beauteous eyes (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 8

This Band, which bound thy yellow hair (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 212

This day, of all our days, has done (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._). vii. 71

This faint resemblance of thy charms (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 32, _36_

This votive pledge of fond esteem (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 78

Those flaxen locks, those eyes of blue (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 260

Thou art not false, but thou art fickle (_Poems 1809-1818_), iii. 64

_Thou_ lay thy branch of _laurel_ down (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 19

Thou Power! who hast ruled me through Infancy's days (_Hours of
  Idleness_), i. 254

Thou whose spell can raise the dead (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 392

Though the day of my Destiny's over (_Poems of July-September, 1816_),
  iv. 54

Through cloudless skies, in silvery sheen (_Poems 1809-1818_), iii. 11

Through Life's dull road, so dim and dirty (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii.
  73

Through thy battlements, Newstead, the hollow winds whistle (_Hours of
  Idleness_), i. 1

Thy cheek is pale with thought, but not from woe (_Poems 1809-1813_),
  iii. 71

Thy days are done, thy fame begun (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 391

Thy verse is "sad" enough, no doubt (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 252

Time! on whose arbitrary wing (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 60

'T is done--and shivering in the gale (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 285

'T is done--but yesterday a King! (_Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte_), iii.
  305

'T is done--I saw it in my dreams (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 211

'T is fifty years, and yet their fray (_Poems 1816-1823_), iv. 542

'T is known, at least it should be, that throughout (_Beppo_), iv. 159

'T is midnight--but it is not dark (_Poems 1816-1823_), iv. 537

'T is time this heart should be unmoved (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 86

Titan! to whose immortal eyes (_Poems of July-September, 1816_), iv. 48

To be the father of the fatherless (_Poems 1816-1823_), iv. 548

To hook the Reader, you, John Murray (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 44

'T was after dread Pultowa's day (_Maseppa_), iv. 207

'T was now the hour, when Night had driven (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 149

'T was now the noon of night, and all was still (_Hours of Idleness_),
  i. 217


Unhappy Dives! in an evil hour (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 7

Up to battle! Sons of Suli (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 83


Warriors and chiefs! should the shaft or the sword (_Hebrew Melodies_),
  iii. 393

We do not curse thee, Waterloo! (_Poems 1814-1816_), iii. 431

We sate down and wept by the waters (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 402

Weep, daughter of a royal line (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 45

Well! thou art happy, and I feel (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 277; _iv.
  37_

Were my bosom as false as thou deem'st it to be (_Hebrew Melodies_),
  iii. 399

What are to me those honours or renown? (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 85

What are you doing now? (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 43

What matter the pangs of a husband and father? (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._),
  vii. 71

What say _I_?--not a syllable further in prose (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._),
  vi. 39

When a man hath no freedom to fight for at home (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._),
  vii. 70

When all around grew drear and dark (_Poems of the Separation_), iii.
  544

When amatory poets sing their woes (_Don Juan_, Canto V.), vi. 218

When Bishop Berkeley said "there was no matter" (_Don Juan_, Canto XI.),
  vi. 427

When coldness wraps this suffering clay (_Hebrew Melodies_), iii. 395

When Dryden's fool, "unknowing what he sought" (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii.
  59

When energising objects men pursue (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 55

When fierce conflicting passions urge (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 168

When Friendship or Love (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 49

When from the heart where Sorrow sits (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 69

When I hear you express an affection so warm (_Hours of Idleness_), i.
  23

When I rov'd a young Highlander o'er the dark heath (_Hours of
  Idleness_), i. 191

When Man, expell'd from Eden's bowers (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 282

When Newton saw an apple fall, he found (_Don Juan_, Canto X.), vi. 400

When slow Disease, with all her host of Pains (_Hours of Idleness_
  [_Childish Recollections_]), i. 84

When some proud son of man returns to earth (_Hours of Idleness_), i.
  280

When the last sunshine of expiring Day (_Monody on the Death of
  Sheridan_), iv. 71

When the vain triumph of the imperial lord (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii.
  37

When Thurlow this damned nonsense sent (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 17

When Time, or soon or late, shall bring (_Poems, 1809-1813_), iii. 39

When, to their airy hall, my Father's voice (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 21

When we two parted (_Poems 1814-1816_), iii. 410

Whene'er I view those lips of thine (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 76

Where are those honours, Ida, once your own? (_Hours of Idleness_), i.
  16

White as a white sail on a dusky sea (_Island_, Canto IV.), v. 626

Who hath not glowed above the page where Fame (_Poems 1814-1816_), iii.
  415

Who killed John Keats? (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 76

Who would not laugh, if Lawrence, hired to grace (_Hints from Horace_),
  i. 389

Why, how now, saucy Tom? (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 74

Why, Pigot, complain? (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 53

Why should my anxious breast repine? (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 220

With Death doomed to grapple (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 64

Without a stone to mark the spot (_Poems 1809-1813_), iii. 30

Woman! Experience might have told me (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 43

Would you go to the house by the true gate? (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._),
  vii. 69

Ye cupids, droop each little head (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 74

Ye scenes of my childhood, whose lov'd recollection (_Hours of
  Idleness_), i. 25

Yes! wisdom shines in all his mien (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 12

You call me still your _Life_.--Oh! change the word (_Poems 1809-1813_),
  iii. 72

You have asked for a verse:--the request (_Poems 1816-1823_), iv. 565

You say you love, and yet your eye (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 9

Young Oak! when I planted thee deep in the ground (_Hours of Idleness_),
  i. 256

Your pardon, my friend (_Hours of Idleness_), i. 63

Youth, Nature, and relenting Jove (_Jeux d'Esprit, etc._), vii. 10




                               THE END.

  PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BECCLES.




