
True Stories from History and Biography
by Nathaniel Hawthorne
BOSTON:
TICKNOR, REED, AND FIELDS.
MDCCCLI.

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1850, by NATHANIEL
HAWTHORNE, in the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the District of
Massachusetts.

CAMBRIDGE:
PRINTED BY BOLLES AND HOUGHTON.





                              [Frontispiece]





Preface
THE WHOLE HISTORY OF GRANDFATHER’S CHAIR
Part I
   Chapter I
   Chapter II
      THE LADY ARBELLA
   Chapter III
   Chapter IV
   Chapter V
   Chapter VI
      THE PINE-TREE SHILLINGS
   Chapter VII
   Chapter VIII
      THE INDIAN BIBLE
   Chapter IX
   Chapter X
      THE SUNKEN TREASURE
   Chapter XI
Part II
   Chapter I
   Chapter II
   Chapter III
      THE OLD-FASHIONED SCHOOL
   Chapter IV
   Chapter VI
      THE REJECTED BLESSING
   Chapter VII
   Chapter VIII
      THE PROVINCIAL MUSTER
   Chapter IX
      THE ACADIAN EXILES
   Chapter X
   Chapter XI
Part III
   Chapter I
   Chapter II
   Chapter III
      THE HUTCHINSON MOB
   Chapter IV
   Chapter V
      THE BOSTON MASSACRE
   Chapter VI
   Chapter VII
   Chapter VIII
   Chapter IX
      THE TORY’S FAREWELL
   Chapter X
   Chapter XI
      GRANDFATHER’S DREAM
Biographical Stories
   Chapter I
   Chapter II
      BENJAMIN WEST
   Chapter III
      SIR ISAAC NEWTON
   Chapter IV
      SAMUEL JOHNSON
   Chapter V
      SAMUEL JOHNSON—CONTINUED.
   Chapter VI
      OLIVER CROMWELL
   Chapter VII
      BENJAMIN FRANKLIN
   Chapter VIII
      BENJAMIN FRANKLIN—CONTINUED
   Chapter IX
      QUEEN CHRISTINA





PREFACE


In writing this ponderous tome, the author’s desire has been to describe
the eminent characters and remarkable events of our annals, in such a form
and style, that the YOUNG might make acquaintance with them of their own
accord. For this purpose, while ostensibly relating the adventures of a
Chair, he has endeavored to keep a distinct and unbroken thread of
authentic history. The Chair is made to pass from one to another of those
personages, of whom he thought it most desirable for the young reader to
have vivid and familiar ideas, and whose lives and actions would best
enable him to give picturesque sketches of the times. On its sturdy oaken
legs, it trudges diligently from one scene to another, and seems always to
thrust itself in the way, with most benign complacency, whenever a
historical personage happens to be looking round for a seat.

There is certainly no method, by which the shadowy outlines of departed
men and women can he made to assume the hues of life more effectually,
than by connecting their images with the substantial and homely reality of
a fireside chair. It causes us to feel at once, that these characters of
history had a private and familiar existence, and were not wholly
contained within that cold array of outward action, which we are compelled
to receive as the adequate representation of their lives. If this
impression can be given, much is accomplished.

Setting aside Grandfather and his auditors, and excepting the adventures
of the Chair, which form the machinery of the work, nothing in the ensuing
pages can be termed fictitious. The author, it is true, has sometimes
assumed the license of filling up the outline of history with details, for
which he has none but imaginative authority, but which, he hopes, do not
violate nor give a false coloring to the truth. He believes that, in this
respect, his narrative will not be found to convey ideas and impressions,
of which the reader may hereafter find it necessary to purge his mind.

The author’s great doubt is, whether he has succeeded in writing a book
which will be readable by the class for whom he intends it. To make a
lively and entertaining narrative for children, with such unmalleable
material as is presented by the sombre, stern, and rigid characteristics
of the Puritans and their descendants, is quite as difficult an attempt,
as to manufacture delicate playthings out of the granite rocks on which
New England is founded.






                 THE WHOLE HISTORY OF GRANDFATHER’S CHAIR


                         COMPLETE IN THREE PARTS.





PART I




Chapter I


Grandfather had been sitting in his old arm-chair, all that pleasant
afternoon, while the children were pursuing their various sports, far off
or near at hand. Sometimes you would have said, "Grandfather is asleep;"
but still, even when his eyes were closed, his thoughts were with the
young people, playing among the flowers and shrubbery of the garden.

He heard the voice of Laurence, who had taken possession of a heap of
decayed branches which the gardener had lopped from the fruit trees, and
was building a little hut for his cousin Clara and himself. He heard
Clara’s gladsome voice, too, as she weeded and watered the flower-bed
which had been given her for her own. He could have counted every footstep
that Charley took, as he trundled his wheelbarrow along the gravel walk.
And though Grandfather was old and gray-haired, yet his heart leaped with
joy whenever little Alice came fluttering, like a butterfly, into the
room. She had made each of the children her playmate in turn, and now made
Grandfather her playmate too, and thought him the merriest of them all.

At last the children grew weary of their sports; because a summer
afternoon is like a long lifetime to the young. So they came into the room
together, and clustered round Grandfather’s great chair. Little Alice, who
was hardly five years old, took the privilege of the youngest, and climbed
his knee. It was a pleasant thing to behold that fair and golden-haired
child in the lap of the old man, and to think that, different as they
were, the hearts of both could be gladdened with the same joys.

"Grandfather," said little Alice, laying her head back upon his arm, "I am
very tired now. You must tell me a story to make me go to sleep."

"That is not what story-tellers like," answered Grandfather, smiling.
"They are better satisfied when they can keep their auditors awake."

"But here are Laurence, and Charley, and I," cried cousin Clara, who was
twice as old as little Alice. "We will all three keep wide awake. And
pray, Grandfather, tell us a story about this strange-looking old chair."

Now, the chair in which Grandfather sat was made of oak, which had grown
dark with age, but had been rubbed and polished till it shone as bright as
mahogany. It was very large and heavy, and had a back that rose high above
Grandfather’s white head. This back was curiously carved in open work, so
as to represent flowers and foliage and other devices; which the children
had often gazed at, but could never understand what they meant. On the
very tiptop of the chair, over the head of Grandfather himself, was a
likeness of a lion’s head, which had such a savage grin that you would
almost expect to hear it growl and snarl.

The children had seen Grandfather sitting in this chair ever since they
could remember any thing. Perhaps the younger of them supposed that he and
the chair had come into the world together, and that both had always been
as old as they were now. At this time, however, it happened to be the
fashion for ladies to adorn their drawing-rooms with the oldest and oddest
chairs that could be found. It seemed to cousin Clara that if these ladies
could have seen Grandfather’s old chair, they would have thought it worth
all the rest together. She wondered if it were not even older than
Grandfather himself, and longed to know all about its history.

"Do, Grandfather, talk to us about this chair," she repeated.

"Well, child," said Grandfather, patting Clara’s cheek, "I can tell you a
great many stories of my chair. Perhaps your cousin Laurence would like to
hear them too. They would teach him something about the history and
distinguished people of his country, which he has never read in any of his
school-books."

Cousin Laurence was a boy of twelve, a bright scholar, in whom an early
thoughtfulness and sensibility began to show themselves. His young fancy
kindled at the idea of knowing all the adventures of this venerable chair.
He looked eagerly in Grandfather’s face; and even Charley, a bold, brisk,
restless little fellow of nine, sat himself down on the carpet, and
resolved to be quiet for at least ten minutes, should the story last so
long.

Meantime, little Alice was already asleep; so Grandfather, being much
pleased with such an attentive audience, began to talk about matters that
had happened long ago.




Chapter II


But, before relating the adventures of the chair, Grandfather found it
necessary to speak of the circumstances that caused the first settlement
of New England. For it will soon be perceived that the story of this
remarkable chair cannot be told without telling a great deal of the
history of the country.

So, Grandfather talked about the Puritans, as those persons were called
who thought it sinful to practise the religious forms and ceremonies which
the Church of England had borrowed from the Roman Catholics. These
Puritans suffered so much persecution in England that, in 1607, many of
them went over to Holland, and lived ten or twelve years at Amsterdam and
Leyden. But they feared that, if they continued there much longer, they
should cease to be English, and should adopt all the manners and ideas and
feelings of the Dutch. For this and other reasons, in the year 1620, they
embarked on board of the ship Mayflower, and crossed the ocean to the
shores of Cape Cod. There they made a settlement, and called it Plymouth;
which, though now a part of Massachusetts, was for a long time a colony by
itself. And thus was formed the earliest settlement of the Puritans in
America.

Meantime, those of the Puritans who remained in England continued to
suffer grievous persecution on account of their religious opinions. They
began to look around them for some spot where they might worship God, not
as the king and bishops thought fit, but according to the dictates of
their own consciences. When their brethren had gone from Holland to
America, they bethought themselves that they likewise might find refuge
from persecution there. Several gentlemen among them purchased a tract of
country on the coast of Massachusetts Bay, and obtained a charter from
King Charles, which authorized them to make laws for the settlers. In the
year 1628, they sent over a few people, with John Endicott at their head,
to commence a plantation at Salem. Peter Palfrey, Roger Conant, and one or
two more, had built houses there in 1626, and may be considered as the
first settlers of that ancient town. Many other Puritans prepared to
follow Endicott.

"And now we come to the chair, my dear children," said Grandfather. "This
chair is supposed to have been made of an oak tree which grew in the park
of the English earl of Lincoln, between two and three centuries ago. In
its younger days it used, probably, to stand in the hall of the earl’s
castle. Do not you see the coat of arms of the family of Lincoln, carved
in the open work of the back? But when his daughter, the Lady Arbella, was
married to a certain Mr. Johnson, the earl gave her this valuable chair."

"Who was Mr. Johnson?" inquired Clara.

"He was a gentleman of great wealth, who agreed with the Puritans in their
religious opinions," answered Grandfather. "And as his belief was the same
as theirs, he resolved that he would live and die with them. Accordingly,
in the month of April, 1630, he left his pleasant abode and all his
comforts in England, and embarked with the Lady Arbella, on board of a
ship bound for America."

As Grandfather was frequently impeded by the questions and observations of
his young auditors, we deem it advisable to omit all such prattle as is
not essential to the story. We have taken some pains to find out exactly
what Grandfather said, and here offer to our readers, as nearly as
possible in his own words, the story of



THE LADY ARBELLA


The ship in which Mr. Johnson and his lady embarked, taking Grandfather’s
chair along with them, was called the Arbella, in honor of the lady
herself. A fleet of ten or twelve vessels, with many hundred passengers,
left England about the same time; for a multitude of people, who were
discontented with the king’s government and oppressed by the bishops, were
flocking over to the new world. One of the vessels in the fleet was that
same Mayflower which had carried the Puritan pilgrims to Plymouth. And
now, my children, I would have you fancy yourselves in the cabin of the
good ship Arbella; because if you could behold the passengers aboard that
vessel, you would feel what a blessing and honor it was for New England to
have such settlers. They were the best men and women of their day.

Among the passengers was John Winthrop, who had sold the estate of his
forefathers, and was going to prepare a new home for his wife and children
in the wilderness. He had the king’s charter in his keeping, and was
appointed the first Governor of Massachusetts. Imagine him a person of
grave and benevolent aspect, dressed in a black velvet suit, with a broad
ruff around his neck and a peaked beard upon his chin. There was likewise
a minister of the Gospel, whom the English bishops had forbidden to
preach, but who knew that he should have liberty both to preach and pray
in the forests of America. He wore a black cloak, called a Geneva cloak,
and had a black velvet cap, fitting close to his head, as was the fashion
of almost all the Puritan clergymen. In their company came Sir Richard
Saltonstall, who had been one of the five first projectors of the new
colony. He soon returned to his native country. But his descendants still
remain in New England; and the good old family name is as much respected
in our days as it was in those of Sir Richard.

Not only these, but several other men of wealth and pious ministers, were
in the cabin of the Arbella. One had banished himself for ever from the
old hall where his ancestors had lived for hundreds of years. Another had
left his quiet parsonage, in a country town of England. Others had come
from the universities of Oxford or Cambridge, where they had gained great
fame for their learning. And here they all were, tossing upon the
uncertain and dangerous sea, and bound for a home that was more dangerous
than even the sea itself. In the cabin, likewise, sat the Lady Arbella in
her chair, with a gentle and sweet expression on her face, but looking too
pale and feeble to endure the hardships of the wilderness.

Every morning and evening the Lady Arbella gave up her great chair to one
of the ministers, who took his place in it and read passages from the
Bible to his companions. And thus, with prayers and pious conversation,
and frequent singing of hymns, which the breezes caught from their lips
and scattered far over the desolate waves, they prosecuted their voyage,
and sailed into the harbor of Salem in the month of June.

At that period there were but six or eight dwellings in the town; and
these were miserable hovels, with roofs of straw and wooden chimneys. The
passengers in the fleet either built huts with bark and branches of trees,
or erected tents of cloth till they could provide themselves with better
shelter. Many of them went to form a settlement at Charlestown. It was
thought fit that the Lady Arbella should tarry in Salem for a time; she
was probably received as a guest into the family of John Endicott. He was
the chief person in the plantation, and had the only comfortable house
which the new comers had beheld since they left England. So now, children,
you must imagine Grandfather’s chair in the midst of a new scene.

Suppose it a hot summer’s day, and the lattice-windows of a chamber in Mr.
Endicott’s house thrown wide open. The Lady Arbella, looking paler than
she did on shipboard, is sitting in her chair, and thinking mournfully of
far-off England. She rises and goes to the window. There, amid patches of
garden ground and cornfield, she sees the few wretched hovels of the
settlers, with the still ruder wigwams and cloth tents of the passengers
who had arrived in the same fleet with herself. Far and near stretches the
dismal forest of pine trees, which throw their black shadows over the
whole land, and likewise over the heart of this poor lady.

All the inhabitants of the little village are busy. One is clearing a spot
on the verge of the forest for his homestead; another is hewing the trunk
of a fallen pine tree, in order to build himself a dwelling; a third is
hoeing in his field of Indian corn. Here comes a huntsman out of the
woods, dragging a bear which he has shot, and shouting to the neighbors to
lend him a hand. There goes a man to the sea-shore, with a spade and a
bucket, to dig a mess of clams, which were a principal article of food
with the first settlers. Scattered here and there are two or three dusky
figures, clad in mantles of fur, with ornaments of bone hanging from their
ears, and the feathers of wild birds in their coal black hair. They have
belts of shell-work slung across their shoulders, and are armed with bows
and arrows and flint-headed spears. These are an Indian Sagamore and his
attendants, who have come to gaze at the labors of the white men. And now
rises a cry, that a pack of wolves have seized a young calf in the
pasture; and every man snatches up his gun or pike, and runs in chase of
the marauding beasts.

Poor Lady Arbella watches all these sights, and feels that this new world
is fit only for rough and hardy people. None should be here but those who
can struggle with wild beasts and wild men, and can toil in the heat or
cold, and can keep their hearts firm against all difficulties and dangers.
But she is not one of these. Her gentle and timid spirit sinks within her;
and turning away from the window she sits down in the great chair, and
wonders thereabouts in the wilderness her friends will dig her grave.

Mr. Johnson had gone, with Governor Winthrop and most of the other
passengers, to Boston, where he intended to build a house for Lady Arbella
and himself. Boston was then covered with wild woods, and had fewer
inhabitants even than Salem. During her husband’s absence, poor Lady
Arbella felt herself growing ill, and was hardly able to stir from the
great chair. Whenever John Endicott noticed her despondency, he doubtless
addressed her with words of comfort. "Cheer up, my good lady!" he would
say. "In a little time, you will love this rude life of the wilderness as
I do." But Endicott’s heart was as bold and resolute as iron, and he could
not understand why a woman’s heart should not be of iron too.

Still, however, he spoke kindly to the lady, and then hastened forth to
till his corn-field and set out fruit trees, or to bargain with the
Indians for furs, or perchance to oversee the building of a fort. Also
being a magistrate, he had often to punish some idler or evil-doer, by
ordering him to be set in the stocks or scourged at the whipping-post.
Often, too, as was the custom of the times, he and Mr. Higginson, the
minister of Salem, held long religious talks together. Thus John Endicott
was a man of multifarious business, and had no time to look back
regretfully to his native land. He felt himself fit for the new world, and
for the work that he had to do, and set himself resolutely to accomplish
it.

What a contrast, my dear children, between this bold, rough, active man,
and the gentle Lady Arbella, who was fading away, like a pale English
flower, in the shadow of the forest! And now the great chair was often
empty, because Lady Arbella grew too weak to arise from bed.

Meantime, her husband had pitched upon a spot for their new home. He
returned from Boston to Salem, travelling through the woods on foot, and
leaning on his pilgrim’s staff. His heart yearned within him; for he was
eager to tell his wife of the new home which he had chosen. But when he
beheld her pale and hollow cheek, and found how her strength was wasted,
he must have known that her appointed home was in a better land. Happy for
him then,—happy both for him and her,—if they remembered that there was a
path to heaven, as well from this heathen wilderness as from the Christian
land whence they had come. And so, in one short month from her arrival,
the gentle Lady Arbella faded away and died. They dug a grave for her in
the new soil, where the roots of the pine trees impeded their spades; and
when her bones had rested there nearly two hundred years, and a city had
sprung up around them, a church of stone was built upon the spot.



Charley, almost at the commencement of the foregoing narrative, had
galloped away with a prodigious clatter, upon Grandfather’s stick, and was
not yet returned. So large a boy should have been ashamed to ride upon a
stick. But Laurence and Clara had listened attentively, and were affected
by this true story of the gentle lady, who had come so far to die so soon.
Grandfather had supposed that little Alice was asleep, but, towards the
close of the story, happening to look down upon her, he saw that her blue
eyes were wide open, and fixed earnestly upon his face. The tears had
gathered in them, like dew upon a delicate flower; but when Grandfather
ceased to speak, the sunshine of her smile broke forth again.

"O, the lady must have been so glad to get to heaven!" exclaimed little
Alice.

"Grandfather, what became of Mr. Johnson?" asked Clara.

"His heart appears to have been quite broken," answered Grandfather; "for
he died at Boston within a month after the death of his wife. He was
buried in the very same tract of ground, where he had intended to build a
dwelling for Lady Arbella and himself. Where their house would have stood
there was his grave.

"I never heard any thing so melancholy!" said Clara.

"The people loved and respected Mr. Johnson so much," continued
Grandfather, "that it was the last request of many of them, when they
died, that they might be buried as near as possible to this good man’s
grave. And so the field became the first burial-ground in Boston. When you
pass through Tremont street, along by King’s Chapel, you see a
burial-ground, containing many old grave-stones and monuments. That was
Mr. Johnson’s field."

"How sad is the thought," observed Clara, "that one of the first things
which the settlers had to do, when they came to the new world, was to set
apart a burial-ground!"

"Perhaps," said Laurence, "if they had found no need of burial-grounds
here, they would have been glad, after a few years, to go back to
England."

Grandfather looked at Laurence, to discover whether he knew how profound
and true a thing he had said.




Chapter III


Not long after Grandfather had told the story of his great chair, there
chanced to be a rainy day. Our friend Charley, after disturbing the
household with beat of drum and riotous shouts, races up and down the
staircase, overturning of chairs, and much other uproar, began to feel the
quiet and confinement within doors intolerable. But as the rain came down
in a flood, the little fellow was hopelessly a prisoner, and now stood
with sullen aspect at a window, wondering whether the sun itself were not
extinguished by so much moisture in the sky.

Charley had already exhausted the less eager activity of the other
children; and they had betaken themselves to occupations that did not
admit of his companionship. Laurence sat in a recess near the book-case,
reading, not for the first time, the Midsummer Night’s Dream. Clara was
making a rosary of beads for a little figure of a Sister of Charity, who
was to attend the Bunker Hill Fair, and lend her aid in erecting the
Monument. Little Alice sat on Grandfather’s foot-stool, with a
picture-book in her hand; and, for every picture, the child was telling
Grandfather a story. She did not read from the book, (for little Alice had
not much skill in reading,) but told the story out of her own heart and
mind.

Charley was too big a boy, of course, to care any thing about little
Alice’s stories, although Grandfather appeared to listen with a good deal
of interest. Often, in a young child’s ideas and fancies, there is
something which it requires the thought of a lifetime to comprehend. But
Charley was of opinion, that if a story must be told, it had better be
told by Grandfather, than little Alice.

"Grandfather, I want to hear more about your chair," said he.

Now Grandfather remembered that Charley had galloped away upon a stick, in
the midst of the narrative of poor Lady Arbella, and I know not whether he
would have thought it worth while to tell another story, merely to gratify
such an inattentive auditor as Charley. But Laurence laid down his book
and seconded the request. Clara drew her chair nearer to Grandfather, and
little Alice immediately closed her picture-book, and looked up into his
face. Grandfather had not the heart to disappoint them.

He mentioned several persons who had a share in the settlement of our
country, and who would be well worthy of remembrance, if we could find
room to tell about them all. Among the rest, Grandfather spoke of the
famous Hugh Peters, a minister of the gospel, who did much good to the
inhabitants of Salem. Mr. Peters afterwards went back to England, and was
chaplain to Oliver Cromwell; but Grandfather did not tell the children
what became of this upright and zealous man, at last. In fact, his
auditors were growing impatient to hear more about the history of the
chair.

"After the death of Mr. Johnson," said he, "Grandfather’s chair came into
the possession of Roger Williams. He was a clergyman, who arrived at
Salem, and settled there in 1631. Doubtless the good man has spent many a
studious hour in this old chair, either penning a sermon, or reading some
abstruse book of theology, till midnight came upon him unawares. At that
period, as there were few lamps or candles to be had, people used to read
or work by the light of pitchpine torches. These supplied the place of the
"midnight oil," to the learned men of New England."

Grandfather went on to talk about Roger Williams, and told the children
several particulars, which we have not room to repeat. One incident,
however, which was connected with his life, must be related, because it
will give the reader an idea of the opinions and feelings of the first
settlers of New England. It was as follows:



THE RED CROSS


While Roger Williams sat in Grandfather’s chair, at his humble residence
in Salem, John Endicott would often come to visit him. As the clergy had
great influence in temporal concerns, the minister and magistrate would
talk over the occurrences of the day, and consult how the people might be
governed according to scriptural laws.

One thing especially troubled them both. In the old national banner of
England, under which her soldiers have fought for hundreds of years, there
is a Red Cross, which has been there ever since the days when England was
in subjection to the Pope. The Cross, though a holy symbol, was abhorred
by the Puritans, because they considered it a relic of Popish idolatry.
Now, whenever the train-band of Salem was mustered, the soldiers, with
Endicott at their head, had no other flag to march under than this same
old papistical banner of England, with the Red Cross in the midst of it.
The banner of the Red Cross, likewise, was flying on the walls of the fort
of Salem; and a similar one was displayed in Boston harbor, from the
fortress on Castle Island.

"I profess, brother Williams," Captain Endicott would say, after they had
been talking of this matter, "it distresses a Christian man’s heart, to
see this idolatrous Cross flying over our heads. A stranger beholding it,
would think that we had undergone all our hardships and dangers, by sea
and in the wilderness, only to get new dominions for the Pope of Rome."

"Truly, good Mr. Endicott," Roger Williams would answer, "you speak as an
honest man and Protestant Christian should. For mine own part, were it my
business to draw a sword, I should reckon it sinful to fight under such a
banner. Neither can I, in my pulpit, ask the blessing of Heaven upon it."

Such, probably, was the way in which Roger Williams and John Endicott used
to talk about the banner of the Red Cross. Endicott, who was a prompt and
resolute man, soon determined that Massachusetts, if she could not have a
banner of her own, should at least be delivered from that of the Pope of
Rome.

Not long afterwards there was a military muster at Salem. Every
able-bodied man, in the town and neighborhood, was there. All were well
armed, with steel caps upon their heads, plates of iron upon their breasts
and at their backs, and gorgets of steel around their necks. When the sun
shone upon these ranks of iron-clad men, they flashed and blazed with a
splendor that bedazzled the wild Indians, who had come out of the woods to
gaze at them. The soldiers had long pikes, swords, and muskets, which were
fired with matches, and were almost as heavy as a small cannon.

These men had mostly a stern and rigid aspect. To judge by their looks,
you might have supposed that there was as much iron in their hearts, as
there was upon their heads and breasts. They were all devoted Puritans,
and of the same temper as those with whom Oliver Cromwell afterwards
overthrew the throne of England. They hated all the relics of Popish
superstition as much as Endicott himself; and yet, over their heads, was
displayed the banner of the Red Cross.

Endicott was the captain of the company. While the soldiers were expecting
his orders to begin their exercise, they saw him take the banner in one
hand, holding his drawn sword in the other. Probably he addressed them in
a speech, and explained how horrible a thing it was, that men, who had
fled from Popish idolatry into the wilderness, should be compelled to
fight under its symbols here. Perhaps he concluded his address somewhat in
the following style.

"And now, fellow soldiers, you see this old banner of England. Some of
you, I doubt not, may think it treason for a man to lay violent hands upon
it. But whether or no it be treason to man, I have good assurance in my
conscience that it is no treason to God. Wherefore I have resolved that we
will rather be God’s soldiers, than soldiers of the Pope of Rome; and in
that mind I now cut the Papal Cross out of this banner."

And so he did. And thus, in a province belonging to the crown of England,
a captain was found bold enough to deface the King’s banner with his
sword.

When Winthrop, and the other wise men of Massachusetts, heard of it, they
were disquieted, being afraid that Endicott’s act would bring great
trouble upon himself and them. An account of the matter was carried to
King Charles; but he was then so much engrossed by dissensions with his
people, that he had no leisure to punish the offender. In other times, it
might have cost Endicott his life, and Massachusetts her charter.



"I should like to know, Grandfather," said Laurence, when the story was
ended, "whether, when Endicott cut the Red Cross out of the banner, he
meant to imply that Massachusetts was independent of England?"

"A sense of the independence of his adopted country, must have been in
that bold man’s heart," answered Grandfather; "but I doubt whether he had
given the matter much consideration, except in its religious bearing.
However, it was a very remarkable affair, and a very strong expression of
Puritan character."

Grandfather proceeded to speak further of Roger Williams, and of other
persons who sat in the great chair, as will be seen in the following
chapter.




Chapter IV


"Roger Williams," said Grandfather, "did not keep possession of the chair
a great while. His opinions of civil and religious matters differed, in
many respects, from those of the rulers and clergymen of Massachusetts.
Now the wise men of those days believed, that the country could not be
safe, unless all the inhabitants thought and felt alike."

"Does any body believe so in our days Grandfather?" asked Laurence.

"Possibly there are some who believe it," said Grandfather; "but they have
not so much power to act upon their belief, as the magistrates and
ministers had, in the days of Roger Williams. They had the power to
deprive this good man of his home, and to send him out from the midst of
them, in search of a new place of rest. He was banished in 1634, and went
first to Plymouth colony; but as the people there held the same opinions
as those of Massachusetts, he was not suffered to remain among them.
However, the wilderness was wide enough; so Roger Williams took his staff
and travelled into the forest, and made treaties with the Indians, and
began a plantation which he called Providence."

"I have been to Providence on the railroad," said Charley. "It is but a
two hours’ ride."

"Yes, Charley," replied Grandfather; "but when Roger Williams travelled
thither, over hills and valleys, and through the tangled woods, and across
swamps and streams, it was a journey of several days. Well; his little
plantation is now grown to be a populous city; and the inhabitants have a
great veneration for Roger Williams. His name is familiar in the mouths of
all because they see it on their bank bills. How it would have perplexed
this good clergyman, if he had been told that he should give his name to
the ROGER WILLIAMS BANK!"

"When he was driven from Massachusetts," said Laurence, "and began his
journey into the woods, he must have felt as if he were burying himself
forever from the sight and knowledge of men. Yet the whole country has now
heard of him, and will remember him forever."

"Yes," answered Grandfather, "it often happens, that the outcasts of one
generation are those, who are reverenced as the wisest and best of men by
the next. The securest fame is that which comes after a man’s death. But
let us return to our story. When Roger Williams was banished, he appears
to have given the chair to Mrs. Anne Hutchinson. At all events it was in
her possession in 1637. She was a very sharp-witted and well-instructed
lady, and was so conscious of her own wisdom and abilities, that she
thought it a pity that the world should not have the benefit of them. She
therefore used to hold lectures in Boston, once or twice a week, at which
most of the women attended. Mrs. Hutchinson presided at these meetings,
sitting, with great state and dignity, in Grandfather’s chair."

"Grandfather, was it positively this very chair?" demanded Clara, laying
her hand upon its carved elbow.

"Why not, my dear Clara?" said Grandfather. "Well; Mrs. Hutchinson’s
lectures soon caused a great disturbance; for the ministers of Boston did
not think it safe and proper, that a woman should publicly instruct the
people in religious doctrines. Moreover, she made the matter worse, by
declaring that the Rev. Mr. Cotton was the only sincerely pious and holy
clergyman in New England. Now the clergy of those days had quite as much
share in the government of the country, though indirectly, as the
magistrates themselves; so you may imagine what a host of powerful enemies
were raised up against Mrs. Hutchinson. A synod was convened; that is to
say, an assemblage of all the ministers in Massachusetts. They declared
that there were eighty-two erroneous opinions on religious subjects,
diffused among the people, and that Mrs. Hutchinson’s opinions were of the
number."

"If they had eighty-two wrong opinions," observed Charley, "I don’t see
how they could have any right ones."

"Mrs. Hutchinson had many zealous friends and converts," continued
Grandfather. "She was favored by young Henry Vane, who had come over from
England a year or two before, and had since been chosen governor of the
colony, at the age of twenty-four. But Winthrop, and most of the other
leading men, as well as the ministers, felt an abhorrence of her
doctrines. Thus two opposite parties were formed; and so fierce were the
dissensions, that it was feared the consequence would be civil war and
bloodshed. But Winthrop and the ministers being the most powerful, they
disarmed and imprisoned Mrs. Hutchinson’s adherents. She, like Roger
Williams, was banished."

"Dear Grandfather, did they drive the poor woman into the woods?"
exclaimed little Alice, who contrived to feel a human interest even in
these discords of polemic divinity.

"They did, my darling," replied Grandfather; "and the end of her life was
so sad, you must not hear it. At her departure, it appears from the best
authorities, that she gave the great chair to her friend, Henry Vane. He
was a young man of wonderful talents and great learning, who had imbibed
the religious opinions of the Puritans, and left England with the
intention of spending his life in Massachusetts. The people chose him
governor; but the controversy about Mrs. Hutchinson, and other troubles,
caused him to leave the country in 1637. You may read the subsequent
events of his life in the History of England."

"Yes, Grandfather," cried Laurence; "and we may read them better in Mr.
Upham’s biography of Vane. And what a beautiful death he died, long
afterwards! beautiful, though it was on a scaffold."

"Many of the most beautiful deaths have been there," said Grandfather.
"The enemies of a great and good man can in no other way make him so
glorious, as by giving him the crown of martyrdom."

In order that the children might fully understand the all-important
history of the chair, Grandfather now thought fit to speak of the progress
that was made in settling several colonies. The settlement of Plymouth, in
1620, has already been mentioned. In 1635, Mr. Hooker and Mr. Stone, two
ministers, went on foot from Massachusetts to Connecticut, through the
pathless woods, taking their whole congregation along with them. They
founded the town of Hartford. In 1638, Mr. Davenport, a very celebrated
minister, went, with other people, and began a plantation at New Haven. In
the same year, some persons who had been persecuted in Massachusetts, went
to the Isle of Rhodes, since called Rhode Island, and settled there. About
this time, also, many settlers had gone to Maine, and were living without
any regular government. There were likewise settlers near Piscataqua
River, in the region which is now called New Hampshire.

Thus, at various points along the coast of New England, there were
communities of Englishmen. Though these communities were independent of
one another, yet they had a common dependence upon England; and, at so
vast a distance from their native home, the inhabitants must all have felt
like brethren. They were fitted to become one united people, at a future
period. Perhaps their feelings of brotherhood were the stronger, because
different nations had formed settlements to the north and to the south. In
Canada and Nova Scotia were colonies of French. On the banks of the Hudson
River was a colony of Dutch, who had taken possession of that region many
years before, and called it New Netherlands.

Grandfather, for aught I know, might have gone on to speak of Maryland and
Virginia; for the good old gentleman really seemed to suppose, that the
whole surface of the United States was not too broad a foundation to place
the four legs of his chair upon. But, happening to glance at Charley, he
perceived that this naughty boy was growing impatient, and meditating
another ride upon a stick. So here, for the present, Grandfather suspended
the history of his chair.




Chapter V


The Children had now learned to look upon the chair with an interest,
which was almost the same as if it were a conscious being, and could
remember the many famous people whom it had held within its arms.

Even Charley, lawless as he was, seemed to feel that this venerable chair
must not be clambered upon nor overturned, although he had no scruple in
taking such liberties with every other chair in the house. Clara treated
it with still greater reverence, often taking occasion to smooth its
cushion, and to brush the dust from the carved flowers and grotesque
figures of its oaken back and arms. Laurence would sometimes sit a whole
hour, especially at twilight, gazing at the chair, and, by the spell of
his imaginations, summoning up its ancient occupants to appear in it
again.

Little Alice evidently employed herself in a similar way; for once, when
Grandfather had gone abroad, the child was heard talking with the gentle
Lady Arbella, as if she were still sitting in the chair. So sweet a child
as little Alice may fitly talk with angels, such as the Lady Arbella had
long since become.

Grandfather was soon importuned for more stories about the chair. He had
no difficulty in relating them; for it really seemed as if every person,
noted in our early history, had, on some occasion or other, found repose
within its comfortable arms. If Grandfather took pride in any thing, it
was in being the possessor of such an honorable and historic elbow chair.

"I know not precisely who next got possession of the chair, after Governor
Vane went back to England," said Grandfather. "But there is reason to
believe that President Dunster sat in it, when he held the first
commencement at Harvard College. You have often heard, children, how
careful our forefathers were, to give their young people a good education.
They had scarcely cut down trees enough to make room for their own
dwellings, before they began to think of establishing a college. Their
principal object was, to rear up pious and learned ministers; and hence
old writers call Harvard College a school of the prophets."

"Is the college a school of the prophets now?" asked Charley.

"It is a long while since I took my degree, Charley. You must ask some of
the recent graduates," answered Grandfather. "As I was telling you,
President Dunster sat in Grandfather’s chair in 1642, when he conferred
the degree of bachelor of arts on nine young men. They were the first in
America, who had received that honor. And now, my dear auditors, I must
confess that there are contradictory statements and some uncertainty about
the adventures of the chair, for a period of almost ten years. Some say
that it was occupied by your own ancestor, William Hawthorne, first
Speaker of the House of Representatives. I have nearly satisfied myself,
however, that, during most of this questionable period, it was literally
the Chair of State. It gives me much pleasure to imagine, that several
successive governors of Massachusetts sat in it at the council board."

"But, Grandfather," interposed Charley, who was a matter-of-fact little
person, "what reason have you to imagine so?"

"Pray do imagine it, Grandfather," said Laurence.

"With Charley’s permission, I will," replied Grandfather, smiling. "Let us
consider it settled, therefore, that Winthrop, Bellingham, Dudley, and
Endicott, each of them, when chosen governor, took his seat in our great
chair on election day. In this chair, likewise, did those excellent
governors preside, while holding consultations with the chief counsellors
of the province, who were styled Assistants. The governor sat in this
chair, too, whenever messages were brought to him from the chamber of
Representatives."

And here Grandfather took occasion to talk, rather tediously, about the
nature and forms of government that established themselves, almost
spontaneously, in Massachusetts and the other New England colonies.
Democracies were the natural growth of the new world. As to Massachusetts,
it was at first intended that the colony should be governed by a council
in London. But, in a little while, the people had the whole power in their
own hands, and chose annually the governor, the counsellors, and the
representatives. The people of old England had never enjoyed any thing
like the liberties and privileges, which the settlers of New England now
possessed. And they did not adopt these modes of government after long
study, but in simplicity, as if there were no other way for people to be
ruled.

"But, Laurence," continued Grandfather, "when you want instruction on
these points, you must seek it in Mr. Bancroft’s History. I am merely
telling the history of a chair. To proceed. The period during which the
governors sat in our chair, was not very full of striking incidents. The
province was now established on a secure foundation; but it did not
increase so rapidly as at first, because the Puritans were no longer
driven from England by persecution. However, there was still a quiet and
natural growth. The legislature incorporated towns, and made new purchases
of lands from the Indians. A very memorable event took place in 1643. The
colonies of Massachusetts, Plymouth, Connecticut, and New Haven, formed a
union, for the purpose of assisting each other in difficulties, and for
mutual defence against their enemies. They called themselves the United
Colonies of New England."

"Were they under a government like that of the United States?" inquired
Laurence.

"No," replied Grandfather, "the different colonies did not compose one
nation together; it was merely a confederacy among the governments. It
somewhat resembled the league of the Amphictyons, which you remember in
Grecian history. But to return to our chair. In 1644 it was highly
honored; for Governor Endicott sat in it, when he gave audience to an
ambassador from the French governor of Acadie, or Nova Scotia. A treaty of
peace, between Massachusetts and the French colony, was then signed."

"Did England allow Massachusetts to make war and peace with foreign
countries?" asked Laurence.

"Massachusetts, and the whole of New England, was then almost independent
of the mother country," said Grandfather. "There was now a civil war in
England; and the king, as you may well suppose, had his hands full at
home, and could pay but little attention to these remote colonies. When
the Parliament got the power into their hands, they likewise had enough to
do in keeping down the Cavaliers. Thus New England, like a young and hardy
lad, whose father and mother neglect it, was left to take care of itself.
In 1649, King Charles was beheaded. Oliver Cromwell then became Protector
of England; and as he was a Puritan himself, and had risen by the valor of
the English Puritans, he showed himself a loving and indulgent father to
the Puritan colonies in America."

Grandfather might have continued to talk in this dull manner, nobody knows
how long; but, suspecting that Charley would find the subject rather dry,
he looked sideways at that vivacious little fellow, and saw him give an
involuntary yawn. Whereupon, Grandfather proceeded with the history of the
chair, and related a very entertaining incident, which will be found in
the next chapter.




Chapter VI


"According to the most authentic records, my dear children," said
Grandfather, "the chair, about this time, had the misfortune to break its
leg. It was probably on account of this accident, that it ceased to be the
seat of the governors of Massachusetts; for, assuredly, it would have been
ominous of evil to the commonwealth, if the Chair of State had tottered
upon three legs. Being therefore sold at auction,—alas! what a vicissitude
for a chair that had figured in such high company, our venerable friend
was knocked down to a certain Captain John Hull. This old gentleman, on
carefully examining the maimed chair, discovered that its broken leg might
be clamped with iron and made as serviceable as ever."

"Here is the very leg that was broken!" exclaimed Charley, throwing
himself down on the floor to look at it. "And here are the iron clamps.
How well it was mended!"

When they had all sufficiently examined the broken leg, Grandfather told
them a story about Captain John Hull and



THE PINE-TREE SHILLINGS


The Captain John Hull, aforesaid, was the mint-master of Massachusetts,
and coined all the money that was made there. This was a new line of
business: for, in the earlier days of the colony, the current coinage
consisted of gold and silver money of England, Portugal, and Spain. These
coins being scarce, the people were often forced to barter their
commodities, instead of selling them.

For instance, if a man wanted to buy a coat, he perhaps exchanged a
bear-skin for it. If he wished for a barrel of molasses, he might purchase
it with a pile of pine boards. Musket-bullets were used instead of
farthings. The Indians had a sort of money, called wampum, which was made
of clam-shells; and this strange sort of specie was likewise taken in
payment of debts, by the English settlers. Bank-bills had never been heard
of. There was not money enough of any kind, in many parts of the country,
to pay the salaries of the ministers; so that they sometimes had to take
quintals of fish, bushels of corn, or cords of wood, instead of silver or
gold.

As the people grew more numerous, and their trade one with another
increased, the want of current money was still more sensibly felt. To
supply the demand, the general court passed a law for establishing a
coinage of shillings, sixpences, and threepences. Captain John Hull was
appointed to manufacture this money, and was to have about one shilling
out of every twenty to pay him for the trouble of making them.

Hereupon, all the old silver in the colony was handed over to Captain John
Hull. The battered silver cans and tankards, I suppose, and silver
buckles, and broken spoons, and silver buttons of worn-out coats, and
silver hilts of swords that had figured at court, all such curious old
articles were doubtless thrown into the melting-pot together. But by far
the greater part of the silver consisted of bullion from the mines of
South America, which the English buccaniers—(who were little better than
pirates)—had taken from the Spaniards, and brought to Massachusetts.

All this old and new silver being melted down and coined, the result was
an immense amount of splendid shillings, sixpences, and threepences. Each
had the date, 1652, on the one side, and the figure of a pine-tree on the
other. Hence they were called pine-tree shillings. And for every twenty
shillings that he coined, you will remember, Captain John Hull was
entitled to put one shilling into his own pocket.

The magistrates soon began to suspect that the mint-master would have the
best of the bargain. They offered him a large sum of money, if he would
but give up that twentieth shilling, which he was continually dropping
into his own pocket. But Captain Hull declared himself perfectly satisfied
with the shilling. And well he might be; for so diligently did he labor,
that, in a few years, his pockets, his money bags, and his strong box,
were overflowing with pine-tree shillings. This was probably the case when
he came into possession of Grandfather’s chair; and, as he had worked so
hard at the mint, it was certainly proper that he should have a
comfortable chair to rest himself in.

When the mint-master had grown very rich, a young man, Samuel Sewell by
name, came a courting to his only daughter. His daughter,—whose name I do
not know, but we will call her Betsey,—was a fine hearty damsel, by no
means so slender as some young ladies of our own days. On the contrary,
having always fed heartily on pumpkin pies, doughnuts, Indian puddings,
and other Puritan dainties, she was as round and plump as a pudding
herself. With this round, rosy Miss Betsey, did Samuel Sewell fall in
love. As he was a young man of good character, industrious in his
business, and a member of the church, the mint-master very readily gave
his consent.

"Yes—you may take her," said he, in his rough way; "and you’ll find her a
heavy burden enough!"

On the wedding day, we may suppose that honest John Hull dressed himself
in a plum-colored coat, all the buttons of which were made of pine-tree
shillings. The buttons of his waistcoat were sixpences; and the knees of
his smallclothes were buttoned with silver threepences. Thus attired, he
sat with great dignity in Grandfather’s chair; and, being a portly old
gentleman, he completely filled it from elbow to elbow. On the opposite
side of the room, between her bride-maids, sat Miss Betsey. She was
blushing with all her might, and looked like a full blown pæony, or a
great red apple.

There, too, was the bridegroom, dressed in a fine purple coat, and gold
lace waistcoat, with as much other finery as the Puritan laws and customs
would allow him to put on. His hair was cropped close to his head, because
Governor Endicott had forbidden any man to wear it below the ears. But he
was a very personable young man; and so thought the bride-maids and Miss
Betsey herself.

The mint-master also was pleased with his new son-in-law; especially as he
had courted Miss Betsey out of pure love, and had said nothing at all
about her portion. So when the marriage ceremony was over, Captain Hull
whispered a word to two of his men-servants, who immediately went out, and
soon returned, lugging in a large pair of scales. They were such a pair as
wholesale merchants use, for weighing bulky commodities; and quite a bulky
commodity was now to be weighed in them.

"Daughter Betsey," said the mint-master, "get into one side of these
scales."

Miss Betsey,—or Mrs. Sewell, as we must now call her,—did as she was bid,
like a dutiful child, without any question of the why and wherefore. But
what her father could mean, unless to make her husband pay for her by the
pound, (in which case she would have been a dear bargain,) she had not the
least idea.

"And now," said honest John Hull to the servants, "bring that box hither."

The box, to which the mint-master pointed, was a huge, square, iron bound,
oaken chest; it was big enough, my children, for all four of you to play
at hide-and-seek in. The servants tugged with might and main, but could
not lift this enormous receptacle, and were finally obliged to drag it
across the floor. Captain Hull then took a key from his girdle, unlocked
the chest, and lifted its ponderous lid. Behold! it was full to the brim
of bright pine-tree shillings, fresh from the mint; and Samuel Sewell
began to think that his father-in-law had got possession of all the money
in the Massachusetts treasury. But it was only the mint-master’s honest
share of the coinage.

Then the servants, at Captain Hull’s command, heaped double handfulls of
shillings into one side of the scales, while Betsey remained in the other.
Jingle, jingle, went the shillings, as handful after handful was thrown
in, till, plump and ponderous as she was, they fairly weighed the young
lady from the floor.

"There, son Sewell!" cried the honest mint-master, resuming his seat in
Grandfather’s chair. "Take these shillings for my daughter’s portion. Use
her kindly, and thank Heaven for her. It is not every wife that’s worth
her weight in silver!"



The children laughed heartily at this legend, and would hardly be
convinced but that Grandfather had made it out of his own head. He assured
them faithfully, however, that he had found it in the pages of a grave
historian, and had merely tried to tell it in a somewhat funnier style. As
for Samuel Sewell, he afterwards became Chief Justice of Massachusetts.

"Well, Grandfather," remarked Clara, "if wedding portions now-a-days were
paid as Miss Betsey’s was, young ladies would not pride themselves upon an
airy figure as many of them do."




Chapter VII


When his little audience next assembled round the chair, Grandfather gave
them a doleful history of the Quaker persecution, which began in 1656, and
raged for about three years in Massachusetts.

He told them how, in the first place, twelve of the converts of George
Fox, the first Quaker in the world, had come over from England. They
seemed to be impelled by an earnest love for the souls of men, and a pure
desire to make known what they considered a revelation from Heaven. But
the rulers looked upon them as plotting the downfall of all government and
religion. They were banished from the colony. In a little while, however,
not only the first twelve had returned, but a multitude of other Quakers
had come to rebuke the rulers, and to preach against the priests and
steeple-houses.

Grandfather described the hatred and scorn with which these enthusiasts
were received. They were thrown into dungeons; they were beaten with many
stripes, women as well as men; they were driven forth into the wilderness,
and left to the tender mercies of wild beasts and Indians. The children
were amazed to hear, that, the more the Quakers were scourged, and
imprisoned, and banished, the more did the sect increase, both by the
influx of strangers, and by converts from among the Puritans. But
Grandfather told them, that God had put something into the soul of man,
which always turned the cruelties of the persecutor to nought.

He went on to relate, that, in 1659, two Quakers, named William Robinson
and Marmaduke Stephenson, were hanged at Boston. A woman had been
sentenced to die with them, but was reprieved, on condition of her leaving
the colony. Her name was Mary Dyer. In the year 1660 she returned to
Boston, although she knew death awaited her there; and, if Grandfather had
been correctly informed, an incident had then taken place, which connects
her with our story. This Mary Dyer had entered the mint-master’s dwelling,
clothed in sackcloth and ashes, and seated herself in our great chair,
with a sort of dignity and state. Then she proceeded to deliver what she
called a message from Heaven; but in the midst of it, they dragged her to
prison.

"And was she executed?" asked Laurence.

"She was," said Grandfather.

"Grandfather," cried Charley, clenching his fist, "I would have fought for
that poor Quaker woman!"

"Ah! but if a sword had been drawn for her," said Laurence, "it would have
taken away all the beauty of her death."

It seemed as if hardly any of the preceding stories had thrown such an
interest around Grandfather’s chair, as did the fact, that the poor,
persecuted, wandering Quaker woman had rested in it for a moment. The
children were so much excited, that Grandfather found it necessary to
bring his account of the persecution to a close.

"In 1660, the same year in which Mary Dyer was executed," said he,
"Charles the Second was restored to the throne of his fathers. This king
had many vices; but he would not permit blood to be shed, under pretence
of religion, in any part of his dominions. The Quakers in England told him
what had been done to their brethren in Massachusetts; and he sent orders
to Governor Endicott to forbear all such proceedings in future. And so
ended the Quaker persecution,—one of the most mournful passages in the
history of our forefathers."

Grandfather then told his auditors, that, shortly after the above
incident, the great chair had been given by the mint-master to the Rev.
Mr. John Eliot. He was the first minister of Roxbury. But besides
attending to his pastoral duties there, he learned the language of the red
men, and often went into the woods to preach to them. So earnestly did he
labor for their conversion, that he has always been called the apostle to
the Indians. The mention of this holy man suggested to Grandfather the
propriety of giving a brief sketch of the history of the Indians, so far
as they were connected with the English colonists.

A short period before the arrival of the first Pilgrims at Plymouth, there
had been a very grievous plague among the red men; and the sages and
ministers of that day were inclined to the opinion, that Providence had
sent this mortality, in order to make room for the settlement of the
English. But I know not why we should suppose that an Indian’s life is
less precious, in the eye of Heaven, than that of a white man. Be that as
it may, death had certainly been very busy with the savage tribes.

In many places the English found the wigwams deserted, and the corn-fields
growing to waste, with none to harvest the grain. There were heaps of
earth also, which, being dug open, proved to be Indian graves, containing
bows and flint-headed spears and arrows; for the Indians buried the dead
warrior’s weapons along with him. In some spots, there were skulls and
other human bones, lying unburied. In 1633, and the year afterwards, the
smallpox broke out among the Massachusetts Indians, multitudes of whom
died by this terrible disease of the old world. These misfortunes made
them far less powerful than they had formerly been.

For nearly half a century after the arrival of the English, the red men
showed themselves generally inclined to peace and amity. They often made
submission, when they might have made successful war. The Plymouth
settlers, led by the famous Captain Miles Standish, slew some of them in
1623, without any very evident necessity for so doing. In 1636, and the
following year, there was the most dreadful war that had yet occurred
between the Indians and the English. The Connecticut settlers, assisted by
a celebrated Indian chief, named Uncas, bore the brunt of this war, with
but little aid from Massachusetts. Many hundreds of the hostile Indians
were slain, or burnt in their wigwams. Sassacus, their sachem, fled to
another tribe, after his own people were defeated; but he was murdered by
them, and his head was sent to his English enemies.

From that period, down to the time of King Philip’s war, which will be
mentioned hereafter, there was not much trouble with the Indians. But the
colonists were always on their guard, and kept their weapons ready for the
conflict.

"I have sometimes doubted," said Grandfather, when he had told these
things to the children, "I have sometimes doubted whether there was more
than a single man, among our forefathers, who realized that an Indian
possesses a mind and a heart, and an immortal soul. That single man was
John Eliot. All the rest of the early settlers seemed to think that the
Indians were an inferior race of beings, whom the Creator had merely
allowed to keep possession of this beautiful country, till the white men
should be in want of it.

"Did the pious men of those days never try to make Christians of them?"
asked Laurence.

"Sometimes, it is true," answered Grandfather, "the magistrates and
ministers would talk about civilizing and converting the red people. But,
at the bottom of their hearts, they would have had almost as much
expectation of civilizing a wild bear of the woods, and making him fit for
paradise. They felt no faith in the success of any such attempts, because
they had no love for the poor Indians. Now Eliot was full of love for
them, and therefore so full of faith and hope, that he spent the labor of
a lifetime in their behalf."

"I would have conquered them first, and then converted them," said
Charley.

"Ah, Charley, there spoke the very spirit of our forefathers!" replied
Grandfather. "But Mr. Eliot had a better spirit. He looked upon them as
his brethren. He persuaded as many of them as he could, to leave off their
idle and wandering habits, and to build houses, and cultivate the earth,
as the English did. He established schools among them, and taught many of
the Indians how to read. He taught them, likewise, how to pray. Hence they
were called ’praying Indians.’ Finally, having spent the best years of his
life for their good, Mr. Eliot resolved to spend the remainder in doing
them a yet greater benefit."

"I know what that was!" cried Laurence.

"He sat down in his study," continued Grandfather, "and began a
translation of the Bible into the Indian tongue. It was while he was
engaged in this pious work, that the mint-master gave him our great chair.
His toil needed it, and deserved it."

"O, Grandfather, tell us all about that Indian Bible!" exclaimed Laurence.
"I have seen it in the library of the Athenæum; and the tears came into my
eyes, to think that there were no Indians left to read it."




Chapter VIII


As Grandfather was a great admirer of the Apostle Eliot, he was glad to
comply with the earnest request which Laurence had made, at the close of
the last chapter. So he proceeded to describe how good Mr. Eliot labored,
while he was at work upon



THE INDIAN BIBLE


My dear children, what a task would you think it, even with a long
lifetime before you, were you bidden to copy every chapter and verse, and
word, in yonder great family Bible! Would not this be a heavy toil? But if
the task were, not to write off the English Bible, but to learn a
language, utterly unlike all other tongues,—a language which hitherto had
never been learned, except by the Indians themselves, from their mothers’
lips,—a language never written, and the strange words of which seemed
inexpressible by letters;—if the task were, first, to learn this new
variety of speech, and then to translate the Bible into it, and to do it
so carefully, that not one idea throughout the holy book should be
changed,—what would induce you to undertake this toil? Yet this was what
the Apostle Eliot did.

It was a mighty work for a man, now growing old, to take upon himself. And
what earthly reward could he expect from it? None; no reward on earth. But
he believed that the red men were the descendants of those lost tribes of
Israel of whom history has been able to tell us nothing, for thousands of
years. He hoped that God had sent the English across the ocean, Gentiles
as they were, to enlighten this benighted portion of his once chosen race.
And when he should be summoned hence, he trusted to meet blessed spirits
in another world, whose bliss would have been earned by his patient toil,
in translating the Word of God. This hope and trust were far dearer to
him, than any thing that earth could offer.

Sometimes, while thus at work, he was visited by learned men, who desired
to know what literary undertaking Mr. Elliot had in hand. They, like
himself, had been bred in the studious cloisters of a university, and were
supposed to possess all the erudition which mankind has hoarded up from
age to age. Greek and Latin were as familiar to them as the babble of
their childhood. Hebrew was like their mother tongue. They had grown gray
in study; their eyes were bleared with poring over print and manuscript by
the light of the midnight lamp.

And yet, how much had they left unlearned! Mr. Eliot would put into their
hands some of the pages, which he had been writing; and behold! the
gray-headed men stammered over the long, strange words, like a little
child in his first attempts to read. Then would the apostle call to him an
Indian boy, one of his scholars, and show him the manuscript, which had so
puzzled the learned Englishmen.

"Read this, my child," said he, "these are some brethren of mine, who
would fain hear the sound of thy native tongue."

Then would the Indian boy cast his eyes over the mysterious page, and read
it so skilfully, that it sounded like wild music. It seemed as if the
forest leaves were singing in the ears of his auditors, and as if the roar
of distant streams were poured through the young Indian’s voice. Such were
the sounds amid which the language of the red man had been formed; and
they were still heard to echo in it.

The lesson being over, Mr. Eliot would give the Indian boy an apple or a
cake, and bid him leap forth into the open air, which his free nature
loved. The apostle was kind to children, and even shared in their sports,
sometimes. And when his visitors had bidden him farewell, the good man
turned patiently to his toil again.

No other Englishman had ever understood the Indian character so well, nor
possessed so great an influence over the New England tribes, as the
apostle did. His advice and assistance must often have been valuable to
his countrymen, in their transactions with the Indians. Occasionally,
perhaps, the governor and some of the counsellors came to visit Mr. Eliot.
Perchance they were seeking some method to circumvent the forest people.
They inquired, it may be, how they could obtain possession of such and
such a tract of their rich land. Or they talked of making the Indians
their servants, as if God had destined them for perpetual bondage to the
more powerful white man.

Perhaps, too, some warlike captain, dressed in his buff-coat, with a
corslet beneath it, accompanied the governor and counsellors. Laying his
hand upon his sword hilt, he would declare, that the only method of
dealing with the red men was to meet them with the sword drawn, and the
musket presented.

But the apostle resisted both the craft of the politician, and the
fierceness of the warrior.

"Treat these sons of the forest as men and brethren," he would say, "and
let us endeavor to make them Christians. Their forefathers were of that
chosen race, whom God delivered from Egyptian bondage. Perchance he has
destined us to deliver the children from the more cruel bondage of
ignorance and idolatry. Chiefly for this end, it may be, we were directed
across the ocean."

When these other visitors were gone, Mr. Eliot bent himself again over the
half written page. He dared hardly relax a moment from his toil. He felt
that, in the book which he was translating, there was a deep human, as
well as heavenly wisdom, which would of itself suffice to civilize and
refine the savage tribes. Let the Bible be diffused among them, and all
earthly good would follow. But how slight a consideration was this, when
he reflected that the eternal welfare of a whole race of men depended upon
his accomplishment of the task which he had set himself! What if his hands
should be palsied? What if his mind should lose its vigor? What if death
should come upon him, ere the work were done? Then must the red man wander
in the dark wilderness of heathenism for ever.

Impelled by such thoughts as these, he sat writing in the great chair,
when the pleasant summer breeze came in through his open casement; and
also when the fire of forest logs sent up its blaze and smoke, through the
broad stone chimney, into the wintry air. Before the earliest bird sang,
in the morning, the apostle’s lamp was kindled; and, at midnight, his
weary head was not yet upon its pillow. And at length, leaning back in the
great chair, he could say to himself, with a holy triumph,—"The work is
finished!"

It was finished. Here was a Bible for the Indians. Those long lost
descendants of the ten tribes of Israel would now learn the history of
their forefathers. That grace, which the ancient Israelites had forfeited,
was offered anew to their children.

There is no impiety in believing that, when his long life was over, the
apostle of the Indians was welcomed to the celestial abodes by the
prophets of ancient days, and by those earliest apostles and evangelists,
who had drawn their inspiration from the immediate presence of the
Saviour. They first had preached truth and salvation to the world. And
Eliot, separated from them by many centuries, yet full of the same spirit,
had borne the like message to the new world of the West. Since the first
days of Christianity, there has been no man more worthy to be numbered in
the brotherhood of the apostles, than Eliot.



"My heart is not satisfied to think," observed Laurence, "that Mr. Eliot’s
labors have done no good, except to a few Indians of his own time.
Doubtless, he would not have regretted his toil, if it were the means of
saving but a single soul. But it is a grievous thing to me, that he should
have toiled so hard to translate the Bible, and now the language and the
people are gone! The Indian Bible itself is almost the only relic of
both."

"Laurence," said his Grandfather, "if ever you should doubt that man is
capable of disinterested zeal for his brother’s good, then remember how
the apostle Eliot toiled. And if you should feel your own self-interest
pressing upon your heart too closely, then think of Eliot’s Indian Bible.
It is good for the world that such a man has lived, and left this emblem
of his life."

The tears gushed into the eyes of Laurence, and he acknowledged that Eliot
had not toiled in vain. Little Alice put up her arms to Grandfather, and
drew down his white head beside her own golden locks.

"Grandfather," whispered she, "I want to kiss good Mr. Eliot!"

And, doubtless, good Mr. Eliot would gladly receive the kiss of so sweet a
child as little Alice, and would think it a portion of his reward in
heaven.

Grandfather now observed, that Dr. Francis had written a very beautiful
Life of Eliot, which he advised Laurence to peruse. He then spoke of King
Philip’s war, which began in 1675, and terminated with the death of King
Philip, in the following year. Philip was a proud, fierce Indian, whom Mr.
Eliot had vainly endeavored to convert to the Christian faith.

"It must have been a great anguish to the apostle," continued Grandfather,
"to hear of mutual slaughter and outrage between his own countrymen, and
those for whom he felt the affection of a father. A few of the praying
Indians joined the followers of King Philip. A greater number fought on
the side of the English. In the course of the war, the little community of
red people whom Mr. Eliot had begun to civilize, was scattered, and
probably never was restored to a flourishing condition. But his zeal did
not grow cold; and only about five years before his death he took great
pains in preparing a new edition of the Indian Bible."

"I do wish Grandfather," cried Charley, "you would tell us all about the
battles in King Philip’s war."

"O, no!" exclaimed Clara. "Who wants to hear about tomahawks and scalping
knives!"

"No, Charley," replied Grandfather, "I have no time to spare in talking
about battles. You must be content with knowing that it was the bloodiest
war that the Indians had ever waged against the white men; and that, at
its close, the English set King Philip’s head upon a pole."

"Who was the captain of the English?" asked Charley.

"Their most noted captain was Benjamin Church,—a very famous warrior,"
said Grandfather. "But I assure you, Charley, that neither Captain Church,
nor any of the officers and soldiers who fought in King Philip’s war, did
any thing a thousandth part so glorious, as Mr. Eliot did, when he
translated the Bible for the Indians."

"Let Laurence be the apostle," said Charley to himself, "and I will be the
captain."




Chapter IX


The children were now accustomed to assemble round Grandfather’s chair, at
all their unoccupied moments; and often it was a striking picture to
behold the white-headed old sire, with this flowery wreath of young people
around him. When he talked to them, it was the past speaking to the
present,—or rather to the future, for the children were of a generation
which had not become actual. Their part in life, thus far, was only to be
happy, and to draw knowledge from a thousand sources. As yet, it was not
their time to do.

Sometimes, as Grandfather gazed at their fair, unworldly countenances, a
mist of tears bedimmed his spectacles. He almost regretted that it was
necessary for them to know any thing of the past, or to provide aught for
the future. He could have wished that they might be always the happy,
youthful creatures, who had hitherto sported around his chair, without
inquiring whether it had a history. It grieved him to think that his
little Alice, who was a flower-bud fresh from paradise, must open her
leaves to the rough breezes of the world, or ever open them in any clime.
So sweet a child she was, that it seemed fit her infancy should be
immortal!

But such repinings were merely flitting shadows across the old man’s
heart. He had faith enough to believe, and wisdom enough to know, that the
bloom of the flower would be even holier and happier than its bud. Even
within himself,—though Grandfather was now at that period of life, when
the veil of mortality is apt to hang heavily over the soul,—still, in his
inmost being, he was conscious of something that he would not have
exchanged for the best happiness of childhood. It was a bliss to which
every sort of earthly experience,—all that he had enjoyed or suffered, or
seen, or heard, or acted, with the broodings of his soul upon the
whole,—had contributed somewhat. In the same manner must a bliss, of which
now they could have no conception, grow up within these children, and form
a part of their sustenance for immortality.

So Grandfather, with renewed cheerfulness, continued his history of the
chair, trusting that a profounder wisdom than his own would extract, from
these flowers and weeds of Time, a fragrance that might last beyond all
time.

At this period of the story, Grandfather threw a glance backward, as far
as the year 1660. He spoke of the ill-concealed reluctance with which the
Puritans in America had acknowledged the sway of Charles the Second, on
his restoration to his father’s throne. When death had stricken Oliver
Cromwell, that mighty protector had no sincerer mourners than in New
England. The new king had been more than a year upon the throne before his
accession was proclaimed in Boston; although the neglect to perform the
ceremony might have subjected the rulers to the charge of treason.

During the reign of Charles the Second, however, the American colonies had
but little reason to complain of harsh or tyrannical treatment. But when
Charles died, in 1685, and was succeeded by his brother James, the
patriarchs of New England began to tremble. King James was a bigoted Roman
Catholic, and was known to be of an arbitrary temper. It was feared by all
Protestants, and chiefly by the Puritians, that he would assume despotic
power, and attempt to establish Popery throughout his dominions. Our
forefathers felt that they had no security either for their religion or
their liberties.

The result proved that they had reason for their apprehensions. King James
caused the charters of all the American colonies to be taken away. The old
charter of Massachusetts, which the people regarded as a holy thing, and
as the foundation of all their liberties, was declared void. The colonists
were now no longer freemen; they were entirely dependent on the king’s
pleasure. At first, in 1685, King James appointed Joseph Dudley, a native
of Massachusetts, to be president of New England. But soon afterwards, Sir
Edmund Andros, an officer of the English army, arrived, with a commission
to be governor-general of New England and New York.

The king had given such powers to Sir Edmund Andros, that there was now no
liberty, nor scarcely any law, in the colonies over which he ruled. The
inhabitants were not allowed to choose representatives, and consequently
had no voice whatever in the government, nor control over the measures
that were adopted. The counsellors, with whom the governor consulted on
matters of state, were appointed by himself. This sort of government was
no better than an absolute despotism.

"The people suffered much wrong, while Sir Edmund Andros ruled over them,"
continued Grandfather, "and they were apprehensive of much more. He had
brought some soldiers with him from England, who took possession of the
old fortress on Castle Island, and of the fortification on Fort Hill.
Sometimes it was rumored that a general massacre of the inhabitants was to
be perpetrated by these soldiers. There were reports, too, that all the
ministers were to be slain or imprisoned."

"For what?" inquired Charley.

"Because they were the leaders of the people, Charley," said Grandfather.
"A minister was a more formidable man than a general, in those days. Well;
while these things were going on in America, King James had so misgoverned
the people of England, that they sent over to Holland for the Prince of
Orange. He had married the king’s daughter, and was therefore considered
to have a claim to the crown. On his arrival in England, the Prince of
Orange was proclaimed king, by the name of William the Third. Poor old
King James made his escape to France."

Grandfather told how, at the first intelligence of the landing of the
Prince of Orange in England, the people of Massachusetts rose in their
strength, and overthrew the government of Sir Edmund Andros. He, with
Joseph Dudley, Edmund Randolph, and his other principal adherents, were
thrown into prison. Old Simon Bradstreet, who had been governor, when King
James took away the charter, was called by the people to govern them
again.

"Governor Bradstreet was a venerable old man, nearly ninety years of age,"
said Grandfather. "He came over with the first settlers, and had been the
intimate companion of all those excellent and famous men who laid the
foundation of our country. They were all gone before him to the grave; and
Bradstreet was the last of the Puritans."

Grandfather paused a moment, and smiled, as if he had something very
interesting to tell his auditors. He then proceeded:

"And now, Laurence,—now, Clara,—now, Charley,—now, my dear little
Alice,—what chair do you think had been placed in the council chamber, for
old Governor Bradstreet to take his seat in? Would you believe that it was
this very chair in which grandfather now sits, and of which he is telling
you the history?"

"I am glad to hear it, with all my heart!" cried Charley, after a shout of
delight. "I thought Grandfather had quite forgotten the chair."

"It was a solemn and affecting sight," said Grandfather, "when this
venerable patriarch, with his white beard flowing down upon his breast,
took his seat in his Chair of State. Within his remembrance, and even
since his mature age, the site where now stood the populous town, had been
a wild and forest-covered peninsula. The province, now so fertile, and
spotted with thriving villages, had been a desert wilderness. He was
surrounded by a shouting multitude, most of whom had been born in the
country which he had helped to found. They were of one generation, and he
of another. As the old man looked upon them, and beheld new faces
everywhere, he must have felt that it was now time for him to go, whither
his brethren had gone before him."

"Were the former governors all dead and gone?" asked Laurence.

"All of them," replied Grandfather. "Winthrop had been dead forty years.
Endicott died, a very old man, in 1665. Sir Henry Vane was beheaded in
London, at the beginning of the reign of Charles the Second. And Haynes,
Dudley, Bellingham and Leverett, who had all been governors of
Massachusetts, were now likewise in their graves. Old Simon Bradstreet was
the sole representative of that departed brotherhood. There was no other
public man remaining to connect the ancient system of government and
manners with the new system, which was about to take its place. The era of
the Puritans was now completed."

"I am sorry for it," observed Laurence; "for, though they were so stern,
yet it seems to me that there was something warm and real about them. I
think, Grandfather, that each of these old governors should have his
statue set up in our State House, sculptured out of the hardest of New
England granite."

"It would not be amiss, Laurence," said Grandfather; "but perhaps clay, or
some other perishable material, might suffice for some of their
successors. But let us go back to our chair. It was occupied by Governor
Bradstreet from April, 1689, until May, 1692. Sir William Phips then
arrived in Boston, with a new charter from King William, and a commission
to be governor."




Chapter X


"And what became of the chair," inquired Clara.

"The outward aspect of our chair," replied Grandfather, "was now somewhat
the worse for its long and arduous services. It was considered hardly
magnificent enough to be allowed to keep its place in the council chamber
of Massachusetts. In fact, it was banished as an article of useless
lumber. But Sir William Phips happened to see it and being much pleased
with its construction, resolved to take the good old chair into his
private mansion. Accordingly, with his own gubernatorial hands, he
repaired one of its arms, which had been slightly damaged".

"Why, Grandfather, here is the very arm!" interrupted Charley, in great
wonderment. "And did Sir William Phips put in these screws with his own
hands? I am sure, he did it beautifully! But how came a governor to know
how to mend a chair?"

"I will tell you a story about the early life of Sir William Phips," said
Grandfather. "You will then perceive, that he well knew how to use his
hands."

So Grandfather related the wonderful and true tale of



THE SUNKEN TREASURE


Picture to yourselves, my dear children, a handsome, old-fashioned room,
with a large, open cupboard at one end, in which is displayed a
magnificent gold cup, with some other splendid articles of gold and silver
plate. In another part of the room, opposite to a tall looking-glass,
stands our beloved chair, newly polished, and adorned with a gorgeous
cushion of crimson velvet tufted with gold.

In the chair sits a man of strong and sturdy frame, whose face has been
roughened by northern tempests, and blackened by the burning sun of the
West Indies. He wears an immense periwig, flowing down over his shoulders.
His coat has a wide embroidery of golden foliage; and his waistcoat,
likewise, is all flowered over and bedizened with gold. His red, rough
hands, which have done many a good day’s work with the hammer and adze,
are half covered by the delicate lace ruffles at his wrists. On a table
lies his silver-hilted sword, and in a corner of the room stands his
gold-headed cane, made of a beautifully polished West Indian wood.

Somewhat such an aspect as this, did Sir William Phips present, when he
sat in Grandfather’s chair, after the king had appointed him governor of
Massachusetts. Truly, there was need that the old chair should be
varnished, and decorated with a crimson cushion, in order to make it
suitable for such a magnificent looking personage.

But Sir William Phips had not always worn a gold embroidered coat, nor
always sat so much at his ease as he did in Grandfather’s chair. He was a
poor man’s son, and was born in the province of Maine, where he used to
tend sheep upon the hills, in his boyhood and youth. Until he had grown to
be a man, he did not even know how to read and write. Tired of tending
sheep, he next apprenticed himself to a ship-carpenter, and spent about
four years in hewing the crooked limbs of oak trees into knees for
vessels.

In 1673, when he was twenty-two years old, he came to Boston, and soon
afterwards was married to a widow lady, who had property enough to set him
up in business. It was not long, however, before he lost all the money
that he had acquired by his marriage, and became a poor man again. Still,
he was not discouraged. He often told his wife that, some time or other,
he should be very rich, and would build a "fair brick house" in the Green
Lane of Boston.

Do not suppose, children, that he had been to a fortune-teller to inquire
his destiny. It was his own energy and spirit of enterprise, and his
resolution to lead an industrious life, that made him look forward with so
much confidence to better days.

Several years passed away; and William Phips had not yet gained the riches
which he promised to himself. During this time he had begun to follow the
sea for a living. In the year 1684, he happened to hear of a Spanish ship,
which had been cast away near the Bahama Islands, and which was supposed
to contain a great deal of gold and silver. Phips went to the place in a
small vessel, hoping that he should be able to recover some of the
treasure from the wreck. He did not succeed, however, in fishing up gold
and silver enough to pay the expenses of his voyage.

But, before he returned, he was told of another Spanish ship or galleon,
which had been cast away near Porto de la Plata. She had now lain as much
as fifty years beneath the waves. This old ship had been laden with
immense wealth; and, hitherto, nobody had thought of the possibility of
recovering any part of it from the deep sea, which was rolling and tossing
it about. But though it was now an old story, and the most aged people had
almost forgotten that such a vessel had been wrecked. William Phips
resolved that the sunken treasure should again be brought to light.

He went to London, and obtained admittance to King James, who had not yet
been driven from his throne. He told the king of the vast wealth that was
lying at the bottom of the sea. King James listened with attention, and
thought this a fine opportunity to fill his treasury with Spanish gold. He
appointed William Phips to be captain of a vessel, called the Rose Algier,
carrying eighteen guns and ninety-five men. So now he was Captain Phips of
the English navy.

Captain Phips sailed from England in the Rose Algier, and cruised for
nearly two years in the West Indies, endeavoring to find the wreck of the
Spanish ship. But the sea is so wide and deep, that it is no easy matter
to discover the exact spot where a sunken vessel lies. The prospect of
success seemed very small; and most people would have thought that Captain
Phips was as far from having money enough to build a "fair brick house,"
as he was while he tended sheep.

The seamen of the Rose Algier became discouraged, and gave up all hope of
making their fortunes by discovering the Spanish wreck. They wanted to
compel Captain Phips to turn pirate. There was a much better prospect,
they thought, of growing rich by plundering vessels, which still sailed
the sea, than by seeking for a ship that had lain beneath the waves full
half a century. They broke out in open mutiny, but were finally mastered
by Phips, and compelled to obey his orders. It would have been dangerous,
however, to continue much longer at sea with such a crew of mutinous
sailors; and, besides, the Rose Algier was leaky and unseaworthy. So
Captain Phips judged it best to return to England.

Before leaving the West Indies, he met with a Spaniard, an old man, who
remembered the wreck of the Spanish ship, and gave him directions how to
find the very spot. It was on a reef of rocks a few leagues from Porto de
la Plata.

On his arrival in England, therefore, Captain Phips solicited the king to
let him have another vessel, and send him back again to the West Indies.
But King James, who had probably expected that the Rose Algier would
return laden with gold, refused to have any thing more to do with the
affair. Phips might never have been able to renew the search, if the Duke
of Albemarle, and some other noblemen had not lent their assistance. They
fitted out a ship and gave the command to Captain Phips. He sailed from
England, and arrived safely at Porto de la Plata, where he took an adze
and assisted his men to build a large boat.

The boat was intended for the purpose of going closer to the reef of rocks
than a large vessel could safely venture. When it was finished, the
Captain sent several men in it, to examine the spot where the Spanish ship
was said to have been wrecked. They were accompanied by some Indians, who
were skilful divers, and could go down a great way into the depths of the
sea.

The boat’s crew proceeded to the reef of rocks, and rowed round and round
it, a great many times. They gazed down into the water, which was so
transparent that it seemed as if they could have seen the gold and silver
at the bottom, had there been any of those precious metals there. Nothing,
however, could they see; nothing more valuable than a curious sea shrub,
which was growing beneath the water, in a crevice of the reef of rocks. It
flaunted to and fro with the swell and reflux of the waves, and looked as
bright and beautiful as if its leaves were gold.

"We won’t go back empty-handed," cried an English sailor; and then he
spoke to one of the Indian divers. "Dive down and bring me that pretty sea
shrub there. That’s the only treasure we shall find!"

Down plunged the diver, and soon rose dripping from the water, holding the
sea shrub in his hand. But he had learnt some news at the bottom of the
sea.

"There are some ship’s guns," said he, the moment he had drawn breath,
"some great cannon among the rocks, near where the shrub was growing."

No sooner had he spoken, than the English sailors knew that they had found
the very spot where the Spanish galleon had been wrecked so many years
before. The other Indian divers immediately plunged over the boat’s side,
and swam headlong down, groping among the rocks and sunken cannon. In a
few moments one of them rose above the water, with a heavy lump of silver
in his arms. That single lump was worth more than a thousand dollars. The
sailors took it into the boat, and then rowed back as speedily as they
could, being in haste to inform Captain Phips of their good luck.

But, confidently as the Captain had hoped to find the Spanish wreck, yet
now that it was really found, the news seemed too good to be true. He
could not believe it till the sailors showed him the lump of silver.

"Thanks be to God!" then cries Captain Phips. "We shall every man of us
make our fortunes!"

Hereupon the Captain and all the crew set to work, with iron rakes and
great hooks and lines, fishing for gold and silver at the bottom of the
sea. Up came the treasure in abundance. Now they beheld a table of solid
silver, once the property of an old Spanish Grandee. Now they found a
sacramental vessel, which had been destined as a gift to some Catholic
church. Now they drew up a golden cup, fit for the king of Spain to drink
his wine out of. Perhaps the bony hand of its former owner had been
grasping the precious cup, and was drawn up along with it. Now their rakes
or fishing lines were loaded with masses of silver bullion. There were
also precious stones among the treasure, glittering and sparkling, so that
it is a wonder how their radiance could have been concealed.

There is something sad and terrible in the idea of snatching all this
wealth from the devouring ocean, which had possessed it for such a length
of years. It seems as if men had no right to make themselves rich with it.
It ought to have been left with the skeletons of the ancient Spaniards,
who had been drowned when the ship was wrecked, and whose bones were now
scattered among the gold and silver.

But Captain Phips and his crew were troubled with no such thoughts as
these. After a day or two they lighted on another part of the wreck, where
they found a great many bags of silver dollars. But nobody could have
guessed that these were money-bags. By remaining so long in the
salt-water, they had become covered over with a crust which had the
appearance of stone, so that it was necessary to break them in pieces with
hammers and axes. When this was done, a stream of silver dollars gushed
out upon the deck of the vessel.

The whole value of the recovered treasure, plate, bullion, precious
stones, and all, was estimated at more than two millions of dollars. It
was dangerous even to look at such a vast amount of wealth. A sea captain,
who had assisted Phips in the enterprise, utterly lost his reason at the
sight of it. He died two years afterwards, still raving about the
treasures that lie at the bottom of the sea. It would have been better for
this man, if he had left the skeletons of the shipwrecked Spaniards in
quiet possession of their wealth.

Captain Phips and his men continued to fish up plate, bullion, and
dollars, as plentifully as ever, till their provisions grew short. Then,
as they could not feed upon gold and silver any more than old King Midas
could, they found it necessary to go in search of better sustenance. Phips
resolved to return to England. He arrived there in 1687, and was received
with great joy by the Duke of Albemarle and the other English lords, who
had fitted out the vessel. Well they might rejoice; for they took by far
the greater part of the treasure to themselves.

The Captain’s share, however, was enough to make him comfortable for the
rest of his days. It also enabled him to fulfil his promise to his wife,
by building a "fair brick house," in the Green Lane of Boston. The Duke of
Albemarle sent Mrs. Phips a magnificent gold cup, worth at least five
thousand dollars. Before Captain Phips left London, King James made him a
knight; so that, instead of the obscure ship-carpenter who had formerly
dwelt among them, the inhabitants of Boston welcomed him on his return, as
the rich and famous Sir William Phips.




Chapter XI


"Sir William Phips," continued Grandfather, "was too active and
adventurous a man to sit still in the quiet enjoyment of his good fortune.
In the year 1690, he went on a military expedition against the French
colonies in America, conquered the whole province of Acadie, and returned
to Boston with a great deal of plunder."

"Why, grandfather, he was the greatest man that ever sat in the chair!"
cried Charley.

"Ask Laurence what he thinks," replied Grandfather with a smile. "Well; in
the same year, Sir William took command of an expedition against Quebec,
but did not succeed in capturing the city. In 1692, being then in London,
King William the Third appointed him governor of Massachusetts. And now,
my dear children, having followed Sir William Phips through all his
adventures and hardships, till we find him comfortably seated in
Grandfather’s chair, we will here bid him farewell. May he be as happy in
ruling a people, as he was while he tended sheep!"

Charley, whose fancy had been greatly taken by the adventurous disposition
of Sir William Phips, was eager to know how he had acted, and what
happened to him while he held the office of governor. But Grandfather had
made up his mind to tell no more stories for the present.

"Possibly, one of these days, I may go on with the adventures of the
chair," said he. "But its history becomes very obscure just at this point;
and I must search into some old books and manuscripts, before proceeding
further. Besides, it is now a good time to pause in our narrative; because
the new charter, which Sir William Phips brought over from England, formed
a very important epoch in the history of the province."

"Really, Grandfather," observed Laurence, "this seems to be the most
remarkable chair in the world. Its history cannot be told without
intertwining it with the lives of distinguished men, and the great events
that have befallen the country."

"True, Laurence," replied Grandfather, smiling, "We must write a book,
with some such title as this,—MEMOIRS OF MY OWN TIMES, BY GRANDFATHER’S
CHAIR."

"That would be beautiful!" exclaimed Laurence, clapping his hands.

"But, after all," continued Grandfather, "any other old chair, if it
possessed memory, and a hand to write its recollections, could record
stranger stories than any that I have told you. From generation to
generation, a chair sits familiarly in the midst of human interests, and
is witness to the most secret and confidential intercourse, that mortal
man can hold with his fellow. The human heart may best be read in the
fireside chair. And as to external events, Grief and Joy keep a continual
vicissitude around it and within it. Now we see the glad face and glowing
form of Joy, sitting merrily in the old chair, and throwing a warm
fire-light radiance over all the household. Now, while we thought not of
it, the dark clad mourner, Grief, has stolen into the place of Joy, but
not to retain it long. The imagination can hardly grasp so wide a subject,
as is embraced in the experience of a family chair."

"It makes my breath flutter,—my heart thrill,—to think of it," said
Laurence. "Yes; a family chair must have a deeper history than a Chair of
State."

"O, yes!" cried Clara, expressing a woman’s feeling on the point in
question, "The history of a country is not nearly so interesting as that
of a single family would be."

"But the history of a country is more easily told," said Grandfather. "So,
if we proceed with our narrative of the chair, I shall still confine
myself to its connection with public events."

Good old Grandfather now rose and quitted the room, while the children
remained gazing at the chair. Laurence, so vivid was his conception of
past times, would hardly have deemed it strange, if its former occupants,
one after another, had resumed the seat which they had each left vacant,
such a dim length of years ago.

First, the gentle and lovely lady Arbella would have been seen in the old
chair, almost sinking out of its arms, for very weakness; then Roger
Williams, in his cloak and band, earnest, energetic, and benevolent; then
the figure of Anne Hutchinson, with the like gesture as when she presided
at the assemblages of women; then the dark, intellectual face of Vane,
"young in years, but in sage counsel old." Next would have appeared the
successive governors, Winthrop, Dudley, Bellingham, and Endicott, who sat
in the chair, while it was a Chair of State. Then its ample seat would
have been pressed by the comfortable, rotund corporation of the honest
mint-master. Then the half-frenzied shape of Mary Dyer, the persecuted
Quaker woman, clad in sackcloth and ashes, would have rested in it for a
moment. Then the holy apostolic form of Eliot would have sanctified it.
Then would have arisen, like the shade of departed Puritanism, the
venerable dignity of the white-bearded Governor Bradstreet. Lastly, on the
gorgeous crimson cushion of Grandfather’s chair, would have shone the
purple and golden magnificence of Sir William Phips.

But, all these, with the other historic personages, in the midst of whom
the chair had so often stood, had passed, both in substance and shadow,
from the scene of ages. Yet here stood the chair, with the old Lincoln
coat of arms, and the oaken flowers and foliage, and the fierce lion’s
head at the summit, the whole, apparently, in as perfect preservation as
when it had first been placed in the Earl of Lincoln’s Hall. And what vast
changes of society and of nations had been wrought by sudden convulsions
or by slow degrees, since that era!

"This chair has stood firm when the thrones of kings were overturned!"
thought Laurence. "Its oaken frame has proved stronger than many frames of
government!"

More the thoughtful and imaginative boy might have mused; but now a large
yellow cat, a great favorite with all the children, leaped in at the open
window. Perceiving that Grandfather’s chair was empty, and having often
before experienced its comforts, puss laid herself quietly down upon the
cushion. Laurence, Clara, Charley, and little Alice, all laughed at the
idea of such a successor to the worthies of old times.

"Pussy," said little Alice, putting out her hand, into which the cat laid
a velvet paw, "you look very wise. Do tell us a story about GRANDFATHER’S
CHAIR!"





PART II




Chapter I


"O Grandfather," dear Grandfather, cried little Alice, "pray tell us some
more stories about your chair!"

How long a time had fled, since the children had felt any curiosity to
hear the sequel of this venerable chair’s adventures! Summer was now past
and gone, and the better part of Autumn likewise. Dreary, chill November
was howling, out of doors, and vexing the atmosphere with sudden showers
of wintry rain, or sometimes with gusts of snow, that rattled like small
pebbles against the windows.

When the weather began to grow cool, Grandfather’s chair had been removed
from the summer parlor into a smaller and snugger room. It now stood by
the side of a bright blazing wood-fire. Grandfather loved a wood-fire, far
better than a grate of glowing anthracite, or than the dull heat of an
invisible furnace, which seems to think that it has done its duty in
merely warming the house. But the wood-fire is a kindly, cheerful,
sociable spirit, sympathizing with mankind, and knowing that to create
warmth is but one of the good offices which are expected from it.
Therefore it dances on the hearth, and laughs broadly through the room,
and plays a thousand antics, and throws a joyous glow over all the faces
that encircle it.

In the twilight of the evening, the fire grew brighter and more cheerful.
And thus, perhaps, there was something in Grandfather’s heart, that
cheered him most with its warmth and comfort in the gathering twilight of
old age. He had been gazing at the red embers, as intently as if his past
life were all pictured there, or as if it were a prospect of the future
world, when little Alice’s voice aroused him.

"Dear Grandfather," repeated the little girl, more earnestly, "do talk to
us again about your chair."

Laurence, and Clara, and Charley, and little Alice, had been attracted to
other objects, for two or three months past. They had sported in the
gladsome sunshine of the present, and so had forgotten the shadowy region
of the past, in the midst of which stood Grandfather’s chair. But now, in
the autumnal twilight, illuminated by the flickering blaze of the
wood-fire, they looked at the old chair and thought that it had never
before worn such an interesting aspect. There it stood, in the venerable
majesty of more than two hundred years. The light from the hearth quivered
upon the flowers and foliage, that were wrought into its oaken back; and
the lion’s head at the summit seemed almost to move its jaws and shake its
mane.

"Does little Alice speak for all of you?" asked Grandfather. "Do you wish
me to go on with the adventures of the chair?"

"Oh, yes, yes, Grandfather!" cried Clara. "The dear old chair! How strange
that we should have forgotten it so long!"

"Oh, pray begin, Grandfather," said Laurence; "for I think, when we talk
about old times, it should be in the early evening before the candles are
lighted. The shapes of the famous persons, who once sat in the chair, will
be more apt to come back, and be seen among us, in this glimmer and
pleasant gloom, than they would in the vulgar daylight. And, besides, we
can make pictures of all that you tell us, among the glowing embers and
white ashes."

Our friend Charley, too, thought the evening the best time to hear
Grandfather’s stories, because he could not then be playing out of doors.
So, finding his young auditors unanimous in their petition, the good old
gentleman took up the narrative of the historic chair, at the point where
he had dropt it.




Chapter II


"You recollect, my dear children," said Grandfather, "that we took leave
of the chair in 1692, while it was occupied by Sir William Phips. This
fortunate treasure-seeker, you will remember, had come over from England,
with King William’s commission to be Governor of Massachusetts. Within the
limits of this province were now included the old colony of Plymouth, and
the territories of Maine and Nova Scotia. Sir William Phips had likewise
brought a new charter from the king, which served instead of a
constitution, and set forth the method in which the province was to be
governed."

"Did the new charter allow the people all their former liberties?"
inquired Laurence.

"No," replied Grandfather. "Under the first charter, the people had been
the source of all power. Winthrop, Endicott, Bradstreet, and the rest of
them, had been governors by the choice of the people, without any
interference of the king. But henceforth the governor was to hold his
station solely by the king’s appointment, and during his pleasure; and the
same was the case with the lieutenant-governor, and some other high
officers. The people, however, were still allowed to choose
representatives; and the governor’s council was chosen by the general
court."

"Would the inhabitants have elected Sir William Phips," asked Laurence,
"if the choice of governor had been left to them?"

"He might probably have been a successful candidate," answered
Grandfather; "for his adventures and military enterprises had gained him a
sort of renown, which always goes a great way with the people. And he had
many popular characteristics, being a kind, warm-hearted man, not ashamed
of his low origin, nor haughty in his present elevation. Soon after his
arrival, he proved that he did not blush to recognize his former
associates."

"How was that?" inquired Charley.

"He made a grand festival at his new brick house," said Grandfather, "and
invited all the ship-carpenters of Boston to be his guests. At the head of
the table, in our great chair, sat Sir William Phips himself, treating
these hard handed men as his brethren, cracking jokes with them, and
talking familiarly about old times. I know not whether he wore his
embroidered dress, but I rather choose to imagine that he had on a suit of
rough clothes, such as he used to labor in, while he was Phips the
ship-carpenter."

"An aristocrat need not be ashamed of the trade," observed Laurence; "for
the czar Peter the Great once served an apprenticeship to it."

"Did Sir William Phips make as good a governor as he was a
ship-carpenter?" asked Charley.

"History says but little about his merits as a ship-carpenter," answered
Grandfather; "but, as a governor, a great deal of fault was found with
him. Almost as soon as he assumed the government, he became engaged in a
very frightful business, which might have perplexed a wiser and better
cultivated head than his. This was the witchcraft delusion."

And here Grandfather gave his auditors such details of this melancholy
affair, as he thought it fit for them to know. They shuddered to hear that
a frenzy, which led to the death of many innocent persons, had originated
in the wicked arts of a few children. They belonged to the Rev. Mr.
Parris, minister of Salem. These children complained of being pinched, and
pricked with pins, and otherwise tormented by the shapes of men and women,
who were supposed to have power to haunt them invisibly, both in darkness
and daylight. Often, in the midst of their family and friends, the
children would pretend to be seized with strange convulsions, and would
cry out that the witches were afflicting them.

These stories spread abroad, and caused great tumult and alarm. From the
foundation of New England, it had been the custom of the inhabitants, in
all matters of doubt and difficulty, to look to their ministers for
council. So they did now; but, unfortunately, the ministers and wise men
were more deluded than the illiterate people. Cotton Mather, a very
learned and eminent clergyman, believed that the whole country was full of
witches and wizards, who had given up their hopes of heaven, and signed a
covenant with the Evil One.

Nobody could be certain that his nearest neighbor, or most intimate
friend, was not guilty of this imaginary crime. The number of those who
pretended to be afflicted by witchcraft, grew daily more numerous; and
they bore testimony against many of the best and worthiest people. A
minister, named George Burroughs, was among the accused. In the months of
August and September, 1692, he, and nineteen other innocent men and women,
were put to death. The place of execution was a high hill, on the
outskirts of Salem; so that many of the sufferers, as they stood beneath
the gallows, could discern their own habitations in the town.

The martyrdom of these guiltless persons seemed only to increase the
madness. The afflicted now grew bolder in their accusations. Many people
of rank and wealth were either thrown into prison, or compelled to flee
for their lives. Among these were two sons of old Simon Bradstreet, the
last of the Puritan governors. Mr. Willard, a pious minister of Boston,
was cried out upon as a wizard, in open court. Mrs. Hale, the wife of the
minister of Beverly, was likewise accused. Philip English, a rich merchant
of Salem, found it necessary to take flight, leaving his property and
business in confusion. But a short time afterwards, the Salem people were
glad to invite him back.

"The boldest thing that the accusers did," continued Grandfather, "was to
cry out against the governor’s own beloved wife. Yes; the lady of Sir
William Phips was accused of being a witch, and of flying through the air
to attend witch meetings. When the governor heard this, he probably
trembled, so that our great chair shook beneath him."

"Dear Grandfather," cried little Alice, clinging closer to his knee, "is
it true that witches ever come in the night-time to frighten little
children?"

"No, no, dear little Alice," replied Grandfather. "Even if there were any
witches, they would flee away from the presence of a pure-hearted child.
But there are none; and our forefathers soon became convinced, that they
had been led into a terrible delusion. All the prisoners on account of
witchcraft were set free. But the innocent dead could not be restored to
life; and the hill where they were executed, will always remind people of
the saddest and most humiliating passage in our history."

Grandfather then said, that the next remarkable event, while Sir William
Phips remained in the chair, was the arrival at Boston of an English
fleet, in 1693. It brought an army, which was intended for the conquest of
Canada. But a malignant disease, more fatal than the small-pox, broke out
among the soldiers and sailors, and destroyed the greater part of them.
The infection spread into the town of Boston, and made much havoc there.
This dreadful sickness caused the governor, and Sir Francis Wheeler, who
was commander of the British forces, to give up all thoughts of attacking
Canada.

"Soon after this," said Grandfather, "Sir William Phips quarrelled with
the captain of an English frigate, and also with the Collector of Boston.
Being a man of violent temper, he gave each of them a sound beating with
his cane."

"He was a bold fellow," observed Charley, who was himself somewhat
addicted to a similar mode of settling disputes.

"More bold than wise," replied Grandfather; "for complaints were carried
to the king, and Sir William Phips was summoned to England, to make the
best answer he could. Accordingly he went to London, where, in 1695, he
was seized with a malignant fever, of which he died. Had he lived longer,
he would probably have gone again in search of sunken treasure. He had
heard of a Spanish ship, which was cast away in 1502, during the lifetime
of Columbus. Bovadilla, Roldan, and many other Spaniards, were lost in
her, together with the immense wealth of which they had robbed the South
American kings."

"Why, Grandfather," exclaimed Laurence, "what magnificent ideas the
governor had! Only think of recovering all that old treasure, which had
lain almost two centuries under the sea! Me thinks Sir William Phips ought
to have been buried in the ocean, when he died; so that he might have gone
down among the sunken ships, and cargoes of treasure, which he was always
dreaming about in his lifetime."

"He was buried in one of the crowded cemeteries of London," said
Grandfather. "As he left no children, his estate was inherited by his
nephew, from whom is descended the present Marquis of Normandy. The noble
Marquis is not aware, perhaps, that the prosperity of his family
originated in the successful enterprise of a New England ship carpenter."




Chapter III


"At the death of Sir William Phips," proceeded Grandfather, "our chair was
bequeathed to Mr. Ezekiel Cheever, a famous school-master in Boston. This
old gentleman came from London in 1637, and had been teaching school ever
since; so that there were now aged men, grandfathers like myself, to whom
Master Cheever had taught their alphabet. He was a person of venerable
aspect, and wore a long white beard.

"Was the chair placed in his school?" asked Charley.

"Yes, in his school," answered Grandfather; "and we may safely say that it
had never before been regarded with such awful reverence—no, not even when
the old governors of Massachusetts sat in it. Even you, Charley, my boy,
would have felt some respect for the chair, if you had seen it occupied by
this famous school-master."

And here Grandfather endeavored to give his auditors an idea how matters
were managed in schools above a hundred years ago. As this will probably
be an interesting subject to our readers, we shall make a separate sketch
of it, and call it



THE OLD-FASHIONED SCHOOL


Now imagine yourselves, my children, in Master Ezekiel Cheever’s
school-room. It is a large, dingy room, with a sanded floor, and is
lighted by windows that turn on hinges, and have little diamond shaped
panes of glass. The scholars sit on long benches, with desks before them.
At one end of the room is a great fire-place, so very spacious, that there
is room enough for three or four boys to stand in each of the chimney
corners. This was the good old fashion of fire-places, when there was wood
enough in the forests to keep people warm, without their digging into the
bowels of the earth for coal.

It is a winter’s day when we take our peep into the school-room. See what
great logs of wood have been rolled into the fire-place, and what a broad,
bright blaze goes leaping up the chimney! And every few moments, a vast
cloud of smoke is puffed into the room, which sails slowly over the heads
of the scholars, until it gradually settles upon the walls and ceiling.
They are blackened with the smoke of many years already.

                                [Image #2]

Next, look at our old historic chair! It is placed, you perceive, in the
most comfortable part of the room, where the generous glow of the fire is
sufficiently felt, without being too intensely hot. How stately the old
chair looks, as if it remembered its many famous occupants, but yet were
conscious that a greater man is sitting in it now! Do you see the
venerable school-master, severe in aspect, with a black scull-cap on his
head, like an ancient Puritan, and the snow of his white beard drifting
down to his very girdle? What boy would dare to play, or whisper, or even
glance aside from his book, while Master Cheever is on the look-out,
behind his spectacles! For such offenders, if any such there be, a rod of
birch is hanging over the fire-place, and a heavy ferule lies on the
master’s desk.

And now school is begun. What a murmur of multitudinous tongues, like the
whispering leaves of a wind-stirred oak, as the scholars con over their
various tasks! Buz, buz, buz! Amid just such a murmur has Master Cheever
spent above sixty years: and long habit has made it as pleasant to him as
the hum of a bee-hive, when the insects are busy in the sunshine.

Now a class in Latin is called to recite. Forth steps a row of
queer-looking little fellows, wearing square-skirted coats, and small
clothes, with buttons at the knee. They look like so many grandfathers in
their second childhood. These lads are to be sent to Cambridge, and
educated for the learned professions. Old Master Cheever has lived so
long, and seen so many generations of school-boys grow up to be men, that
now he can almost prophesy what sort of a man each boy will be. One urchin
shall hereafter be a doctor, and administer pills and potions, and stalk
gravely through life, perfumed with assaf[oe]tida. Another shall wrangle
at the bar, and fight his way to wealth and honors, and in his declining
age, shall be a worshipful member of his Majesty’s council. A third—and he
is the Master’s favorite—shall be a worthy successor to the old Puritan
ministers, now in their graves; he shall preach with great unction and
effect, and leave volumes of sermons, in print and manuscript, for the
benefit of future generations.

But, as they are merely school-boys now, their business is to construe
Virgil. Poor Virgil, whose verses, which he took so much pains to polish,
have been mis-scanned, and mis-parsed, and mis-interpreted, by so many
generations of idle school-boys! There, sit down, ye Latinists. Two or
three of you, I fear, are doomed to feel the master’s ferule.

Next comes a class in Arithmetic. These boys are to be the merchants,
shop-keepers, and mechanics, of a future period. Hitherto, they have
traded only in marbles and apples. Hereafter, some will send vessels to
England for broadcloths and all sorts of manufactured wares, and to the
West Indies for sugar, and rum, and coffee. Others will stand behind
counters, and measure tape, and ribbon, and cambric, by the yard. Others
will upheave the blacksmith’s hammer, or drive the plane over the
carpenter’s bench, or take the lapstone and the awl, and learn the trade
of shoe-making. Many will follow the sea, and become bold, rough
sea-captains.

This class of boys, in short, must supply the world with those active,
skilful hands, and clear, sagacious heads, without which the affairs of
life would be thrown into confusion, by the theories of studious and
visionary men. Wherefore, teach them their multiplication table, good
Master Cheever, and whip them well, when they deserve it; for much of the
country’s welfare depends on these boys!

But, alas! while we have been thinking of other matters, Master Cheever’s
watchful eye has caught two boys at play. Now we shall see awful times!
The two malefactors are summoned before the master’s chair, wherein he
sits, with the terror of a judge upon his brow. Our old chair is now a
judgment-seat. Ah, Master Cheever has taken down that terrible birch-rod!
Short is the trial—the sentence quickly passed—and now the judge prepares
to execute it in person. Thwack! thwack! thwack! In those good old times,
a school-master’s blows were well laid on.

See! the birch-rod has lost several of its twigs, and will hardly serve
for another execution. Mercy on us, what a bellowing the urchins make! My
ears are almost deafened, though the clamor comes through the far length
of a hundred and fifty years. There, go to your seats, poor boys; and do
not cry, sweet little Alice; for they have ceased to feel the pain, a long
time since.

And thus the forenoon passes away. Now it is twelve o’clock. The master
looks at his great silver watch, and then with tiresome deliberation, puts
the ferule into his desk. The little multitude await the word of
dismissal, with almost irrepressible impatience.

"You are dismissed," says Master Cheever.

The boys retire, treading softly until they have passed the threshold;
but, fairly out of the school-room, lo, what a joyous shout!—what a
scampering and trampling of feet!—what a sense of recovered freedom,
expressed in the merry uproar of all their voices! What care they for the
ferule and birch-rod now? Were boys created merely to study Latin and
Arithmetic? No; the better purposes of their being are to sport, to leap,
to run, to shout, to slide upon the ice, to snow-ball!

Happy boys! Enjoy your play-time now, and come again to study, and to feel
the birch-rod and the ferule, to-morrow; not till to-morrow, for to-day is
Thursday-lecture; and ever since the settlement of Massachusetts, there
has been no school on Thursday afternoons. Therefore, sport, boys, while
you may; for the morrow cometh, with the birch-rod and the ferule; and
after that, another Morrow, with troubles of its own.

Now the master has set every thing to rights, and is ready to go home to
dinner. Yet he goes reluctantly. The old man has spent so much of his life
in the smoky, noisy, buzzing school-room, that, when he has a holiday, he
feels as if his place were lost, and himself a stranger in the world. But,
forth he goes; and there stands our old chair, vacant and solitary, till
good Master Cheever resumes his seat in it to-morrow morning.



"Grandfather," said Charley, "I wonder whether the boys did not use to
upset the old chair, when the school-master was out?"

"There is a tradition," replied Grandfather, "that one of its arms was
dislocated, in some such manner. But I cannot believe that any school-boy
would behave so naughtily."

As it was now later than little Alice’s usual bedtime, Grandfather broke
off his narrative, promising to talk more about Master Cheever and his
scholars, some other evening.




Chapter IV


Accordingly the next evening, Grandfather resumed the history of his
beloved chair.

"Master Ezekiel Cheever," said he, "died in 1707, after having taught
school about seventy years. It would require a pretty good scholar in
arithmetic to tell how many stripes he had inflicted, and how many
birch-rods he had worn out, during all that time, in his fatherly
tenderness for his pupils. Almost all the great men of that period, and
for many years back, had been whipt into eminence by Master Cheever.
Moreover, he had written a Latin Accidence, which was used in schools more
than half a century after his death; so that the good old man, even in his
grave, was still the cause of trouble and stripes to idle school-boys."

Grandfather proceeded to say, that, when Master Cheever died, he
bequeathed the chair to the most learned man that was educated at his
school, or that had ever been born in America. This was the renowned
Cotton Mather, minister of the Old North Church in Boston.

"And author of the Magnalia, Grandfather, which we sometimes see you
reading," said Laurence.

"Yes, Laurence," replied Grandfather. "The Magnalia is a strange, pedantic
history, in which true events and real personages move before the reader,
with the dreamy aspect which they wore in Cotton Mather’s singular mind.
This huge volume, however, was written and published before our chair came
into his possession. But, as he was the author of more books than there
are days in the year, we may conclude that he wrote a great deal, while
sitting in this chair."

"I am tired of these school-masters and learned men," said Charley. "I
wish some stirring man, that knew how to do something in the world, like
Sir William Phips, would set in the chair."

"Such men seldom have leisure to sit quietly in a chair," said
Grandfather. "We must make the best of such people as we have."

As Cotton Mather was a very distinguished man, Grandfather took some pains
to give the children a lively conception of his character. Over the door
of his library were painted these words—BE SHORT—as a warning to visitors
that they must not do the world so much harm, as needlessly to interrupt
this great man’s wonderful labors. On entering the room you would probably
behold it crowded, and piled, and heaped with books. There were huge,
ponderous folios and quartos, and little duodecimos, in English, Latin,
Greek, Hebrew, Chaldaic, and all other languages, that either originated
at the confusion of Babel, or have since come into use.

All these books, no doubt, were tossed about in confusion, thus forming a
visible emblem of the manner in which their contents were crowded into
Cotton Mather’s brain. And in the middle of the room stood a table, on
which, besides printed volumes, were strewn manuscript sermons, historical
tracts, and political pamphlets, all written in such a queer, blind,
crabbed, fantastical hand, that a writing-master would have gone raving
mad at the sight of them. By this table stood Grandfather’s chair, which
seemed already to have contracted an air of deep erudition, as if its
cushion were stuffed with Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, and other hard
matters.

In this chair, from one year’s end to another, sat that prodigious
book-worm, Cotton Mather, sometimes devouring a great book, and sometimes
scribbling one as big. In Grandfather’s younger days, there used to be a
wax figure of him in one of the Boston museums, representing a solemn,
dark-visaged person, in a minister’s black gown, and with a black-letter
volume before him.

"It is difficult, my children," observed Grandfather, "to make you
understand such a character as Cotton Mather’s, in whom there was so much
good, and yet so many failings and frailties. Undoubtedly, he was a pious
man. Often he kept fasts; and once, for three whole days, he allowed
himself not a morsel of food, but spent the time in prayer and religious
meditation. Many a live-long night did he watch and pray. These fasts and
vigils made him meagre and haggard, and probably caused him to appear as
if he hardly belonged to the world."

"Was not the witchcraft delusion partly caused by Cotton Mather?" inquired
Laurence.

"He was the chief agent of the mischief," answered Grandfather; "but we
will not suppose that he acted otherwise than conscientiously. He believed
that there were evil spirits all about the world. Doubtless he imagined
that they were hidden in the corners and crevices of his library, and that
they peeped out from among the leaves of many of his books, as he turned
them over, at midnight. He supposed that these unlovely demons were
everywhere, in the sunshine as well as in the darkness, and that they were
hidden in men’s hearts, and stole into their most secret thoughts."

Here Grandfather was interrupted by little Alice, who hid her face in his
lap, and murmured a wish that he would not talk any more about Cotton
Mather and the evil spirits. Grandfather kissed her, and told her that
angels were the only spirits whom she had any thing to do with. He then
spoke of the public affairs of the period.

A new war between France and England had broken out in 1702, and had been
raging ever since. In the course of it, New England suffered much injury
from the French and Indians, who often came through the woods from Canada,
and assaulted the frontier towns. Villages were sometimes burnt, and the
inhabitants slaughtered, within a day’s ride of Boston. The people of New
England had a bitter hatred against the French, not only for the mischief
which they did with their own hands, but because they incited the Indians
to hostility.

The New Englanders knew that they could never dwell in security, until the
provinces of France should be subdued, and brought under the English
government. They frequently, in time of war, undertook military
expeditions against Acadia and Canada, and sometimes besieged the
fortresses, by which those territories were defended. But the most earnest
wish of their hearts was, to take Quebec, and so get possession of the
whole province of Canada. Sir William Phips had once attempted it, but
without success.

Fleets and soldiers were often sent from England, to assist the colonists
in their warlike undertakings. In 1710, Port Royal, a fortress of Acadia,
was taken by the English. The next year, in the month of June, a fleet,
commanded by Admiral Sir Hovenden Walker, arrived in Boston Harbor. On
board of this fleet was the English General Hill, with seven regiments of
soldiers, who had been fighting under the Duke of Marlborough, in
Flanders. The government of Massachusetts was called upon to find
provisions for the army and fleet, and to raise more men to assist in
taking Canada.

What with recruiting and drilling of soldiers, there was now nothing but
warlike bustle in the streets of Boston. The drum and fife, the rattle of
arms, and the shouts of boys, were heard from morning till night. In about
a month, the fleet set sail, carrying four regiments from New England and
New York, besides the English soldiers. The whole army amounted to at
least seven thousand men. They steered for the mouth of the river St.
Lawrence.

"Cotton Mather prayed most fervently for their success," continued
Grandfather, "both in his pulpit, and when he kneeled down in the solitude
of his library, resting his face on our old chair. But Providence ordered
the result otherwise. In a few weeks, tidings were received, that eight or
nine of the vessels had been wrecked in the St. Lawrence, and that above a
thousand drowned soldiers had been washed ashore, on the banks of that
mighty river. After this misfortune, Sir Hovenden Walker set sail for
England; and many pious people began to think it a sin, even to wish for
the conquest of Canada."

"I would never give it up so," cried Charley.

"Nor did they, as we shall see," replied Grandfather. "However, no more
attempts were made during this war, which came to a close in 1713. The
people of New England were probably glad of some repose; for their young
men had been made soldiers, till many of them were fit for nothing else.
And those, who remained at home, had been heavily taxed to pay for the
arms, ammunition, fortifications, and all the other endless expenses of a
war. There was great need of the prayers of Cotton Mather, and of all
pious men, not only on account of the sufferings of the people, but
because the old moral and religious character of New England was in danger
of being utterly lost."

"How glorious it would have been," remarked Laurence, "if our forefathers
could have kept the country unspotted with blood."

"Yes," said Grandfather; "but there was a stern warlike spirit in them,
from the beginning. They seem never to have thought of questioning either
the morality or piety of war."

The next event, which Grandfather spoke of, was one that Cotton Mather, as
well as most of the other inhabitants of New England, heartily rejoiced
at. This was the accession of the Elector of Hanover to the throne of
England, in 1714, on the death of Queen Anne. Hitherto, the people had
been in continual dread that the male line of the Stuarts, who were
descended from the beheaded King Charles and the banished King James,
would be restored to the throne. In that case, as the Stuart family were
Roman Catholics, it was supposed that they would attempt to establish
their own religion throughout the British dominions. But the Elector of
Hanover, and all his race, were Protestants; so that now the descendants
of the old Puritans were relieved from many fears and disquietudes.

"The importance of this event," observed Grandfather, "was a thousand
times greater than that of a Presidential Election, in our own days. If
the people dislike their president, they may get rid of him in four years;
whereas, a dynasty of kings may wear the crown for an unlimited period."

The German elector was proclaimed king from the balcony of the town-house,
in Boston, by the title of George the First, while the trumpets sounded,
and the people cried Amen. That night, the town was illuminated; and
Cotton Mather threw aside book and pen, and left Grandfather’s chair
vacant, while he walked hither and thither to witness the rejoicings.




Chapter VI


"Cotton Mather," continued Grandfather, "was a bitter enemy to Governor
Dudley; and nobody exulted more than he, when that crafty politician was
removed from the government, and succeeded by Colonel Shute. This took
place in 1716. The new governor had been an officer in the renowned Duke
of Marlborough’s army, and had fought in some of the great battles in
Flanders."

"Now, I hope," said Charley, "we shall hear of his doing great things."

"I am afraid you will be disappointed, Charley," answered Grandfather. "It
is true, that Colonel Shute had probably never led so unquiet a life while
fighting the French, as he did now, while governing this province of
Massachusetts Bay. But his troubles consisted almost entirely of
dissensions with the legislature. The king had ordered him to lay claim to
a fixed salary; but the representatives of the people insisted upon paying
him only such sums, from year to year, as they saw fit."

Grandfather here explained some of the circumstances, that made the
situation of a colonial governor so difficult and irksome. There was not
the same feeling towards the chief magistrate, now, that had existed,
while he was chosen by the free suffrages of the people. It was felt,
that, as the king appointed the governor, and as he held his office during
the king’s pleasure, it would be his great object to please the king. But
the people thought, that a governor ought to have nothing in view, but the
best interests of those whom he governed.

"The governor," remarked Grandfather, "had two masters to serve—the king,
who appointed him, and the people, on whom he depended for his pay. Few
men, in this position, would have ingenuity enough to satisfy either
party. Colonel Shute, though a good-natured, well-meaning man, succeeded
so ill with the people, that in 1722, he suddenly went away to England,
and made complaint to King George. In the mean time, Lieutenant-Governor
Dummer directed the affairs of the province, and carried on a long and
bloody war with the Indians."

"But where was our chair, all this time?" asked Clara.

"It still remained in Cotton Mather’s library," replied Grandfather; "and
I must not omit to tell you an incident, which is very much to the honor
of this celebrated man. It is the more proper, too, that you should hear
it, because it will show you what a terrible calamity the small pox was to
our forefathers. The history of the province, (and, of course, the history
of our chair,) would be incomplete, without particular mention of it."
Accordingly, Grandfather told the children a story, to which, for want of
a better title, we shall give that of



THE REJECTED BLESSING


One day, in 1721, Doctor Cotton Mather sat in his library, reading a book
that had been published by the Royal Society of London. But, every few
moments, he laid the book upon the table, and leaned back in Grandfather’s
chair, with an aspect of deep care and disquietude. There were certain
things which troubled him exceedingly, so that he could hardly fix his
thoughts upon what he read.

It was now a gloomy time in Boston. That terrible disease, the small pox,
had recently made its appearance in the town. Ever since the first
settlement of the country, this awful pestilence had come, at intervals,
and swept away multitudes of the inhabitants. Whenever it commenced its
ravages, nothing seemed to stay its progress, until there were no more
victims for it to seize upon. Oftentimes, hundreds of people, at once, lay
groaning with its agony; and when it departed, its deep footsteps were
always to be traced in many graves.

The people never felt secure from this calamity. Sometimes, perhaps, it
was brought into the country by a poor sailor, who had caught the
infection in foreign parts, and came hither to die, and to be the cause of
many deaths. Sometimes, no doubt, it followed in the train of the pompous
governors, when they came over from England. Sometimes, the disease lay
hidden in the cargoes of ships, among silks and brocades, and other costly
merchandise, which was imported for the rich people to wear. And,
sometimes, it started up, seemingly of its own accord; and nobody could
tell whence it came. The physician, being called to attend the sick
person, would look at him, and say,—"It is the small pox! let the patient
be carried to the hospital."

And now, this dreadful sickness had shown itself again in Boston. Cotton
Mather was greatly afflicted, for the sake of the whole province. He had
children, too, who were exposed to the danger. At that very moment, he
heard the voice of his youngest son, for whom his heart was moved with
apprehension.

"Alas! I fear for that poor child," said Cotton Mather to himself. "What
shall I do for my son Samuel?"

Again, he attempted to drive away these thoughts, by taking up the book
which he had been reading. And now, all of a sudden, his attention became
fixed. The book contained a printed letter that an Italian physician had
written upon the very subject, about which Cotton Mather was so anxiously
meditating. He ran his eye eagerly over the pages; and, behold! a method
was disclosed to him, by which the small pox might be robbed of its worst
terrors. Such a method was known in Greece. The physicians of Turkey, too,
those long-bearded Eastern sages, had been acquainted with it for many
years. The negroes of Africa, ignorant as they were, had likewise
practised it, and thus had shown themselves wiser than the white men.

"Of a truth," ejaculated Cotton Mather, clasping his hands and looking up
to Heaven, "it was a merciful Providence that brought this book under mine
eye! I will procure a consultation of physicians, and see whether this
wondrous Inoculation may not stay the progress of the Destroyer."

So he arose from Grandfather’s chair, and went out of the library. Near
the door he met his son Samuel, who seemed downcast and out of spirits.
The boy had heard, probably, that some of his playmates were taken ill
with the small pox. But, as his father looked cheerfully at him, Samuel
took courage, trusting that either the wisdom of so learned a minister
would find some remedy for the danger, or else that his prayers would
secure protection from on high.

Meanwhile, Cotton Mather took his staff and three-cornered hat, and walked
about the streets, calling at the houses of all the physicians in Boston.
They were a very wise fraternity; and their huge wigs, and black dresses,
and solemn visages, made their wisdom appear even profounder than it was.
One after another, he acquainted them with the discovery which he had hit
upon.

But these grave and sagacious personages would scarcely listen to him. The
oldest doctor in town contented himself with remarking, that no such thing
as inoculation was mentioned by Galen or Hippocrates, and it was
impossible that modern physicians should be wiser than those old sages. A
second held up his hands in dumb astonishment and horror, at the madness
of what Cotton Mather proposed to do. A third told him, in pretty plain
terms, that he knew not what he was talking about. A fourth requested, in
the name of the whole medical fraternity, that Cotton Mather would confine
his attention to people’s souls, and leave the physicians to take care of
their bodies.

In short, there was but a single doctor among them all, who would grant
the poor minister so much as a patient hearing. This was Doctor Zabdiel
Boylston. He looked into the matter like a man of sense, and finding,
beyond a doubt, that inoculation had rescued many from death, he resolved
to try the experiment in his own family.

And so he did. But, when the other physicians heard of it, they arose in
great fury, and began a war of words, written, printed, and spoken,
against Cotton Mather and Doctor Boylston. To hear them talk, you would
have supposed that these two harmless and benevolent men had plotted the
ruin of the country.

The people, also, took the alarm. Many, who thought themselves more pious
than their neighbors, contended, that, if Providence had ordained them to
die of the small pox, it was sinful to aim at preventing it. The strangest
reports were in circulation. Some said, that Doctor Boylston had contrived
a method for conveying the gout, rheumatism, sick headache, asthma, and
all other diseases, from one person to another, and diffusing them through
the whole community. Others flatly affirmed that the Evil One had got
possession of Cotton Mather, and was at the bottom of the whole business.

You must observe, children, that Cotton Mather’s fellow citizens were
generally inclined to doubt the wisdom of any measure, which he might
propose to them. They recollected how he had led them astray in the old
witchcraft delusion; and now, if he thought and acted ever so wisely, it
was difficult for him to get the credit of it.

The people’s wrath grew so hot at his attempt to guard them from the small
pox, that he could not walk the streets in peace. Whenever the venerable
form of the old minister, meagre and haggard with fasts and vigils, was
seen approaching, hisses were heard, and shouts of derision, and scornful
and bitter laughter. The women snatched away their children from his path,
lest he should do them a mischief. Still, however, bending his head
meekly, and perhaps stretching out his hands to bless those who reviled
him, he pursued his way. But the tears came into his eyes, to think how
blindly the people rejected the means of safety, that were offered them.

Indeed, there were melancholy sights enough in the streets of Boston, to
draw forth the tears of a compassionate man. Over the door of almost every
dwelling, a red flag was fluttering in the air. This was the signal that
the small pox had entered the house, and attacked some member of the
family; or perhaps the whole family, old and young, were struggling at
once with the pestilence. Friends and relatives, when they met one another
in the streets, would hurry onward without a grasp of the hand, or
scarcely a word of greeting, lest they should catch or communicate the
contagion. And, often a coffin was borne hastily along.

"Alas, alas!" said Cotton Mather to himself. "What shall be done for this
poor, misguided people? Oh, that Providence would open their eyes, and
enable them to discern good from evil!"

So furious, however, were the people, that they threatened vengeance
against any person who should dare to practise inoculation, though it were
only in his own family. This was a hard case for Cotton Mather, who saw no
other way to rescue his poor child Samuel from the disease. But he
resolved to save him, even if his house should be burnt over his head.

"I will not be turned aside," said he. "My townsmen shall see that I have
faith in this thing, when I make the experiment on my beloved son, whose
life is dearer to me than my own. And when I have saved Samuel,
peradventure they will be persuaded to save themselves."

Accordingly, Samuel was inoculated; and so was Mr. Walter, a son-in-law of
Cotton Mather. Doctor Boylston, likewise, inoculated many persons; and
while hundreds died, who had caught the contagion from the garments of the
sick, almost all were preserved, who followed the wise physician’s advice.

But the people were not yet convinced of their mistake. One night, a
destructive little instrument, called a hand-grenade, was thrown into
Cotton Mather’s window, and rolled under Grandfather’s chair. It was
supposed to be filled with gunpowder, the explosion of which would have
blown the poor minister to atoms. But the best-informed historians are of
opinion, that the grenade contained only brimstone and assaf[oe]tida, and
was meant to plague Cotton Mather with a very evil perfume.

This is no strange thing in human experience. Men, who attempt to do the
world more good, than the world is able entirely to comprehend, are almost
invariably held in bad odor. But yet, if the wise and good man can wait
awhile, either the present generation or posterity, will do him justice.
So it proved, in the case which we have been speaking of. In after years,
when inoculation was universally practised, and thousands were saved from
death by it, the people remembered old Cotton Mather, then sleeping in his
grave. They acknowledged that the very thing, for which they had so
reviled and persecuted him, was the best and wisest thing he ever did.



"Grandfather, this is not an agreeable story," observed Clara.

"No, Clara," replied Grandfather. "But it is right that you should know
what a dark shadow this disease threw over the times of our forefathers.
And now, if you wish to learn more about Cotton Mather, you must read his
biography, written by Mr. Peabody, of Springfield. You will find it very
entertaining and instructive; but perhaps the writer is somewhat too harsh
in his judgment of this singular man. He estimates him fairly, indeed, and
understands him well; but he unriddles his character rather by acuteness
than by sympathy. Now, his life should have been written by one, who,
knowing all his faults, would nevertheless love him."

So Grandfather made an end of Cotton Mather, telling his auditors that he
died in 1728, at the age of sixty-five, and bequeathed the chair to Elisha
Cooke. This gentleman was a famous advocate of the people’s rights.

The same year, William Burnet, a son of the celebrated Bishop Burnet,
arrived in Boston, with the commission of governor. He was the first that
had been appointed since the departure of Colonel Shute. Governor Burnet
took up his residence with Mr. Cooke, while the Province House was
undergoing repairs. During this period, he was always complimented with a
seat in Grandfather’s chair; and so comfortable did he find it, that on
removing to the Province House, he could not bear to leave it behind him.
Mr. Cooke, therefore, requested his acceptance of it.

"I should think," said Laurence, "that the people would have petitioned
the king always to appoint a native-born New Englander to govern them."

"Undoubtedly it was a grievance," answered Grandfather, "to see men placed
in this station, who perhaps had neither talents nor virtues to fit them
for it, and who certainly could have no natural affection for the country.
The king generally bestowed the governorships of the American colonies
upon needy noblemen, or hangers-on at court, or disbanded officers. The
people knew that such persons would be very likely to make the good of the
country subservient to the wishes of the king. The legislature, therefore,
endeavored to keep as much power as possible in their own hands, by
refusing to settle a fixed salary upon the governors. It was thought
better to pay them according to their deserts."

"Did Governor Burnet work well for his money?" asked Charley.

Grandfather could not help smiling at the simplicity of Charley’s
question. Nevertheless, it put the matter in a very plain point of view.

He then described the character of Governor Burnet, representing him as a
good scholar, possessed of much ability, and likewise of unspotted
integrity. His story affords a striking example, how unfortunate it is for
a man, who is placed as ruler over a country, to be compelled to aim at
any thing but the good of the people. Governor Burnet was so chained down
by his instructions from the king, that he could not act as he might
otherwise have wished. Consequently, his whole term of office was wasted
in quarrels with the legislature.

"I am afraid, children," said Grandfather, "that Governor Burnet found but
little rest or comfort in our old chair. Here he used to sit, dressed in a
coat which was made of rough, shaggy cloth outside, but of smooth velvet
within. It was said that his own character resembled that coat, for his
outward manner was rough, but his inward disposition soft and kind. It is
a pity that such a man could not have been kept free from trouble. But so
harassing were his disputes with the representatives of the people, that
he fell into a fever, of which he died, in 1720. The legislature had
refused him a salary, while alive; but they appropriated money enough to
give him a splendid and pompous funeral."

And now Grandfather perceived that little Alice had fallen fast asleep,
with her head upon his footstool. Indeed, as Clara observed, she had been
sleeping from the time of Sir Hovenden Walker’s expedition against Quebec,
until the death of Governor Burnet—a period of about eighteen years. And
yet, after so long a nap, sweet little Alice was a golden-haired child, of
scarcely five years old.

"It puts me in mind," said Laurence, "of the story of the enchanted
princess, who slept many a hundred years, and awoke as young and beautiful
as ever."




Chapter VII


A few evenings afterwards, cousin Clara happened to inquire of
Grandfather, whether the old chair had never been present at a ball. At
the same time, little Alice brought forward a doll, with whom she had been
holding a long conversation.

"See, Grandfather," cried she. "Did such a pretty lady as this ever sit in
your great chair?"

These questions led Grandfather to talk about the fashions and manners,
which now began to be introduced from England into the provinces. The
simplicity of the good old Puritan times was fast disappearing. This was
partly owing to the increasing number and wealth of the inhabitants, and
to the additions which they continually received, by the arrival and
settlement of people from beyond the sea.

Another cause of a pompous and artificial mode of life, among those who
could afford it, was, that the example was set by the royal governors.
Under the old charter, the governors were the representatives of the
people, and therefore their way of living had probably been marked by a
popular simplicity. But now, as they represented the person of the king,
they thought it necessary to preserve the dignity of their station, by the
practice of high and gorgeous ceremonials. And, besides, the profitable
offices under the government were filled by men who had lived in London,
and had there contracted fashionable and luxurious habits of living, which
they would not now lay aside. The wealthy people of the province imitated
them; and thus began a general change in social life.

"So, my dear Clara," said Grandfather, "after our chair had entered the
Province House, it must often have been present at balls and festivals,
though I cannot give you a description of any particular one. But I doubt
not that they were very magnificent; and slaves in gorgeous liveries
waited on the guests, and offered them wine in goblets of massive silver."

"Were there slaves in those days?" exclaimed Clara.

"Yes; black slaves and white," replied Grandfather. "Our ancestors not
only bought negroes from Africa, but Indians from South America, and white
people from Ireland. These last were sold, not for life, but for a certain
number of years, in order to pay the expenses of their voyage across the
Atlantic. Nothing was more common than to see a lot of likely Irish girls,
advertised for sale in the newspapers. As for the little negro babies,
they were offered to be given away, like young kittens."

"Perhaps Alice would have liked one to play with, instead of her doll,"
said Charley, laughing.

But little Alice clasped the waxen doll closer to her bosom.

"Now, as for this pretty doll, my little Alice," said Grandfather, "I wish
you could have seen what splendid dresses the ladies wore in those times.
They had silks, and satins, and damasks, and brocades, and high
head-dresses, and all sorts of fine things. And they used to wear
hooped-petticoats, of such enormous size that it was quite a journey to
walk round them."

"And how did the gentlemen dress?" asked Charley.

"With full as much magnificence as the ladies," answered Grandfather. "For
their holiday suits, they had coats of figured velvet, crimson, green,
blue, and all other gay colors, embroidered with gold or silver lace.
Their waistcoats, which were five times as large as modern ones, were very
splendid. Sometimes, the whole waistcoat, which came down almost to the
knees, was made of gold brocade."

"Why, the wearer must have shone like a golden image!" said Clara.

"And, then," continued Grandfather, "they wore various sorts of periwigs,
such as the Tie, the Spencer, the Brigadier, the Major, the Albemarle, the
Ramilies, the Feather-top, and the Full-bottom! Their three-cornered hats
were laced with gold or silver. They had shining buckles at the knees of
their small clothes, and buckles likewise in their shoes. They wore
swords, with beautiful hilts, either of silver, or sometimes of polished
steel, inlaid with gold."

"Oh, I should like to wear a sword!" cried Charley.

"And an embroidered crimson velvet coat," said Clara, laughing, "and a
gold brocade waistcoat down to your knees!"

"And knee-buckles and shoe-buckles," said Laurence, laughing also.

"And a periwig," added little Alice, soberly, not knowing what was the
article of dress, which she recommended to our friend Charley.

Grandfather smiled at the idea of Charley’s sturdy little figure in such a
grotesque caparison. He then went on with the history of the chair, and
told the children, that, in 1730, King George the Second appointed
Jonathan Belcher to be governor of Massachusetts, in place of the deceased
Governor Burnet. Mr. Belcher was a native of the province, but had spent
much of his life in Europe.

The new governor found Grandfather’s chair in the Province House, he was
struck with its noble and stately aspect, but was of opinion, that age and
hard services had made it scarcely so fit for courtly company, as when it
stood in the Earl of Lincoln’s hall. Wherefore, as Governor Belcher was
fond of splendor, he employed a skilful artist to beautify the chair. This
was done by polishing and varnishing it, and by gilding the carved work of
the elbows, and likewise the oaken flowers of the back. The lion’s head
now shone like a veritable lump of gold. Finally, Governor Belcher gave
the chair a cushion of blue damask, with a rich golden fringe.

"Our good old chair being thus glorified," proceeded Grandfather, "it
glittered with a great deal more splendor than it had exhibited just a
century before, when the Lady Arbella brought it over from England. Most
people mistook it for a chair of the latest London fashion. And this may
serve for an example, that there is almost always an old and time-worn
substance under all the glittering show of new invention."

"Grandfather, I cannot see any of the gilding," remarked Charley, who had
been examining the chair very minutely.

"You will not wonder that it has been rubbed off," replied Grandfather,
"when you hear all the adventures that have since befallen the chair.
Gilded it was; and the handsomest room in the Province House was adorned
by it."

There was not much to interest the children, in what happened during the
years that Governor Belcher remained in the chair. At first, like Colonel
Shute and Governor Burnet, he was engaged in disputing with the
legislature about his salary. But, as he found it impossible to get a
fixed sum, he finally obtained the king’s leave to accept whatever the
legislature chose to give him. And thus the people triumphed, after this
long contest for the privilege of expending their own money as they saw
fit.

The remainder of Governor Belcher’s term of office was principally taken
up in endeavoring to settle the currency. Honest John Hull’s pine-tree
shillings had long ago been worn out, or lost, or melted down again, and
their place was supplied by bills of paper or parchment, which were
nominally valued at three pence and upwards. The value of these bills kept
continually sinking, because the real hard money could not be obtained for
them. They were a great deal worse than the old Indian currency of
clam-shells. These disorders of the circulating medium were a source of
endless plague and perplexity to the rulers and legislators, not only in
Governor Belcher’s days, but for many years before and afterwards.

Finally, the people suspected that Governor Belcher was secretly
endeavoring to establish the Episcopal mode of worship in the provinces.
There was enough of the old Puritan spirit remaining, to cause most of the
true sons of New England to look with horror upon such an attempt. Great
exertions were made, to induce the king to remove the governor.
Accordingly, in 1740, he was compelled to resign his office, and
Grandfather’s chair into the bargain, to Mr. Shirley.




Chapter VIII


"William Shirley," said Grandfather, "had come from England a few years
before, and begun to practise law in Boston. You will think, perhaps,
that, as he had been a lawyer, the new governor used to sit in our great
chair, reading heavy law-books from morning till night. On the contrary,
he was as stirring and active a governor as Massachusetts ever had. Even
Sir William Phips hardly equalled him. The first year or two of his
administration was spent in trying to regulate the currency. But, in 1744,
after a peace of more than thirty years, war broke out between France and
England."

"And I suppose," said Charley, "the governor went to take Canada."

"Not exactly, Charley," said Grandfather, "though you have made a pretty
shrewd conjecture. He planned, in 1745, an expedition against Louisbourg.
This was a fortified city, on the Island of Cape Breton, near Nova Scotia.
Its walls were of immense height and strength, and were defended by
hundreds of heavy cannon. It was the strongest fortress which the French
possessed in America; and if the king of France had guessed Governor
Shirley’s intentions, he would have sent all the ships he could muster, to
protect it."

As the siege of Louisbourg was one of the most remarkable events that ever
the inhabitants of New England were engaged in, Grandfather endeavored to
give his auditors a lively idea of the spirit with which they set about
it. We shall call his description



THE PROVINCIAL MUSTER


The expedition against Louisbourg first began to be thought of in the
month of January. From that time, the governor’s chair was continually
surrounded by counsellors, representatives, clergymen, captains, pilots,
and all manner of people, with whom he consulted about this wonderful
project.

First of all, it was necessary to provide men and arms. The legislature
immediately sent out a huge quantity of paper money, with which, as if by
magic spell, the governor hoped to get possession of all the old cannon,
powder and balls, rusty swords and muskets, and every thing else that
would be serviceable in killing Frenchmen. Drums were beaten in all the
villages of Massachusetts, to enlist soldiers for the service. Messages
were sent to the other governors of New England, and to New York and
Pennsylvania, entreating them to unite in this crusade against the French.
All these provinces agreed to give what assistance they could.

But there was one very important thing to be decided. Who shall be the
General of this great army? Peace had continued such an unusual length of
time, that there was now less military experience among the colonists,
than at any former period. The old Puritans had always kept their weapons
bright, and were never destitute of warlike captains, who were skilful in
assault or defence. But the swords of their descendants had grown rusty by
disuse. There was nobody in New England that knew any thing about sieges,
or any other regular fighting. The only persons, at all acquainted with
warlike business, were a few elderly men, who had hunted Indians through
the underbrush of the forest, in old Governor Dummer’s war.

In this dilemma, Governor Shirley fixed upon a wealthy merchant, named
William Pepperell, who was pretty well known and liked among the people.
As to military skill, he had no more of it than his neighbors. But, as the
governor urged him very pressingly, Mr. Pepperell consented to shut up his
leger, gird on a sword, and assume the title of General.

Meantime, what a hubbub was raised by this scheme! Rub-a-dub-dub!
Rub-a-dub-dub! The rattle of drums, beaten out of all manner of time, was
heard above every other sound.

Nothing now was so valuable as arms, of whatever style and fashion they
might be. The bellows blew, and the hammer clanged continually upon the
anvil, while the blacksmiths were repairing the broken weapons of other
wars. Doubtless, some of the soldiers lugged out those enormous, heavy
muskets, which used to be fired with rests, in the time of the early
Puritans. Great horse-pistols, too, were found, which would go off with a
bang like a cannon. Old cannon, with touch-holes almost as big as their
muzzles, were looked upon as inestimable treasures. Pikes, which perhaps,
had been handled by Miles Standish’s soldiers, now made their appearance
again. Many a young man ransacked the garret, and brought forth his
great-grandfather’s sword, corroded with rust, and stained with the blood
of King Philip’s war.

Never had there been seen such an arming as this, when a people, so long
peaceful, rose to the war, with the best weapons that they could lay their
hands upon. And still the drums were heard—Rub-a-dub-dub!
Rub-a-dub-dub!—in all the towns and villages; and louder and more numerous
grew the trampling footsteps of the recruits that marched behind.

And now the army began to gather into Boston. Tall, lanky, awkward,
fellows, came in squads, and companies, and regiments, swaggering along,
dressed in their brown homespun clothes and blue yarn stockings. They
stooped, as if they still had hold of the plough-handles, and marched
without any time or tune. Hither they came, from the corn-fields, from the
clearing in the forest, from the blacksmith’s forge, from the carpenter’s
workshop, and from the shoemaker’s seat. They were an army of rough faces
and sturdy frames. A trained officer of Europe would have laughed at them,
till his sides had ached. But there was a spirit in their bosoms, which is
more essential to soldiership than to wear red coats, and march in stately
ranks to the sound of regular music.

Still was heard the beat of the drum—rub-a-dub-dub!—and now a host of
three or four thousand men had found their way to Boston. Little quiet was
there then! Forth scampered the school-boys, shouting behind the drums.
The whole town—the whole land—was on fire with war.

After the arrival of the troops, they were probably reviewed upon the
Common. We may imagine Governor Shirley and General Pepperell riding
slowly along the line, while the drummers beat strange old tunes, like
psalm-tunes, and all the officers and soldiers put on their most warlike
looks. It would have been a terrible sight for the Frenchmen, could they
but have witnessed it!

At length, on the twenty-fourth of March, 1745, the army gave a parting
shout, and set sail from Boston in ten or twelve vessels, which had been
hired by the governor. A few days afterwards, an English fleet, commanded
by Commodore Peter Warren, sailed also for Louisbourg, to assist the
provincial army. So, now, after all this bustle of preparation, the town
and province were left in stillness and repose.

But, stillness and repose, at such a time of anxious expectation, are hard
to bear. The hearts of the old people and women sunk within them, when
they reflected what perils they had sent their sons, and husbands, and
brothers, to encounter. The boys loitered heavily to school, missing the
rub-a-dub-dub, and the trampling march, in the rear of which they had so
lately run and shouted. All the ministers prayed earnestly, in their
pulpits, for a blessing on the army of New England. In every family, when
the good man lifted up his heart in domestic worship, the burthen of his
petition was for the safety of those dear ones, who were fighting under
the walls of Louisbourg.

Governor Shirley, all this time, was probably in an ecstasy of impatience.
He could not sit still a moment. He found no quiet, not even in
Grandfather’s chair, but hurried to-and-fro, and up and down the staircase
of the Province House. Now, he mounted to the cupola, and looked sea-ward,
straining his eyes to discover if there were a sail upon the horizon. Now,
he hastened down the stairs, and stood beneath the portal, on the red
freestone steps, to receive some mud-bespattered courtier, from whom he
hoped to hear tidings of the army.

A few weeks after the departure of the troops, Commodore Warren sent a
small vessel to Boston, with two French prisoners. One of them was
Monsieur Bouladrie, who had been commander of a battery, outside of the
walls of Louisbourg. The other was the Marquis de la Maison Forte, captain
of a French frigate, which had been taken by Commodore Warren’s fleet.
These prisoners assured Governor Shirley, that the fortifications of
Louisbourg were far too strong ever to be stormed by the provincial army.

Day after day, and week after week, went on. The people grew almost
heart-sick with anxiety; for the flower of the country was at peril in
this adventurous expedition. It was now day-break, on the morning of the
third of July.

But, hark! what sound is this? The hurried clang of a bell! There is the
Old North, pealing suddenly out!—there, the Old South strikes in!—now, the
peal comes from the church in Brattle street!—the bells of nine or ten
steeples are all flinging their iron voices, at once, upon the morning
breeze! Is it joy or alarm? There goes the roar of a cannon, too! A royal
salute is thundered forth. And, now, we hear the loud exulting shout of a
multitude, assembled in the street. Huzza, Huzza! Louisbourg has
surrendered! Huzza!



"O Grandfather, how glad I should have been to live in those times!" cried
Charley. "And what reward did the king give to General Pepperell and
Governor Shirley?"

"He made Pepperell a baronet; so that he was now to be called Sir William
Pepperell," replied Grandfather. "He likewise appointed both Pepperell and
Shirley to be colonels in the royal army. These rewards, and higher ones,
were well deserved; for this was the greatest triumph that the English met
with, in the whole course of that war. General Pepperell became a man of
great fame. I have seen a full length portrait of him, representing him in
a splendid scarlet uniform, standing before the walls of Louisbourg, while
several bombs are falling through the air."

"But, did the country gain any real good by the conquest of Louisbourg?"
asked Laurence. "Or was all the benefit reaped by Pepperell and Shirley?"

"The English Parliament," said Grandfather, "agreed to pay the colonists
for all the expenses of the siege. Accordingly, in 1749, two hundred and
fifteen chests of Spanish dollars, and one hundred casks of copper coin,
were brought from England to Boston. The whole amount was about a million
of dollars. Twenty-seven carts and trucks carried this money from the
wharf to the provincial treasury. Was not this a pretty liberal reward?"

"The mothers of the young men, who were killed at the siege of Louisbourg,
would not have thought it so," said Laurence.

"No, Laurence," rejoined Grandfather; "and every warlike achievement
involves an amount of physical and moral evil, for which all the gold in
the Spanish mines would not be the slightest recompense. But, we are to
consider that this siege was one of the occasions, on which the colonists
tested their ability for war, and thus were prepared for the great contest
of the Revolution. In that point of view, the valor of our forefathers was
its own reward."

Grandfather went on to say, that the success of the expedition against
Louisbourg, induced Shirley and Pepperell to form a scheme for conquering
Canada. This plan, however, was not carried into execution.

In the year 1746, great terror was excited by the arrival of a formidable
French fleet upon the coast. It was commanded by the Duke d’Anville, and
consisted of forty ships of war, besides vessels with soldiers on board.
With this force, the French intended to retake Louisbourg, and afterwards
to ravage the whole of New England. Many people were ready to give up the
country for lost.

But the hostile fleet met with so many disasters and losses, by storm and
shipwreck, that the Duke d’Anville is said to have poisoned himself in
despair. The officer next in command threw himself upon his sword and
perished. Thus deprived of their commanders, the remainder of the ships
returned to France. This was as great a deliverance for New England, as
that which old England had experienced in the days of Queen Elizabeth,
when the Spanish Armada was wrecked upon her coast.

"In 1747," proceeded Grandfather, "Governor Shirley was driven from the
Province House, not by a hostile fleet and army, but by a mob of the
Boston people. They were so incensed at the conduct of the British
Commodore Knowles, who had impressed some of their fellow-citizens, that
several thousands of them surrounded the council-chamber, and threw stones
and brick-bats into the windows. The governor attempted to pacify them;
but, not succeeding, he thought it necessary to leave the town, and take
refuge within the walls of Castle William. Quiet was not restored, until
Commodore Knowles had sent back the impressed men. This affair was a flash
of spirit, that might have warned the English not to venture upon any
oppressive measures against their colonial brethren."

Peace being declared between France and England in 1748, the governor had
now an opportunity to sit at his ease in Grandfather’s chair. Such repose,
however, appears not to have suited his disposition; for, in the following
year, he went to England, and thence was dispatched to France, on public
business. Meanwhile, as Shirley had not resigned his office,
Lieutenant-Governor Phips acted as chief magistrate in his stead.




Chapter IX


In the early twilight of Thanksgiving eve, came Laurence, and Clara, and
Charley, and little Alice, hand in hand, and stood in a semi-circle round
Grandfather’s chair. They had been joyous, throughout that day of
festivity, mingling together in all kinds of play, so that the house had
echoed with their airy mirth.

Grandfather, too, had been happy, though not mirthful. He felt that this
was to be set down as one of the good Thanksgivings of his life. In truth,
all his former Thanksgivings had borne their part in the present one; for,
his years of infancy, and youth, and manhood with their blessings and
their griefs, had flitted before him, while he sat silently in the great
chair. Vanished scenes had been pictured in the air. The forms of departed
friends had visited him. Voices, to be heard no more on earth, had sent an
echo from the infinite and the eternal. These shadows, if such they were,
seemed almost as real to him, as what was actually present—as the merry
shouts and laughter of the children—as their figures, dancing like
sunshine before his eyes.

He felt that the past was not taken from him. The happiness of former days
was a possession forever. And there was something in the mingled sorrow of
his lifetime, that became akin to happiness, after being long treasured in
the depths of his heart. There it underwent a change, and grew more
precious than pure gold.

And now came the children, somewhat aweary with their wild play, and
sought the quiet enjoyment of Grandfather’s talk. The good old gentleman
rubbed his eyes, and smiled round upon them all. He was glad, as most aged
people are, to find that he was yet of consequence, and could give
pleasure to the world. After being so merry, all day long, did these
children desire to hear his sober talk? Oh, then, old Grandfather had yet
a place to fill among living men,—or at least among boys and girls!

"Begin quick, Grandfather," cried little Alice; "for Pussy wants to hear
you."

And, truly, our yellow friend, the cat, lay upon the hearth rug, basking
in the warmth of the fire, pricking up her ears, and turning her head from
the children to Grandfather, and from Grandfather to the children, as if
she felt herself very sympathetic with them all. A loud purr, like the
singing of a tea-kettle, or the hum of a spinning-wheel, testified that
she was as comfortable and happy as a cat could be. For Puss had feasted,
and therefore, like Grandfather and the children, had kept a good
Thanksgiving.

"Does Pussy want to hear me?" said Grandfather, smiling. "Well; we must
please Pussy, if we can!"

And so he took up the history of the chair, from the epoch of the peace of
1748. By one of the provisions of the treaty, Louisbourg, which the New
Englanders had been at so much pains to take, was restored to the king of
France.

The French were afraid, that, unless their colonies should be better
defended than heretofore, another war might deprive them of the whole.
Almost as soon as peace was declared, therefore, they began to build
strong fortifications in the interior of North America. It was strange to
behold these warlike castles, on the banks of solitary lakes, and far in
the midst of woods. The Indian, paddling his birch-canoe on Lake
Champlain, looked up at the high ramparts of Ticonderoga, stone piled on
stone, bristling with cannon, and the white flag of France floating above.
There were similar fortifications on Lake Ontario, and near the great
Falls of Niagara, and at the sources of the Ohio River. And all around
these forts and castles lay the eternal forest; and the roll of the drum
died away in those deep solitudes.

The truth was, that the French intended to build forts, all the way from
Canada to Louisiana. They would then have had a wall of military strength,
at the back of the English settlements, so as completely to hem them in.
The king of England considered the building of these forts as a sufficient
cause of war, which was accordingly commenced in 1754.

"Governor Shirley," said Grandfather, "had returned to Boston in 1753.
While in Paris, he had married a second wife, a young French girl, and now
brought her to the Province House. But, when war was breaking out, it was
impossible for such a bustling man to stay quietly at home, sitting in our
old chair, with his wife and children round about him. He therefore
obtained a command in the English forces."

"And what did Sir William Pepperell do?" asked Charley.

"He staid at home," said Grandfather, "and was general of the militia. The
veteran regiments of the English army, which were now sent across the
Atlantic, would have scorned to fight under the orders of an old American
merchant. And now began what aged people call the Old French War. It would
be going too far astray from the history of our chair, to tell you one
half of the battles that were fought. I cannot even allow myself to
describe the bloody defeat of General Braddock, near the sources of the
Ohio River, in 1755. But, I must not omit to mention, that when the
English general was mortally wounded, and his army routed, the remains of
it were preserved by the skill and valor of GEORGE WASHINGTON."

At the mention of this illustrious name, the children started, as if a
sudden sunlight had gleamed upon the history of their country, now that
the great Deliverer had arisen above the horizon.

Among all the events of the Old French War, Grandfather thought that there
was none more interesting than the removal of the inhabitants of Acadia.
From the first settlement of this ancient province of the French, in 1604,
until the present time, its people could scarcely ever know what kingdom
held dominion over them. They were a peaceful race, taking no delight in
warfare, and caring nothing for military renown. And yet, in every war,
their region was infested with iron-hearted soldiers, both French and
English, who fought one another for the privilege of ill treating these
poor harmless Acadians. Sometimes the treaty of peace made them subjects
of one king, sometimes of another.

At the peace of 1748, Acadia had been ceded to England. But the French
still claimed a large portion of it, and built forts for its defence. In
1755, these forts were taken, and the whole of Acadia was conquered, by
three thousand men from Massachusetts, under the command of General
Winslow. The inhabitants were accused of supplying the French with
provisions, and of doing other things that violated their neutrality.

"These accusations were probably true," observed Grandfather; "for the
Acadians were descended from the French, and had the same friendly
feelings towards them, that the people of Massachusetts had for the
English. But their punishment was severe. The English determined to tear
these poor people from their native homes and scatter them abroad."

The Acadians were about seven thousand in number. A considerable part of
them were made prisoners, and transported to the English colonies. All
their dwellings and churches were burnt, their cattle were killed, and the
whole country was laid waste, so that none of them might find shelter or
food in their old homes, after the departure of the English. One thousand
of the prisoners were sent to Massachusetts; and Grandfather allowed his
fancy to follow them thither, and tried to give his auditors an idea of
their situation.

We shall call this passage the story of



THE ACADIAN EXILES


A sad day it was for the poor Acadians, when the armed soldiers drove
them, at the point of the bayonet, down to the sea-shore. Very sad were
they, likewise, while tossing upon the ocean, in the crowded transport
vessels. But, methinks, it must have been sadder still, when they were
landed on the Long Wharf, in Boston, and left to themselves, on a foreign
strand.

Then, probably, they huddled together, and looked into one another’s faces
for the comfort which was not there. Hitherto, they had been confined on
board of separate vessels, so that they could not tell whether their
relatives and friends were prisoners along with them. But, now, at least,
they could tell that many had been left behind, or transported to other
regions.

Now, a desolate wife might be heard calling for her husband. He, alas! had
gone, she knew not whither, or perhaps had fled into the woods of Acadia,
and had now returned to weep over the ashes of their dwelling. An aged
widow was crying out, in a querulous, lamentable tone, for her son, whose
affectionate toil had supported her for many a year. He was not in the
crowd of exiles; and what could this aged widow do but sink down and die?
Young men and maidens, whose hearts had been torn asunder by separation,
had hoped, during the voyage, to meet their beloved ones at its close.
Now, they began to feel that they were separated forever. And, perhaps, a
lonesome little girl, a golden-haired child of five years old, the very
picture of our little Alice, was weeping and wailing for her mother, and
found not a soul to give her a kind word.

Oh, how many broken bonds of affection were here! Country lost!—friends
lost!—their rural wealth of cottage, field, and herds, all lost together!
Every tie between these poor exiles and the world seemed to be cut off at
once. They must have regretted that they had not died before their exile;
for even the English would not have been so pitiless as to deny them
graves in their native soil. The dead were happy; for they were not
exiles!

While they thus stood upon the wharf, the curiosity and inquisitiveness of
the New England people would naturally lead them into the midst of the
poor Acadians. Prying busy-bodies thrust their heads into the circle,
wherever two or three of the exiles were conversing together. How puzzled
did they look, at the outlandish sound of the French tongue! There were
seen the New England women, too. They had just come out of their warm,
safe homes, where every thing was regular and comfortable, and where their
husbands and children would be with them at night-fall. Surely, they could
pity the wretched wives and mothers of Acadia! Or, did the sign of the
cross, which the Acadians continually made upon their breasts, and which
was abhorred by the descendants of the Puritans—did that sign exclude all
pity?

Among the spectators, too, was the noisy brood of Boston school-boys, who
came running, with laughter and shouts, to gaze at this crowd of oddly
dressed foreigners. At first they danced and capered around them, full of
merriment and mischief. But the despair of the Acadians soon had its
effect upon these thoughtless lads, and melted them into tearful sympathy.

At a little distance from the throng, might be seen the wealthy and
pompous merchants, whose warehouses stood on Long Wharf. It was difficult
to touch these rich men’s hearts; for they had all the comforts of the
world at their command; and when they walked abroad, their feelings were
seldom moved, except by the roughness of the pavement, irritating their
gouty toes. Leaning upon their gold-headed canes, they watched the scene
with an aspect of composure. But, let us hope, they distributed some of
their superfluous coin among these hapless exiles, to purchase food and a
night’s lodging.

After standing a long time at the end of the wharf, gazing seaward, as if
to catch a glimpse of their lost Acadia, the strangers began to stray into
the town.

They went, we will suppose, in parties and groups, here a hundred, there a
score, there ten, there three or four, who possessed some bond of unity
among themselves. Here and there was one, who, utterly desolate, stole
away by himself, seeking no companionship.

Whither did they go? I imagine them wandering about the streets, telling
the town’s-people, in outlandish, unintelligible words, that no earthly
affliction ever equalled what had befallen them. Man’s brotherhood with
man was sufficient to make the New Englanders understand this language.
The strangers wanted food. Some of them sought hospitality at the doors of
the stately mansions, which then stood in the vicinity of Hanover Street
and the North Square. Others were applicants at the humble wooden
tenements, where dwelt the petty shop-keepers and mechanics. Pray Heaven,
that no family in Boston turned one of these poor exiles from their door!
It would be a reproach upon New England—a crime worthy of heavy
retribution—if the aged women and children, or even the strong men, were
allowed to feel the pinch of hunger.

Perhaps some of the Acadians, in their aimless wanderings through the
town, found themselves near a large brick edifice, which was fenced in
from the street by an iron railing, wrought with fantastic figures. They
saw a flight of red freestone steps, ascending to a portal, above which
was a balcony and balustrade. Misery and desolation give men the right of
free passage everywhere. Let us suppose, then, that they mounted the
flight of steps, and passed into the Province House. Making their way into
one of the apartments, they beheld a richly clad gentleman, seated in a
stately chair, with gilding upon the carved work of its back, and a gilded
lion’s head at the summit. This was Governor Shirley, meditating upon
matters of war and state, in Grandfather’s chair!

If such an incident did happen, Shirley, reflecting what a ruin of
peaceful and humble hopes had been wrought by the cold policy of the
statesman, and the iron hand of the warrior, might have drawn a deep moral
from it. It should have taught him that the poor man’s hearth is sacred,
and that armies and nations have no right to violate it. It should have
made him feel, that England’s triumph, and increased dominion, could not
compensate to mankind, nor atone to Heaven, for the ashes of a single
Acadian cottage. But it is not thus that statesmen and warriors moralize.

"Grandfather," cried Laurence, with emotion trembling in his voice, "did
iron-hearted War itself ever do so hard and cruel a thing as this before?"

"You have rend in history, Laurence, of whole regions wantonly laid
waste," said Grandfather. "In the removal of the Acadians, the troops were
guilty of no cruelty or outrage, except what was inseparable from the
measure."

Little Alice, whose eyes had, all along, been brimming full of tears, now
burst forth a-sobbing; for Grandfather had touched her sympathies more
than he intended.

"To think of a whole people, homeless in the world!" said Clara, with
moistened eyes. "There never was any thing so sad!"

"It was their own fault," cried Charley, energetically. "Why did not they
fight for the country where they were born? Then, if the worst had
happened to them they could only have been killed and buried there. They
would not have been exiles then!"

"Certainly, their lot was as hard as death," said Grandfather. "All that
could be done for them, in the English provinces, was to send them to the
alms-houses, or bind them out to task-masters. And this was the fate of
persons, who had possessed a comfortable property in their native country.
Some of them found means to embark for France; but though it was the land
of their forefathers, it must have been a foreign land to them. Those, who
remained behind, always cherished a belief, that the king of France would
never make peace with England, till his poor Acadians were restored their
country and their homes."

"And did he?" inquired Clara.

"Alas, my dear Clara," said Grandfather, "it is improbable that the
slightest whisper of the woes of Acadia ever reached the ears of Louis the
Fifteenth. The exiles grew old in the British provinces, and never saw
Acadia again. Their descendants remain among us, to this day. They have
forgotten the language of their ancestors, and probably retain no
tradition of their misfortunes. But, methinks, if I were an American poet,
I would choose Acadia for the subject of my song."

Since Grandfather first spoke these words, the most famous of American
poets has drawn sweet tears from all of us, by his beautiful poem of
Evangeline.

And now, having thrown a gentle gloom around the Thanksgiving fire-side,
by a story that made the children feel the blessing of a secure and
peaceful hearth, Grandfather put off the other events of the Old French
War till the next evening.




Chapter X


In the twilight of the succeeding eve, when the red beams of the fire were
dancing upon the wall, the children besought Grandfather to tell them what
had next happened to the old chair.

"Our chair," said Grandfather, "stood all this time in the Province House.
But, Governor Shirley had seldom an opportunity to repose within its arms.
He was loading his troops through the forest, or sailing in a flat-boat on
Lake Ontario, or sleeping in his tent, while the awful cataract of Niagara
sent its roar through his dreams. At one period, in the early part of the
war, Shirley had the chief command of all the king’s forces in America."

"Did his young wife go with him to the war?" asked Clara.

"I rather imagine," replied Grandfather, "that she remained in Boston.
This lady, I suppose, had our chair all to herself, and used to sit in it,
during those brief intervals when a young French woman can be quiet enough
to sit in a chair. The people of Massachusetts were never fond of Governor
Shirley’s young French wife. They had a suspicion that she betrayed the
military plans of the English to the generals of the French armies."

"And was it true?" inquired Clara.

"Probably not," said Grandfather. "But the mere suspicion did Shirley a
great deal of harm. Partly, perhaps, for this reason, but much more on
account of his inefficiency as a general, he was deprived of his command,
in 1756, and recalled to England. He never afterwards made any figure in
public life."

As Grandfather’s chair had no locomotive properties, and did not even run
on castors, it cannot be supposed to have marched in person to the Old
French War. But Grandfather delayed its momentous history, while he
touched briefly upon some of the bloody battles, sieges, and onslaughts,
the tidings of which kept continually coming to the ears of the old
inhabitants of Boston. The woods of the north were populous with fighting
men. All the Indian tribes uplifted their tomahawks, and took part either
with the French or English. The rattle of musketry and roar of cannon
disturbed the ancient quiet of the forest, and actually drove the bears
and other wild beasts to the more cultivated portion of the country in the
vicinity of the sea-ports. The children felt as if they were transported
back to those forgotten times, and that the couriers from the army, with
the news of a battle lost or won, might even now be heard galloping
through the streets. Grandfather told them about the battle of Lake
George, in 1755, when the gallant Colonel Williams, a Massachusetts
officer, was slain, with many of his countrymen. But General Johnson and
General Lyman, with their army, drove back the enemy, and mortally wounded
the French leader, who was called the Baron Dieskau. A gold watch,
pilfered from the poor Baron, is still in existence, and still marks each
moment of time, without complaining of weariness, although its hands have
been in motion ever since the hour of battle.

In the first years of the war, there were many disasters on the English
side. Among these was the loss of Fort Oswego, in 1756, and of Fort
William Henry, in the following year. But the greatest misfortune that
befell the English, during the whole war, was the repulse of General
Abercrombie, with his army, from the ramparts of Ticonderoga, in 1758. He
attempted to storm the walls; but a terrible conflict ensued, in which
more than two thousand Englishmen and New Englanders were killed or
wounded. The slain soldiers now lie buried around that ancient fortress.
When the plough passes over the soil, it turns up here and there a
mouldering bone.

Up to this period, none of the English generals had shown any military
talent. Shirley, the Earl of Loudon, and General Abercrombie, had each
held the chief command, at different times; but not one of them had won a
single important triumph for the British arms. This ill success was not
owing to the want of means; for, in 1758, General Abercrombie had fifty
thousand soldiers under his command. But the French general, the famous
Marquis de Montcalm, possessed a great genius for war, and had something
within him, that taught him how battles were to be won.

At length, in 1759, Sir Jeffrey Amherst was appointed commander-in-chief
of all the British forces in America. He was a man of ability, and a
skilful soldier. A plan was now formed for accomplishing that object,
which had so long been the darling wish of the New Englanders, and which
their fathers had so many times attempted. This was the conquest of
Canada.

Three separate armies were to enter Canada, from different quarters. One
of the three, commanded by General Prideaux, was to embark on Lake
Ontario, and proceed to Montreal. The second, at the head of which was Sir
Jeffrey Amherst himself, was destined to reach the River St. Lawrence, by
the way of Lake Champlain, and then go down the river to meet the third
army. This last, led by General Wolfe, was to enter the St. Lawrence from
the sea, and ascend the river to Quebec. It is to Wolfe and his army that
England owes one of the most splendid triumphs, ever written in her
history.

Grandfather described the siege of Quebec, and told how Wolfe led his
soldiers up a rugged and lofty precipice, that rose from the shore of the
river to the plain on which the city stood. This bold adventure was
achieved in the darkness of night. At day-break, tidings were carried to
the Marquis de Montcalm, that the English army was waiting to give him
battle on the plains of Abraham. This brave French general ordered his
drums to strike up, and immediately marched to encounter Wolfe.

He marched to his own death. The battle was the most fierce and terrible,
that had ever been fought in America. General Wolfe was at the head of his
soldiers, and while encouraging them onward, received a mortal wound. He
reclined against a stone, in the agonies of death; but it seemed as if his
spirit could not pass away, while the fight yet raged so doubtfully.
Suddenly, a shout came pealing across the battle-field—"They flee! they
flee!" and, for a moment, Wolfe lifted his languid head. "Who flee?" he
inquired. "The French," replied an officer. "Then I die satisfied!" said
Wolfe, and expired in the arms of victory.

"If ever a warrior’s death were glorious, Wolfe’s was so!" said
Grandfather; and his eye kindled, though he was a man of peaceful
thoughts, and gentle spirit. "His life-blood streamed to baptize the soil
which he had added to the dominion of Britain! His dying breath was
mingled with his army’s shout of victory!"

"Oh, it was a good death to die!" cried Charley, with glistening eyes.
"Was it not a good death, Laurence?"

Laurence made no reply; for his heart burned within him, as the picture of
Wolfe, dying on the blood-stained field of victory, arose to his
imagination; and yet, he had a deep inward consciousness, that, after all,
there was a truer glory than could thus be won.

"There were other battles in Canada, after Wolfe’s victory," resumed
Grandfather; "but we may consider the Old French War as having terminated
with this great event. The treaty of peace, however, was not signed until
1763. The terms of the treaty were very disadvantageous to the French; for
all Canada, and all Acadia, and the island of Cape Breton, in short, all
the territories that France and England had been fighting about, for
nearly a hundred years—were surrendered to the English."

"So, now, at last," said Laurence, "New England had gained her wish.
Canada was taken!"

"And now there was nobody to fight with, but the Indians," said Charley.

Grandfather mentioned two other important events. The first was the great
fire of Boston, in 1700, when the glare from nearly three hundred
buildings, all in flames at once, shone through the windows of the
Province House, and threw a fierce lustre upon the gilded foliage and
lion’s head of our old chair. The second event was the proclamation, in
the same year, of George the Third as king of Great Britain. The blast of
the trumpet sounded from the balcony of the Town House, and awoke the
echoes far and wide, as if to challenge all mankind to dispute King
George’s title.

Seven times, as the successive monarchs of Britain ascended the throne,
the trumpet-peal of proclamation had been heard by those who sat in our
venerable chair. But, when the next king put on his father’s crown, no
trumpet-peal proclaimed it to New England! Long before that day, America
had shaken off the royal government.




Chapter XI


Now that Grandfather had fought through the Old French War, in which our
chair made no very distinguished figure, he thought it high time to tell
the children some of the more private history of that praiseworthy old
piece of furniture.

"In 1757," said Grandfather, "after Shirley had been summoned to England,
Thomas Pownall was appointed governor of Massachusetts. He was a gay and
fashionable English gentleman, who had spent much of his life in London,
but had a considerable acquaintance with America. The new governor appears
to have taken no active part in the war that was going on; although, at
one period, he talked of marching against the enemy, at the head of his
company of cadets. But, on the whole, he probably concluded that it was
more befitting a governor to remain quietly in our chair, reading the
newspapers and official documents."

"Did the people like Pownall?" asked Charley.

"They found no fault with him," replied Grandfather. "It was no time to
quarrel with the governor, when the utmost harmony was required, in order
to defend the country against the French. But Pownall did not remain long
in Massachusetts. In 1759, he was sent to be governor of South Carolina.
In thus exchanging one government for another, I suppose he felt no
regret, except at the necessity of leaving Grandfather’s chair behind
him."

"He might have taken it to South Carolina," observed Clara.

"It appears to me," said Laurence, giving the rein to his fancy, "that the
fate of this ancient chair was, somehow or other, mysteriously connected
with the fortunes of old Massachusetts. If Governor Pownall had put it
aboard the vessel in which he sailed for South Carolina, she would
probably have lain wind-bound in Boston harbor. It was ordained that the
chair should not be taken away. Don’t you think so, Grandfather?"

"It was kept here for Grandfather and me to sit in together," said little
Alice, "and for Grandfather to tell stories about."

"And Grandfather is very glad of such a companion, and such a theme," said
the old gentleman, with a smile. "Well, Laurence, if our oaken chair, like
the wooden Palladium of Troy, was connected with the country’s fate, yet
there appears to have been no supernatural obstacle to its removal from
the Province House. In 1760, Sir Francis Bernard, who had been governor of
New Jersey, was appointed to the same office in Massachusetts. He looked
at the old chair, and thought it quite too shabby to keep company with a
new set of mahogany chairs, and an aristocratic sofa, which had just
arrived from London. He therefore ordered it to be put away in the
garret."

The children were loud in their exclamations against this irreverent
conduct of Sir Francis Bernard. But Grandfather defended him, as well as
he could. He observed, that it was then thirty years since the chair had
been beautified by Governor Belcher. Most of the gilding was worn off by
the frequent scourings which it had undergone, beneath the hands of a
black slave. The damask cushion, once so splendid, was now squeezed out of
all shape, and absolutely in tatters, so many were the ponderous gentlemen
who had deposited their weight upon it, during these thirty years.

Moreover, at a council held by the Earl of Loudon with the governors of
New England, in 1757, his lordship, in a moment of passion, had kicked
over the chair with his military boot. By this unprovoked and
unjustifiable act, our venerable friend had suffered a fracture of one of
its rungs.

"But," said Grandfather, "our chair, after all, was not destined to spend
the remainder of its days in the inglorious obscurity of a garret. Thomas
Hutchinson, lieutenant-governor of the province, was told of Sir Francis
Bernard’s design. This gentleman was more familiar with the history of New
England than any other man alive. He knew all the adventures and
vicissitudes through which the old chair had passed, and could have told,
as accurately as your own Grandfather, who were the personages that had
occupied it. Often, while visiting at the Province House, he had eyed the
chair with admiration, and felt a longing desire to become the possessor
of it. He now waited upon Sir Francis Bernard, and easily obtained leave
to carry it home."

"And I hope," said Clara, "he had it varnished and gilded anew."

"No," answered Grandfather. "What Mr. Hutchinson desired was to restore
the chair, as much as possible, to its original aspect, such as it had
appeared, when it was first made out of the Earl of Lincoln’s oak-tree.
For this purpose he ordered it to be well scoured with soap and sand and
polished with wax, and then provided it with a substantial leather
cushion. When all was completed to his mind, he sat down in the old chair,
and began to write his History of Massachusetts."

"Oh, that was a bright thought in Mr. Hutchinson!" exclaimed Laurence.
"And, no doubt, the dim figures of the former possessors of the chair
flitted around him, as he wrote, and inspired him with a knowledge of all
that they had done and suffered while on earth."

"Why, my dear Laurence," replied Grandfather, smiling, "if Mr. Hutchinson
was favored with any such extraordinary inspiration, he made but a poor
use of it in his History; for a duller piece of composition never came
from any man’s pen. However, he was accurate, at least, though far from
possessing the brilliancy or philosophy of Mr. Bancroft."

"But, if Hutchinson knew the history of the chair," rejoined Laurence,
"his heart must have been stirred by it."

"It must, indeed," said Grandfather. "It would be entertaining and
instructive, at the present day, to imagine what were Mr. Hutchinson’s
thoughts, as he looked back upon the long vista of events with which this
chair was so remarkably connected."

And Grandfather allowed his fancy to shape out an image of
Lieutenant-Governor Hutchinson, sitting in an evening reverie by his
fireside, and meditating on the changes that had slowly passed around the
chair.

A devoted monarchist, Hutchinson would heave no sigh for the subversion of
the original republican government, the purest that the world had seen,
with which the colony began its existence. While reverencing the grim and
stern old Puritans as the founders of his native land, he would not wish
to recall them from their graves, nor to awaken again that king-resisting
spirit, which he imagined to be laid asleep with them forever. Winthrop,
Dudley, Bellingham, Endicott, Leverett, and Bradstreet! All these had had
their day. Ages might come and go, but never again would the people’s
suffrages place a republican governor in their ancient Chair of State!

Coming down to the epoch of the second charter, Hutchinson thought of the
ship-carpenter Phips, springing from the lowest of the people, and
attaining to the loftiest station in the land. But, he smiled to perceive
that this governor’s example would awaken no turbulent ambition in the
lower orders, for it was a king’s gracious boon alone that made the
ship-carpenter a ruler. Hutchinson rejoiced to mark the gradual growth of
an aristocratic class, to whom the common people, as in duty bound, were
learning humbly to resign the honors, emoluments, and authority of state.
He saw,—or else deceived himself—that, throughout this epoch, the people’s
disposition to self-government had been growing weaker, through long
disuse, and now existed only as a faint traditionary feeling.

The Lieutenant-Governor’s reverie had now come down to the period at which
he himself was sitting in the historic chair. He endeavored to throw his
glance forward, over the coming years. There, probably, he saw visions of
hereditary rank, for himself and other aristocratic colonists. He saw the
fertile fields of New England, portioned out among a few great
landholders, and descending by entail from generation to generation. He
saw the people a race of tenantry, dependent on their lords. He saw stars,
garters, coronets, and castles.

"But," added Grandfather, turning to Laurence, "the Lieutenant-Governor’s
castles were built nowhere but among the red embers of the fire, before
which he was sitting. And, just as he had constructed a baronial residence
for himself and his posterity, the fire rolled down upon the hearth, and
crumbled it to ashes!"

Grandfather now looked at his watch, which hung within a beautiful little
ebony Temple, supported by four Ionic columns. He then laid his hand on
the golden locks of little Alice, whose head had sunk down upon the arm of
our illustrious chair.

"To bed, to bed, dear child!" said he. "Grandfather has put you to sleep,
already, by his stories about these FAMOUS OLD PEOPLE!"





PART III




Chapter I


On the evening of New Year’s day, Grandfather was walking to and fro,
across the carpet, listening to the rain which beat hard against the
curtained windows. The riotous blast shook the casement, as if a strong
man were striving to force his entrance into the comfortable room. With
every puff of the wind, the fire leaped upward from the hearth, laughing
and rejoicing at the shrieks of the wintry storm.

Meanwhile, Grandfather’s chair stood in its customary place by the
fireside. The bright blaze gleamed upon the fantastic figures of its oaken
back, and shone through the open-work, so that a complete pattern was
thrown upon the opposite side of the room. Sometimes, for a moment or two,
the shadow remained immovable, as if it were painted on the wall. Then,
all at once, it began to quiver, and leap, and dance, with a frisky
motion. Anon, seeming to remember that these antics were unworthy of such
a dignified and venerable chair, it suddenly stood still. But soon it
began to dance anew.

"Only see how grandfather’s chair is dancing!" cried little Alice.

And she ran to the wall, and tried to catch hold of the flickering shadow;
for to children of five years old, a shadow seems almost as real as a
substance.

"I wish," said Clara, "Grandfather would sit down in the chair, and finish
its history."

If the children had been looking at Grandfather, they would have noticed
that he paused in his walk across the room, when Clara made this remark.
The kind old gentleman was ready and willing to resume his stories of
departed times. But he had resolved to wait till his auditors should
request him to proceed, in order that they might find the instructive
history of the chair a pleasure, and not a task.

"Grandfather," said Charley, "I am tired to death of this dismal rain, and
of hearing the wind roar in the chimney. I have had no good time all day.
It would be better to hear stories about the chair, than to sit doing
nothing, and thinking of nothing."

To say the truth, our friend Charley was very much out of humor with the
storm, because it had kept him all day within doors, and hindered him from
making trial of a splendid sled, which Grandfather had given him for a New
Year’s gift. As all sleds, now-a-days, must have a name, the one in
question had been honored with the title of Grandfather’s Chair, which was
painted in golden letters, on each of the sides. Charley greatly admired
the construction of the new vehicle, and felt certain that it would
outstrip any other sled that ever dashed adown the long slopes of the
Common.

As for Laurence, he happened to be thinking, just at this moment, about
the history of the chair. Kind old Grandfather had made him a present of a
volume of engraved portraits, representing the features of eminent and
famous people of all countries. Among them Laurence found several who had
formerly occupied our chair, or been connected with its adventures. While
Grandfather walked to and fro across the room, the imaginative boy was
gazing at the historic chair. He endeavored to summon up the portraits
which he had seen in his volume, and to place them, like living figures,
in the empty seat.

"The old chair has begun another year of its existence, to-day," said
Laurence. "We must make haste, or it will have a new history to be told
before we finish the old one."

"Yes, my children," replied Grandfather, with a smile and a sigh, "another
year has been added to those of the two centuries, and upward, which have
passed since the Lady Arbella brought this chair over from England. It is
three times as old as your Grandfather; but a year makes no impression on
its oaken frame, while it bends the old man nearer and nearer to the
earth; so let me go on with my stories while I may."

Accordingly, Grandfather came to the fireside, and seated himself in the
venerable chair. The lion’s head looked down with a grimly good-natured
aspect, as the children clustered around the old gentleman’s knees. It
almost seemed as if a real lion were peeping over the back of the chair,
and smiling at the group of auditors, with a sort of lion-like
complaisance. Little Alice, whose fancy often inspired her with singular
ideas, exclaimed that the lion’s head was nodding at her, and that it
looked as if it were going to open its wide jaws and tell a story.

But, as the lion’s head appeared to be in no haste to speak, and as there
was no record or tradition of its having spoken, during the whole
existence of the chair, Grandfather did not consider it worth while to
wait.




Chapter II


"Charley, my boy," said Grandfather, "do you remember who was the last
occupant of the chair?"

"It was Lieutenant-Governor Hutchinson," answered Charley. "Sir Francis
Bernard, the new governor, had given him the chair, instead of putting it
away in the garret of the Province House. And when we took leave of
Hutchinson, he was sitting by his fireside, and thinking of the past
adventures of the chair, and of what was to come."

"Very well," said Grandfather; "and you recollect that this was in 1763,
or thereabouts, at the close of the Old French War. Now, that you may
fully comprehend the remaining adventures of the chair, I must make some
brief remarks on the situation and character of the New England colonies
at this period."

So Grandfather spoke of the earnest loyalty of our fathers during the Old
French War, and after the conquest of Canada had brought that war to a
triumphant close.

The people loved and reverenced the king of England, even more than if the
ocean had not rolled its waves between him and them; for, at the distance
of three thousand miles, they could not discover his bad qualities and
imperfections. Their love was increased by the dangers which they had
encountered in order to heighten his glory and extend his dominion.
Throughout the war, the American colonists had fought side by side with
the soldiers of Old England; and nearly thirty thousand young men had laid
down their lives for the honor of King George. And the survivors loved him
the better, because they had done and suffered so much for his sake.

But, there were some circumstances, that caused America to feel more
independent of England than at an earlier period. Canada and Acadia had
now become British provinces; and our fathers were no longer afraid of the
bands of French and Indians, who used to assault them in old times. For a
century and a half this had been the great terror of New England. Now, the
old French soldier was driven from the north forever. And, even had it
been otherwise the English colonies were growing so populous and powerful,
that they might have felt fully able to protect themselves without any
help from England.

There were thoughtful and sagacious men, who began to doubt, whether a
great country like America, would always be content to remain under the
government of an island three thousand miles away. This was the more
doubtful, because the English Parliament had long ago made laws which were
intended to be very beneficial to England, at the expense of America. By
these laws, the colonists were forbidden to manufacture articles for their
own use, or to carry on trade with any nation but the English.

"Now," continued Grandfather, "if King George the Third and his
counsellors had considered these things wisely, they would have taken
another course than they did. But, when they saw how rich and populous the
colonies had grown, their first thought was, how they might make more
profit out of them than heretofore. England was enormously in debt, at the
close of the Old French War, and it was pretended, that this debt had been
contracted for the defence of the American colonies, and that therefore a
part of it ought to be paid by them."

"Why, this was nonsense," exclaimed Charley; "did not our fathers spend
their lives and their money too, to get Canada for King George?"

"True, they did," said Grandfather; "and they told the English rulers so.
But the king and his ministers would not listen to good advice. In 1765,
the British Parliament passed a Stamp Act."

"What was that?" inquired Charley.

"The Stamp Act," replied Grandfather, "was a law by which all deeds,
bonds, and other papers of the same kind, were ordered to be marked with
the king’s stamp; and without this mark, they were declared illegal and
void. Now, in order to get a blank sheet of paper, with the king’s stamp
upon it, people were obliged to pay three pence more than the actual value
of the paper. And this extra sum of three pence was a tax, and was to be
paid into the king’s treasury."

"I am sure three pence was not worth quarrelling about!" remarked Clara.

"It was not for three pence, nor for any amount of money, that America
quarrelled with England," replied Grandfather; "it was for a great
principle. The colonists were determined not to be taxed, except by their
own representatives. They said that neither the king and Parliament nor
any other power on earth, had a right to take their money out of their
pockets, unless they freely gave it. And, rather than pay three pence when
it was unjustly demanded, they resolved to sacrifice all the wealth of the
country, and their lives along with it. They therefore made a most
stubborn resistance to the Stamp Act."

"That was noble!" exclaimed Laurence. "I understand how it was. If they
had quietly paid this tax of three pence, they would have ceased to be
freemen, and would have become tributaries of England. And so they
contended about a great question of right and wrong, and put every thing
at stake for it."

"You are right, Laurence," said Grandfather; "and it was really amazing
and terrible to see what a change came over the aspect of the people, the
moment the English Parliament had passed this oppressive act. The former
history of our chair, my children, has given you some idea of what a
harsh, unyielding, stern set of men the old Puritans were. For a good many
years back, however, it had seemed as if these characteristics were
disappearing. But no sooner did England offer wrong to the colonies, than
the descendants of the early settlers proved that they had the same kind
of temper as their forefathers. The moment before, New England appeared
like an humble and loyal subject of the crown; the next instant, she
showed the grim, dark features of an old king-resisting Puritan."

Grandfather spoke briefly of the public measures that were taken in
opposition to the Stamp Act. As this law affected all the American
colonies alike, it naturally led them to think of consulting together in
order to procure its repeal. For this purpose, the legislature of
Massachusetts proposed that delegates from every colony should meet in
Congress. Accordingly nine colonies, both northern and southern, sent
delegates to the city of New York.

"And did they consult about going to war with England?" asked Charley.

"No, Charley," answered Grandfather; "a great deal of talking was yet to
be done, before England and America could come to blows. The Congress
stated the rights and the grievances of the colonists. They sent an humble
petition to the king, and a memorial to the Parliament, beseeching that
the Stamp Act might be repealed. This was all that the delegates had it in
their power to do."

"They might as well have staid at home, then," said Charley.

"By no means," replied Grandfather. "It was a most important and memorable
event—this first coming together of the American people, by their
representatives from the north and south. If England had been wise, she
would have trembled at the first word that was spoken in such an
assembly!"

These remonstrances and petitions, as Grandfather observed, were the work
of grave, thoughtful, and prudent men. Meantime, the young and hot-headed
people went to work in their own way. It is probable that the petitions of
Congress would have had little or no effect on the British statesmen, if
the violent deeds of the American people had not shown how much excited
the people were. LIBERTY TREE was soon heard of in England.

"What was Liberty Tree?" inquired Clara.

"It was an old elm tree," answered Grandfather, "which stood near the
corner of Essex street, opposite the Boylston market. Under the spreading
branches of this great tree, the people used to assemble, whenever they
wished to express their feelings and opinions. Thus, after a while, it
seemed as if the liberty of the country was connected with Liberty Tree."

"It was glorious fruit for a tree to bear," remarked Laurence.

                                [Image #3]

"It bore strange fruit, sometimes," said Grandfather. "One morning in
August, 1765, two figures were found hanging on the sturdy branches of
Liberty Tree. They were dressed in square-skirted coats and small-clothes;
and, as their wigs hung down over their faces, they looked like real men.
One was intended to represent the Earl of Bute, who was supposed to have
advised the king to tax America. The other was meant for the effigy of
Andrew Oliver, a gentleman belonging to one of the most respectable
families in Massachusetts."

"What harm had he done?" inquired Charley.

"The king had appointed him to be distributor of the stamps," answered
Grandfather. "Mr. Oliver would have made a great deal of money by this
business. But the people frightened him so much by hanging him in effigy,
and afterwards by breaking into his house, that he promised to have
nothing to do with the stamps. And all the king’s friends throughout
America were compelled to make the same promise."




Chapter III


"Lieutenant-Governor Hutchinson," continued Grandfather, "now began to be
unquiet in our old chair. He had formerly been much respected and beloved
by the people, and had often proved himself a friend to their interests.
But the time was come, when he could not be a friend to the people,
without ceasing to be a friend to the king. It was pretty generally
understood, that Hutchinson would act according to the king’s wishes,
right or wrong, like most of the other gentlemen who held offices under
the crown. Besides, as he was brother-in-law of Andrew Oliver, the people
now felt a particular dislike to him."

"I should think," said Laurence, "as Mr. Hutchinson had written the
history of our Puritan forefathers, he would have known what the temper of
the people was, and so have taken care not to wrong them."

"He trusted in the might of the king of England," replied Grandfather,
"and thought himself safe under the shelter of the throne. If no dispute
had arisen between the king and the people, Hutchinson would have had the
character of a wise, good, and patriotic magistrate. But, from the time
that he took part against the rights of his country, the people’s love and
respect were turned to scorn and hatred; and he never had another hour of
peace."

In order to show what a fierce and dangerous spirit was now aroused among
the inhabitants, Grandfather related a passage from history, which we
shall call



THE HUTCHINSON MOB


On the evening of the twenty-sixth of August, 1765, a bonfire was kindled
in King Street. It flamed high upward, and threw a ruddy light over the
front of the town house, on which was displayed a carved representation of
the royal arms. The gilded vane of the cupola glittered in the blaze. The
kindling of this bonfire was the well known signal for the populace of
Boston to assemble in the street.

Before the tar-barrels, of which the bonfire was made, were half burnt
out, a great crowd had come together. They were chiefly laborers and
seafaring men, together with many young apprentices, and all those idle
people about town who are ready for any kind of mischief. Doubtless some
school-boys were among them.

While these rough figures stood round the blazing bonfire, you might hear
them speaking bitter words against the high officers of the province.
Governor Bernard, Hutchinson, Oliver, Storey, Hallowell, and other men
whom King George delighted to honor, were reviled as traitors to the
country. Now and then, perhaps, an officer of the crown passed along the
street, wearing the gold-laced hat, white wig, and embroidered waistcoat,
which were the fashion of the day. But, when the people beheld him, they
set up a wild and angry howl, and their faces had an evil aspect, which
was made more terrible by the flickering blaze of the bonfire.

"I should like to throw the traitor right into that blaze!" perhaps one
fierce rioter would say.

"Yes; and all his brethren too!" another might reply; "and the governor
and old Tommy Hutchinson into the hottest of it!"

"And the Earl of Bute along with them," muttered a third; "and burn the
whole pack of them under King George’s nose! No matter if it singed him!"

Some such expressions as these, either shouted aloud, or muttered under
the breath, were doubtless heard in King Street. The mob, meanwhile, were
growing fiercer, and fiercer, and seemed ready even to set the town on
fire, for the sake of burning the king’s friends out of house and home.
And yet, angry as they were, they sometimes broke into a loud roar of
laughter, as if mischief and destruction were their sport.

But we must now leave the rioters for a time, and take a peep into the
lieutenant-governor’s splendid mansion. It was a large brick house,
decorated with Ionic pilasters, and stood in Garden Court Street, near the
North Square.

While the angry mob in King Street were shouting his name,
Lieutenant-Governor Hutchinson sat quietly in Grandfather’s chair,
unsuspicious of the evil that was about to fall upon his head. His beloved
family were in the room with him. He had thrown off his embroidered coat
and powdered wig, and had on a loose flowing gown and purple velvet cap.
He had likewise laid aside the cares of state, and all the thoughts that
had wearied and perplexed him throughout the day.

Perhaps, in the enjoyment of his home, he had forgotten all about the
Stamp Act, and scarcely remembered that there was a king, across the
ocean, who had resolved to make tributaries of the New Englanders.
Possibly, too, he had forgotten his own ambition, and would not have
exchanged his situation, at that moment, to be governor, or even a lord.

The wax candles were now lighted, and showed a handsome room, well
provided with rich furniture. On the walls hung the pictures of
Hutchinson’s ancestors, who had been eminent men in their day, and were
honorably remembered in the history of the country. Every object served to
mark the residence of a rich, aristocratic gentleman, who held himself
high above the common people, and could have nothing to fear from them. In
a corner of the room, thrown carelessly upon a chair, were the scarlet
robes of the chief justice. This high office, as well as those of
lieutenant-governor, counsellor, and judge of probate, was filled by
Hutchinson.

Who or what could disturb the domestic quiet of such a great and powerful
personage as now sat in Grandfather’s chair.

The lieutenant-governor’s favorite daughter sat by his side. She leaned on
the arm of our great chair, and looked up affectionately into her father’s
face, rejoicing to perceive that a quiet smile was on his lips. But
suddenly a shade came across her countenance. She seemed to listen
attentively, as if to catch a distant sound.

"What is the matter, my child?" inquired Hutchinson.

"Father, do not you hear a tumult in the streets?" said she.

The lieutenant-governor listened. But his ears were duller than those of
his daughter; he could hear nothing more terrible than the sound of a
summer breeze, sighing among the tops of the elm trees.

"No, foolish child!" he replied, playfully patting her cheek. "There is no
tumult. Our Boston mobs are satisfied with what mischief they have already
done. The king’s friends need not tremble."

So Hutchinson resumed his pleasant and peaceful meditations, and again
forgot that there were any troubles in the world. But his family were
alarmed, and could not help straining their ears to catch the slightest
sound. More and more distinctly they heard shouts, and then the trampling
of many feet. While they were listening, one of the neighbors rushed
breathless into the room.

"A mob!—a terrible mob!" cried he: "they have broken into Mr. Storey’s
house, and into Mr. Hallowell’s, and have made themselves drunk with the
liquors in his cellar, and now they are coming hither, as wild as so many
tigers. Flee, lieutenant-governor, for your life! for your life!"

"Father, dear father, make haste!" shrieked his children.

But Hutchinson would not hearken to them. He was an old lawyer; and he
could not realize that the people would do any thing so utterly lawless as
to assault him in his peaceful home. He was one of King George’s chief
officers; and it would be an insult and outrage upon the king himself, if
the lieutenant-governor should suffer any wrong.

"Have no fears on my account," said he; "I am perfectly safe. The king’s
name shall be my protection."

Yet he bade his family retire into one of the neighboring houses. His
daughter would have remained, but he forced her away.

The huzzas and riotous uproar of the mob were now heard, close at hand.
The sound was terrible, and struck Hutchinson with the same sort of dread
as if an enraged wild beast had broken loose, and were roaring for its
prey. He crept softly to the window. There he beheld an immense concourse
of people, filling all the street, and rolling onward to his house. It was
like a tempestuous flood, that had swelled beyond its bounds, and would
sweep every thing before it. Hutchinson trembled; he felt, at that moment,
that the wrath of the people was a thousand-fold more terrible than the
wrath of a king.

That was a moment when a loyalist and an aristocrat, like Hutchinson,
might have learned how powerless are kings, nobles, and great men, when
the low and humble range themselves against them. King George could do
nothing for his servant now. Had King George been there, he could have
done nothing for himself. If Hutchinson had understood this lesson, and
remembered it, he need not, in after years, have been an exile from his
native country, nor finally have laid his bones in a distant land.

There was now a rush against the doors of the house. The people sent up a
hoarse cry. At this instant, the lieutenant-governor’s daughter, whom he
had supposed to be in a place of safety, ran into the room, and threw her
arms around him. She had returned by a private entrance.

"Father, are you mad!" cried she. "Will the king’s name protect you now?
Come with me, or they will have your life."

"True," muttered Hutchinson to himself; "what care these roarers for the
name of king? I must flee, or they will trample me down, on the door of my
own dwelling!"

Hurrying away, he and his daughter made their escape by the private
passage, at the moment when the rioters broke into the house. The foremost
of them rushed up the stair-case, and entered the room which Hutchinson
had just quitted. There they beheld our good old chair, facing them with
quiet dignity, while the lion’s head seemed to move its jaws in the
unsteady light of their torches. Perhaps the stately aspect of our
venerable friend, which had stood firm through a century and a half of
trouble, arrested them for an instant. But they were thrust forward by
those behind, and the chair lay overthrown.

Then began the work of destruction. The carved and polished mahogany
tables were shattered with heavy clubs, and hewn to splinters with axes.
The marble hearths and mantel pieces were broken. The volumes of
Hutchinson’s library, so precious to a studious man, were torn out of
their covers, and the leaves sent flying out of the windows. Manuscripts,
containing secrets of our country’s history, which are now lost forever,
were scattered to the winds.

The old ancestral portraits, whose fixed countenances looked down on the
wild scene, were rent from the walls. The mob triumphed in their downfall
and destruction, as if these pictures of Hutchinson’s forefathers had
committed the same offences as their descendant. A tall looking-glass,
which had hitherto presented a reflection of the enraged and drunken
multitude, was now smashed into a thousand fragments. We gladly dismiss
the scene from the mirror of our fancy.

Before morning dawned, the walls of the house were all that remained. The
interior was a dismal scene of ruin. A shower pattered in at the broken
windows, and when Hutchinson and his family returned, they stood shivering
in the same room, where the last evening had seen them so peaceful and
happy.



"Grandfather," said Laurence indignantly, "if the people acted in this
manner, they were not worthy of even so much liberty as the king of
England was willing to allow them."

"It was a most unjustifiable act, like many other popular movements at
that time," replied Grandfather. "But we must not decide against the
justice of the people’s cause, merely because an excited mob was guilty of
outrageous violence. Besides, all these things were done in the first fury
of resentment. Afterwards, the people grew more calm, and were more
influenced by the counsel of those wise and good men who conducted them
safely and gloriously through the Revolution."

Little Alice, with tears in her blue eyes, said that she hoped the
neighbors had not let Lieutenant-Governor Hutchinson and his family be
homeless in the street, but had taken them into their houses, and been
kind to them. Cousin Clara, recollecting the perilous situation of our
beloved chair, inquired what had become of it.

"Nothing was heard of our chair for sometime afterwards," answered
Grandfather. "One day in September, the same Andrew Oliver, of whom I
before told you, was summoned to appear at high noon, under Liberty Tree.
This was the strangest summons that had ever been heard of; for it was
issued in the name of the whole people, who thus took upon themselves the
authority of a sovereign power. Mr. Oliver dared not disobey. Accordingly,
at the appointed hour, he went, much against his will, to Liberty Tree."

Here Charley interposed a remark that poor Mr. Oliver found but little
liberty under Liberty Tree. Grandfather assented.

"It was a stormy day," continued he. "The equinoctial gale blew violently,
and scattered the yellow leaves of Liberty Tree all along the street. Mr.
Oliver’s wig was dripping with water-drops, and he probably looked
haggard, disconsolate, and humbled to the earth. Beneath the tree, in
Grandfather’s chair,—our own venerable chair,—sat Mr. Richard Dana, a
justice of the peace. He administered an oath to Mr. Oliver, that he would
never have any thing to do with distributing the stamps. A vast concourse
of people heard the oath, and shouted when it was taken."

"There is something grand in this," said Laurence. "I like it, because the
people seem to have acted with thoughtfulness and dignity; and this proud
gentleman, one of his Majesty’s high officers, was made to feel that King
George could not protect him in doing wrong."

"But it was a sad day for poor Mr. Oliver," observed Grandfather. "From
his youth upward, it had probably been the great principle of his life, to
be faithful and obedient to the king. And now, in his old age, it must
have puzzled and distracted him, to find the sovereign people setting up a
claim to his faith and obedience."

Grandfather closed the evening’s conversation by saying that the
discontent of America was so great, that, in 1766, the British Parliament
was compelled to repeal the Stamp Act. The people made great rejoicings,
but took care to keep Liberty Tree well pruned, and free from caterpillars
and canker worms. They foresaw, that there might yet be occasion for them
to assemble under its far projecting shadow.




Chapter IV


The next evening, Clara, who remembered that our chair had been left
standing in the rain, under Liberty Tree, earnestly besought Grandfather
to tell when and where it had next found shelter. Perhaps she was afraid
that the venerable chair, by being exposed to the inclemency of a
September gale, might get the rheumatism in its aged joints.

"The chair," said Grandfather, "after the ceremony of Mr. Oliver’s oath,
appears to have been quite forgotten by the multitude. Indeed, being much
bruised and rather rickety, owing to the violent treatment it had suffered
from the Hutchinson mob, most people would have thought that its days of
usefulness were over. Nevertheless, it was conveyed away, under cover of
the night, and committed to the care of a skilful joiner. He doctored our
old friend so successfully, that, in the course of a few days, it made its
appearance in the public room of the British Coffee House in King Street."

"But why did not Mr. Hutchinson get possession of it again?" inquired
Charley.

"I know not," answered Grandfather, "unless he considered it a dishonor
and disgrace to the chair to have stood under Liberty Tree. At all events,
he suffered it to remain at the British Coffee House, which was the
principal hotel in Boston. It could not possibly have found a situation,
where it would be more in the midst of business and bustle, or would
witness more important events, or be occupied by a greater variety of
persons."

Grandfather went on to tell the proceedings of the despotic king and
ministry of England, after the repeal of the Stamp Act. They could not
bear to think, that their right to tax America should be disputed by the
people. In the year 1767, therefore, they caused Parliament to pass an act
for laying a duty on tea, and some other articles that were in general
use. Nobody could now buy a pound of tea, without paying a tax to King
George. This scheme was pretty craftily contrived; for the women of
America were very fond of tea, and did not like to give up the use of it.

But the people were as much opposed to this new act of Parliament, as they
had been to the Stamp Act. England, however, was determined that they
should submit. In order to compel their obedience, two regiments,
consisting of more than seven hundred British soldiers, were sent to
Boston. They arrived in September, 1768, and were landed on Long Wharf.
Thence they marched to the Common, with loaded muskets, fixed bayonets,
and great pomp and parade. So now, at last, the free town of Boston was
guarded and over-awed by red-coats, as it had been in the days of old Sir
Edmund Andros.

In the month of November, more regiments arrived. There were now four
thousand troops in Boston. The Common was whitened with their tents. Some
of the soldiers were lodged in Faneuil Hall, which the inhabitants looked
upon as a consecrated place, because it had been the scene of a great many
meetings in favor of liberty. One regiment was placed in the town house,
which we now call the Old State House. The lower floor of this edifice had
hitherto been used by the merchants as an exchange. In the upper stories
were the chambers of the judges, the representatives, and the governor’s
council. The venerable counsellors could not assemble to consult about the
welfare of the province, without being challenged by sentinels, and
passing among the bayonets of the British soldiers.

Sentinels, likewise, were posted at the lodgings of the officers, in many
parts of the town. When the inhabitants approached, they were greeted by
the sharp question—"Who goes there?" while the rattle of the soldier’s
musket was heard, as he presented it against their breasts. There was no
quiet, even on the Sabbath day. The pious descendants of the Puritans were
shocked by the uproar of military music, the drum, fife, and bugle,
drowning the holy organ peal and the voices of the singers. It would
appear as if the British took every method to insult the feelings of the
people.

"Grandfather," cried Charley, impatiently, "the people did not go to
fighting half soon enough! These British red-coats ought to have been
driven back to their vessels, the very moment they landed on Long Wharf."

"Many a hot-headed young man said the same as you do, Charley," answered
Grandfather. "But the elder and wiser people saw that the time was not yet
come. Meanwhile, let us take another peep at our old chair."

"Ah, it drooped its head, I know," said Charley, "when it saw how the
province was disgraced. Its old Puritan friends never would have borne
such doings."

"The chair," proceeded Grandfather, "was now continually occupied by some
of the high tories, as the king’s friends were called, who frequented the
British Coffee House. Officers of the custom-house, too, which stood on
the opposite side of King Street, often sat in the chair, wagging their
tongues against John Hancock."

"Why against him?" asked Charley.

"Because he was a great merchant, and contended against paying duties to
the king," said Grandfather.

"Well, frequently, no doubt, the officers of the British regiments, when
not on duty, used to fling themselves into the arms of our venerable
chair. Fancy one of them, a red nosed captain, in his scarlet uniform,
playing with the hilt of his sword, and making a circle of his brother
officers merry with ridiculous jokes at the expense of the poor Yankees.
And perhaps he would call for a bottle of wine, or a steaming bowl of
punch, and drink confusion to all rebels."

"Our grave old chair must have been scandalized at such scenes," observed
Laurence. "The chair that had been the Lady Arbella’s, and which the holy
Apostle Eliot had consecrated."

"It certainly was little less than sacrilege," replied Grandfather; "but
the time was coming, when even the churches, where hallowed pastors had
long preached the word of God, were to be torn down or desecrated by the
British troops. Some years passed, however, before such things were done."

Grandfather now told his auditors, that, in 1769, Sir Francis Bernard went
to England, after having been governor of Massachusetts ten years. He was
a gentleman of many good qualities, an excellent scholar, and a friend to
learning. But he was naturally of an arbitrary disposition; and he had
been bred at the University of Oxford, where young men were taught that
the divine right of kings was the only thing to be regarded in matters of
government. Such ideas were ill adapted to please the people of
Massachusetts. They rejoiced to get rid of Sir Francis Bernard, but liked
his successor, Lieutenant-Governor Hutchinson, no better than himself.

About this period, the people were much incensed at an act, committed by a
person who held an office in the custom-house. Some lads, or young men,
were snow-balling his windows. He fired a musket at them and killed a poor
German boy, only eleven years old. This event made a great noise in town
and country, and much increased the resentment that was already felt
against the servants of the crown.

"Now, children," said Grandfather, "I wish to make you comprehend the
position of the British troops in King Street. This is the same which we
now call State Street. On the south side of the town-house, or Old State
House, was what military men call a court of guard, defended by two brass
cannons, which pointed directly at one of the doors of the above edifice.
A large party of soldiers were always stationed in the court of guard. The
custom-house stood at a little distance down King Street, nearly where the
Suffolk bank now stands; and a sentinel was continually pacing before its
front."

"I shall remember this, to-morrow," said Charley; "and I will go to State
Street, so as to see exactly where the British troops were stationed."

"And, before long," observed Grandfather, "I shall have to relate an
event, which made King Street sadly famous on both sides of the Atlantic.
The history of our chair will soon bring us to this melancholy business."

Here Grandfather described the state of things, which arose from the
ill-will that existed between the inhabitants and the red-coats. The old
and sober part of the town’s-people were very angry at the government, for
sending soldiers to overawe them. But those gray-headed men were cautious,
and kept their thoughts and feelings in their own breasts, without putting
themselves in the way of the British bayonets.

The younger people, however, could hardly be kept within such prudent
limits. They reddened with wrath at the very sight of a soldier, and would
have been willing to come to blows with them, at any moment. For it was
their opinion, that every tap of a British drum within the peninsula of
Boston, was an insult to the brave old town.

"It was sometimes the case," continued Grandfather, "that affrays happened
between such wild young men as these, and small parties of the soldiers.
No weapons had hitherto been used, except fists or cudgels. But, when men
have loaded muskets in their hands, it is easy to foretell, that they will
soon be turned against the bosoms of those who provoke their anger."

"Grandfather," said little Alice, looking fearfully into his face, "your
voice sounds as though you were going to tell us something awful!"




Chapter V


Little Alice, by her last remark, proved herself a good judge of what was
expressed by the tones of Grandfather’s voice. He had given the above
description of the enmity between the town’s-people and the soldiers, in
order to prepare the minds of his auditors for a very terrible event. It
was one that did more to heighten the quarrel between England and America,
than any thing that had yet occurred.

Without further preface, Grandfather began the story of



THE BOSTON MASSACRE


It was now the 3d of March, 1770. The sunset music of the British
regiments was heard, as usual, throughout the town. The shrill fife and
rattling drum awoke the echoes in King Street, while the last ray of
sunshine was lingering on the cupola of the town-house. And now, all the
sentinels were posted. One of them marched up and down before the
custom-house, treading a short path through the snow, and longing for the
time when he would be dismissed to the warm fire-side of the guard-room.
Meanwhile, Captain Preston was perhaps sitting in our great chair, before
the hearth of the British Coffee House. In the course of the evening,
there were two or three slight commotions, which seemed to indicate that
trouble was at hand. Small parties of young men stood at the corners of
the streets, or walked along the narrow pavements. Squads of soldiers, who
were dismissed from duty, passed by them, shoulder to shoulder, with the
regular step which they had learned at the drill. Whenever these
encounters took place, it appeared to be the object of the young men to
treat the soldiers with as much incivility as possible.

"Turn out, you lobster-backs!" one would say. "Crowd them off the
side-walks!" another would cry. "A red-coat has no right in Boston
streets."

"Oh, you rebel rascals!" perhaps the soldiers would reply, glaring
fiercely at the young men. "Some day or other, we’ll make our way through
Boston streets, at the point of the bayonet!"

Once or twice, such disputes as these brought on a scuffle; which passed
off, however, without attracting much notice. About eight o’clock, for
some unknown cause, an alarm bell rang loudly and hurriedly.

At the sound, many people ran out of their houses, supposing it to be an
alarm of fire. But there were no flames to be seen; nor was there any
smell of smoke in the clear, frosty air; so that most of the townsmen went
back to their own fire-sides, and sat talking with their wives and
children about the calamities of the times. Others, who were younger and
less prudent, remained in the streets; for there seems to have been a
presentiment that some strange event was on the eve of taking place.

Later in the evening, not far from nine o’clock, several young men passed
by the town-house, and walked down King Street. The sentinel was still on
his post, in front of the custom-house, pacing to and fro, while, as he
turned, a gleam of light, from some neighboring window, glittered on the
barrel of his musket. At no great distance were the barracks and the
guard-house, where his comrades were probably telling stories of battle
and bloodshed.

Down towards the custom-house, as I told you, came a party of wild young
men. When they drew near the sentinel, he halted on his post, and took his
musket from his shoulder, ready to present the bayonet at their breasts.

"Who goes there?" he cried, in the gruff, peremptory tones of a soldier’s
challenge.

The young men, being Boston boys, felt as if they had a right to walk
their own streets, without being accountable to a British red-coat, even
though he challenged them in King George’s name. They made some rude
answer to the sentinel. There was a dispute, or, perhaps a scuffle. Other
soldiers heard the noise, and ran hastily from the barracks, to assist
their comrade. At the same time, many of the town’s-people rushed into
King Street, by various avenues, and gathered in a crowd round about the
custom-house. It seemed wonderful how such a multitude had started up, all
of a sudden.

The wrongs and insults, which the people had been suffering for many
months, now kindled them into a rage. They threw snow-balls and lumps of
ice at the soldiers. As the tumult grew louder, it reached the ears of
Captain Preston, the officer of the day. He immediately ordered eight
soldiers of the main guard to take their muskets and follow him. They
marched across the street, forcing their way roughly through the crowd,
and pricking the town’s-people with their bayonets.

A gentleman, (it was Henry Knox, afterwards general of the American
artillery,) caught Captain Preston’s arm.

"For Heaven’s sake, sir," exclaimed he, take heed what you do, or here
will be bloodshed."

"Stand aside!" answered Captain Preston, haughtily. "Do not interfere,
sir. Leave me to manage the affair."

Arriving at the sentinel’s post, Captain Preston drew up his men in a
semi-circle, with their faces to the crowd and their rear to the
custom-house. "When the people saw the officer, and beheld the threatening
attitude with which the soldiers fronted them, their rage became almost
uncontrollable.

"Fire, you lobster-backs!" bellowed some.

"You dare not fire, you cowardly red-coats," cried others.

"Rush upon them!" shouted many voices. "Drive the rascals to their
barracks! Down with them! Down with them! Let them fire, if they dare!"

Amid the uproar, the soldiers stood glaring at the people, with the
fierceness of men whose trade was to shed blood.

Oh, what a crisis had now arrived! Up to this very moment, the angry
feelings between England and America might have been pacified. England had
but to stretch out the hand of reconciliation, and acknowledge that she
had hitherto mistaken her rights but would do so no more. Then, the
ancient bonds of brotherhood would again have been knit together, as
firmly as in old times. The habit of loyalty, which had grown as strong as
instinct, was not utterly overcome. The perils shared, the victories won,
in the Old French War, when the soldiers of the colonies fought side by
side with their comrades from beyond the sea, were unforgotten yet.
England was still that beloved country which the colonists called their
home. King George, though he had frowned upon America, was still
reverenced as a father.

But, should the king’s soldiers shed one drop of American blood, then it
was a quarrel to the death. Never—never would America rest satisfied,
until she had torn down the royal authority, and trampled it in the dust.

"Fire, if you dare, villains!" hoarsely shouted the people, while the
muzzles of the muskets were turned upon them; "you dare not fire!"

They appeared ready to rush upon the levelled bayonets. Captain Preston
waved his sword, and uttered a command which could not be distinctly
heard, amid the uproar of shouts that issued from a hundred throats. But
his soldiers deemed that he had spoken the fatal mandate—"fire!" The flash
of their muskets lighted up the street, and the report rang loudly between
the edifices. It was said, too, that the figure of a man with a cloth
hanging down over his face, was seen to step into the balcony of the
custom-house, and discharge a musket at the crowd.

A gush of smoke had overspread the scene. It rose heavily, as if it were
loath to reveal the dreadful spectacle beneath it. Eleven of the sons of
New England lay stretched upon the street. Some, sorely wounded, were
struggling to rise again. Others stirred not, nor groaned, for they were
past all pain. Blood was streaming upon the snow; and that purple stain,
in the midst of King Street, though it melted away in the next day’s sun,
was never forgotten nor forgiven by the people.



Grandfather was interrupted by the violent sobs of little Alice. In his
earnestness, he had neglected to soften down the narrative, so that it
might not terrify the heart of this unworldly infant. Since Grandfather
began the history of our chair, little Alice had listened to many tales of
war. But, probably, the idea had never really impressed itself upon her
mind, that men have shed the blood of their fellow-creatures. And now that
this idea was forcibly presented to her, it affected the sweet child with
bewilderment and horror.

"I ought to have remembered our dear little Alice," said Grandfather
reproachfully to himself. "Oh, what a pity! Her heavenly nature has now
received its first impression of earthly sin and violence. Well, Clara,
take her to bed, and comfort her. Heaven grant that she may dream away the
recollection of the Boston Massacre!"

"Grandfather," said Charley, when Clara and little Alice had retired, "did
not the people rush upon the soldiers, and take revenge?"

"The town drums beat to arms," replied Grandfather, "the alarm bells rang,
and an immense multitude rushed into King Street. Many of them had weapons
in their hands. The British prepared to defend themselves. A whole
regiment was drawn up in the street, expecting an attack; for the townsmen
appeared ready to throw themselves upon the bayonets."

"And how did it end?" asked Charley.

"Governor Hutchinson hurried to the spot," said Grandfather, "and besought
the people to have patience, promising that strict justice should be done.
A day or two afterward, the British troops were withdrawn from town, and
stationed at Castle William. Captain Preston and the eight soldiers were
tried for murder. But none of them were found guilty. The judges told the
jury that the insults and violence which had been offered to the soldiers,
justified them in firing at the mob."

"The Revolution," observed Laurence, who had said but little during the
evening, "was not such a calm, majestic movement as I supposed. I do not
love to hear of mobs and broils in the street. These things were unworthy
of the people, when they had such a great object to accomplish."

"Nevertheless, the world has seen no grander movement than that of our
Revolution, from first to last," said Grandfather. "The people, to a man,
were full of a great and noble sentiment. True, there may be much fault to
find with their mode of expressing this sentiment; but they knew no
better—the necessity was upon them to act out their feelings, in the best
manner they could. We must forgive what was wrong in their actions, and
look into their hearts and minds for the honorable motives that impelled
them."

"And I suppose," said Laurence, "there were men who knew how to act
worthily of what they felt."

"There were many such," replied Grandfather, "and we will speak of some of
them, hereafter."

Grandfather here made a pause. That night, Charley had a dream about the
Boston Massacre, and thought that he himself was in the crowd, and struck
down Captain Preston with a great club. Laurence dreamed that he was
sitting in our great chair, at the window of the British Coffee House, and
beheld the whole scene which Grandfather had described. It seemed to him,
in his dream, that if the town’s-people and the soldiers would but have
heard him speak a single word, all the slaughter might have been averted.
But there was such an uproar that it drowned his voice.

The next morning, the two boys went together to State Street, and stood on
the very spot where the first blood of the Revolution had been shed. The
Old State House was still there, presenting almost the same aspect that it
had worn on that memorable evening, one-and-seventy years ago. It is the
sole remaining witness of the Boston Massacre.




Chapter VI


The next evening the astral lamp was lighted earlier than usual, because
Laurence was very much engaged in looking over the collection of portraits
which had been his New Year’s gift from Grandfather.

Among them he found the features of more than one famous personage who had
been connected with the adventures of our old chair. Grandfather bade him
draw the table nearer to the fire-side; and they looked over the portraits
together, while Clara and Charley likewise lent their attention. As for
little Alice, she sat in Grandfather’s lap, and seemed to see the very men
alive, whose faces were there represented.

Turning over the volume, Laurence came to the portrait of a stern,
grim-looking man, in plain attire, of much more modern fashion than that
of the old Puritans. But the face might well have befitted one of those
iron-hearted men. Beneath the portrait was the name of Samuel Adams.

"He was a man of great note in all the doings that brought about the
Revolution," said Grandfather. "His character was such, that it seemed as
if one of the ancient Puritans had been sent back to earth, to animate the
people’s hearts with the same abhorrence of tyranny, that had
distinguished the earliest settlers. He was as religious as they, as stern
and inflexible, and as deeply imbued with democratic principles. He,
better than any one else, may be taken as a representative of the people
of New England, and of the spirit with which they engaged in the
revolutionary struggle. He was a poor man, and earned his bread by an
humble occupation; but with his tongue and pen, he made the king of
England tremble on his throne. Remember him, my children, as one of the
strong men of our country."

"Here is one whose looks show a very different character," observed
Laurence, turning to the portrait of John Hancock. "I should think, by his
splendid dress and courtly aspect, that he was one of the king’s friends."

"There never was a greater contrast than between Samuel Adams and John
Hancock," said Grandfather. "Yet they were of the same side in politics,
and had an equal agency in the Revolution. Hancock was born to the
inheritance of the largest fortune in New England. His tastes and habits
were aristocratic. He loved gorgeous attire, a splendid mansion,
magnificent furniture, stately festivals, and all that was glittering and
pompous in external things. His manners were so polished, that there stood
not a nobleman at the footstool of King George’s throne, who was a more
skilful courtier than John Hancock might have been. Nevertheless, he, in
his embroidered clothes, and Samuel Adams in his threadbare coat, wrought
together in the cause of liberty. Adams acted from pure and rigid
principle. Hancock, though he loved his country, yet thought quite as much
of his own popularity as he did of the people’s rights. It is remarkable,
that these two men, so very different as I describe them, were the only
two exempted from pardon by the king’s proclamation."

On the next leaf of the book, was the portrait of General Joseph Warren.
Charley recognized the name, and said that here was a greater man than
either Hancock or Adams.

"Warren was an eloquent and able patriot," replied Grandfather. "He
deserves a lasting memory for his zealous efforts in behalf of liberty. No
man’s voice was more powerful in Faneuil Hall than Joseph Warren’s. If his
death had not happened so early in the contest, he would probably have
gained a high name as a soldier."

The next portrait was a venerable man, who held his thumb under his chin,
and, through his spectacles, appeared to be attentively reading a
manuscript.

"Here we see the most illustrious Boston boy that ever lived," said
Grandfather. "This is Benjamin Franklin! But I will not try to compress,
into a few sentences, the character of the sage, who, as a Frenchman
expressed it, snatched the lightning from the sky, and the sceptre from a
tyrant. Mr. Sparks must help you to the knowledge of Franklin."

The book likewise contained portraits of James Otis and Josiah Quincy.
Both of them, Grandfather observed, were men of wonderful talents and true
patriotism. Their voices were like the stirring tones of a trumpet,
arousing the country to defend its freedom. Heaven seemed to have provided
a greater number of eloquent men than had appeared at any other period, in
order that the people might be fully instructed as to their wrongs, and
the method of resistance.

"It is marvellous," said Grandfather, "to see how many powerful writers,
orators, and soldiers started up, just at the time when they were wanted.
There was a man for every kind of work. It is equally wonderful, that men
of such different characters were all made to unite in the one object of
establishing the freedom and independence of America. There was an
overruling Providence above them."

"Here was another great man," remarked Laurence, pointing to the portrait
of John Adams.

"Yes; an earnest, warm-tempered, honest, and most able man," said
Grandfather. "At the period of which we are now speaking, he was a lawyer
in Boston. He was destined, in after years, to be ruler over the whole
American people, whom he contributed so much to form into a nation."

Grandfather here remarked, that many a New Englander, who had passed his
boyhood and youth in obscurity, afterward attained to a fortune, which he
never could have foreseen, even in his most ambitious dreams. John Adams,
the second president of the United States, and the equal of crowned kings,
was once a schoolmaster and country lawyer. Hancock, the first signer of
the Declaration of Independence, served his apprenticeship with a
merchant. Samuel Adams, afterward governor of Massachusetts, was a small
tradesman and a tax-gatherer. General Warren was a physician, General
Lincoln a farmer, and General Knox a bookbinder. General Nathaniel Greene,
the best soldier, except Washington, in the revolutionary army, was a
Quaker and a blacksmith. All these became illustrious men, and can never
be forgotten in American history.

"And any boy, who is born in America, may look forward to the same
things," said our ambitious friend Charley.

After these observations, Grandfather drew the book of portraits towards
him, and showed the children several British peers and members of
Parliament, who had exerted themselves either for or against the rights of
America. There were the Earl of Bute, Mr. Grenville, and Lord North. These
were looked upon as deadly enemies to our country.

Among the friends of America was Mr. Pitt, afterward Earl of Chatham, who
spent so much of his wondrous eloquence in endeavoring to warn England of
the consequences of her injustice. He fell down on the floor of the House
of Lords, after uttering almost his dying words in defence of our
privileges as freemen. There was Edmund Burke, one of the wisest men and
greatest orators that ever the world produced. There was Colonel Barré,
who had been among our fathers, and knew that they had courage enough to
die for their rights. There was Charles James Fox, who never rested until
he had silenced our enemies in the House of Commons.

"It is very remarkable to observe how many of the ablest orators in the
British Parliament were favorable to America," said Grandfather. "We ought
to remember these great Englishmen with gratitude; for their speeches
encouraged our fathers, almost as much as those of our own orators, in
Faneuil Hall, and under Liberty Tree. Opinions, which might have been
received with doubt, if expressed only by a native American, were set down
as true, beyond dispute, when they came from the lips of Chatham, Burke,
Barré, or Fox."

"But, Grandfather," asked Laurence, "were there no able and eloquent men
in this country who took the part of King George?"

"There were many men of talent, who said what they could in defence of the
king’s tyrannical proceedings," replied Grandfather. "But they had the
worst side of the argument, and therefore seldom said any thing worth
remembering. Moreover their hearts were faint and feeble; for they felt
that the people scorned and detested them. They had no friends, no
defence, except in the bayonets of the British troops. A blight fell upon
all their faculties, because they were contending against the rights of
their own native land."

"What were the names of some of them?" inquired Charley.

"Governor Hutchinson, Chief Justice Oliver, Judge Auchmuty, the Reverend
Mather Byles, and several other clergymen, were among the most noted
loyalists," answered Grandfather.

"I wish the people had tarred and feathered every man of them!" cried
Charley.

"That wish is very wrong, Charley," said Grandfather. "You must not think
that there was no integrity and honor, except among those who stood up for
the freedom of America. For aught I know, there was quite as much of these
qualities on one side as on the other. Do you see nothing admirable in a
faithful adherence to an unpopular cause? Can you not respect that
principle of loyalty, which made the royalists give up country, friends,
fortune, every thing, rather than be false to their king? It was a
mistaken principle; but many of them cherished it honorably, and were
martyrs to it."

"Oh, I was wrong!" said Charley, ingenuously. "And I would risk my life,
rather than one of those good old royalists should be tarred and
feathered."

"The time is now come, when we may judge fairly of them," continued
Grandfather. "Be the good and true men among them honored; for they were
as much our countrymen as the patriots were. And, thank Heaven! our
country need not be ashamed of her sons—of most of them, at least—whatever
side they took in the revolutionary contest."

Among the portraits was one of King George the Third. Little Alice clapped
her hands, and seemed pleased with the bluff good nature of his
physiognomy. But Laurence thought it strange, that a man with such a face,
indicating hardly a common share of intellect, should have had influence
enough on human affairs, to convulse the world with war. Grandfather
observed, that this poor king had always appeared to him one of the most
unfortunate persons that ever lived. He was so honest and conscientious,
that, if he had been only a private man, his life would probably have been
blameless and happy. But his was that worst of fortunes, to be placed in a
station far beyond his abilities.

"And so," said Grandfather, "his life, while he retained what intellect
Heaven had gifted him with, was one long mortification. At last, he grew
crazed with care and trouble. For nearly twenty years, the monarch of
England was confined as a madman. In his old age, too, God took away his
eyesight; so that his royal palace was nothing to him but a dark, lonesome
prison-house."




Chapter VII


"Our old chair," resumed Grandfather, "did not now stand in the midst of a
gay circle of British officers. The troops, as I told you, had been
removed to Castle William, immediately after the Boston Massacre. Still,
however, there were many tories, custom-house officers, and Englishmen,
who used to assemble in the British Coffee House, and talk over the
affairs of the period. Matters grew worse and worse; and in 1773, the
people did a deed, which incensed the king and ministry more than any of
their former doings."

Grandfather here described the affair, which is known by the name of the
Boston Tea Party. The Americans, for some time past, had left off
importing tea, on account of the oppressive tax. The East India Company,
in London, had a large stock of tea on hand, which they had expected to
sell to the Americans, but could find no market for it. But, after a
while, the government persuaded this company of merchants to send the tea
to America.

"How odd it is," observed Clara, "that the liberties of America should
have had any thing to do with a cup of tea!"

Grandfather smiled, and proceeded with his narrative. When the people of
Boston heard that several cargoes of tea were coming across the Atlantic,
they held a great many meetings at Faneuil Hall, in the Old South church,
and under Liberty Tree. In the midst of their debates, three ships arrived
in the harbor with the tea on board. The people spent more than a
fortnight in consulting what should be done. At last, on the 16th of
December, 1773, they demanded of Governor Hutchinson, that he should
immediately send the ships back to England.

The governor replied that the ships must not leave the harbor, until the
custom-house duties upon the tea should be paid. Now, the payment of these
duties was the very thing, against which the people had set their faces;
because it was a tax, unjustly imposed upon America by the English
government. Therefore, in the dusk of the evening, as soon as Governor
Hutchinson’s reply was received, an immense crowd hastened to Griffin’s
Wharf, where the tea-ships lay. The place is now called Liverpool Wharf.

"When the crowd reached the wharf," said Grandfather, "they saw that a set
of wild-looking figures were already on board of the ships. You would have
imagined that the Indian warriors, of old times, had come back again; for
they wore the Indian dress, and had their faces covered with red and black
paint, like the Indians, when they go to war. These grim figures hoisted
the tea chests on the decks of the vessels, broke them open, and threw all
the contents into the harbor."

"Grandfather," said little Alice, "I suppose Indians don’t love tea; else
they would never waste it so."

"They were not real Indians, my child," answered Grandfather. "They were
white men, in disguise; because a heavy punishment would have been
inflicted on them, if the king’s officers had found who they were. But it
was never known. From that day to this, though the matter has been talked
of by all the world, nobody can tell the names of those Indian figures.
Some people say that there were very famous men among them, who afterwards
became governors and generals. Whether this be true, I cannot tell."

When tidings of this bold deed were carried to England, King George was
greatly enraged. Parliament immediately passed an act, by which all
vessels were forbidden to take in or discharge their cargoes at the port
of Boston. In this way, they expected to ruin all the merchants, and
starve the poor people, by depriving them of employment. At the same time,
another act was passed, taking away many rights and privileges which had
been granted in the charter of Massachusetts.

Governor Hutchinson, soon afterward, was summoned to England, in order
that he might give his advice about the management of American affairs.
General Gage, an officer of the Old French War, and since
commander-in-chief of the British forces in America, was appointed
governor in his stead. One of his first acts, was to make Salem, instead
of Boston, the metropolis of Massachusetts, by summoning the General Court
to meet there.

According to Grandfather’s description, this was the most gloomy time that
Massachusetts had ever seen. The people groaned under as heavy a tyranny
as in the days of Sir Edmund Andros. Boston looked as if it were afflicted
with some dreadful pestilence,—so sad were the inhabitants, and so
desolate the streets. There was no cheerful hum of business. The merchants
shut up their warehouses, and the laboring men stood idle about the
wharves. But all America felt interested in the good town of Boston; and
contributions were raised, in many places, for the relief of the poor
inhabitants.

"Our dear old chair!" exclaimed Clara. "How dismal it must have been now!"

"Oh," replied Grandfather, "a gay throng of officers had now come back to
the British Coffee House; so that the old chair had no lack of mirthful
company. Soon after General Gage became governor, a great many troops had
arrived, and were encamped upon the Common. Boston was now a garrisoned
and fortified town; for the general had built a battery across the neck,
on the road to Roxbury, and placed guards for its defence. Every thing
looked as if a civil war were close at hand."

"Did the people make ready to fight?" asked Charley.

"A continental Congress assembled at Philadelphia," said Grandfather, "and
proposed such measures as they thought most conducive to the public good.
A provincial Congress was likewise chosen in Massachusetts. They exhorted
the people to arm and discipline themselves. A great number of minute men
were enrolled. The Americans called them minute men, because they engaged
to be ready to fight at a minute’s warning. The English officers laughed,
and said that the name was a very proper one, because the minute men would
run away the the minute they saw the enemy. Whether they would fight or
run, was soon to be proved."

Grandfather told the children, that the first open resistance offered to
the British troops, in the province of Massachusetts was at Salem. Colonel
Timothy Pickering, with thirty or forty militia men, prevented the English
colonel, Leslie, with four times as many regular soldiers, from taking
possession of some military stores. No blood was shed on this occasion;
but, soon afterward, it began to flow.

General Gage sent eight hundred soldiers to Concord, about eighteen miles
from Boston, to destroy some ammunition and provisions which the colonists
had collected there. They set out on their march in the evening of the
18th of April, 1775. The next morning, the General sent Lord Percy, with
nine hundred men, to strengthen the troops which had gone before. All that
day, the inhabitants of Boston heard various rumors. Some said, that the
British were making great slaughter among our countrymen. Others affirmed
that every man had turned out with his musket, and that not a single
soldier would ever get back to Boston.

"It was after sunset," continued Grandfather, "when the troops, who had
marched forth so proudly, were seen entering Charlestown. They were
covered with dust, and so hot and weary that their tongues hung out of
their mouths. Many of them were faint with wounds. They had not all
returned. Nearly three hundred were strewn, dead or dying, along the road
from Concord. The yeomanry had risen upon the invaders, and driven them
back."

"Was this the battle of Lexington?" asked Charley.

"Yes," replied Grandfather; "it was so called, because the British,
without provocation, had fired upon a party of minute men, near Lexington
meeting-house, and killed eight of them. That fatal volley, which was
fired by order of Major Pitcairn, began the war of the Revolution."

About this time, if Grandfather had been correctly informed, our chair
disappeared from the British Coffee House. The manner of its departure
cannot be satisfactorily ascertained. Perhaps the keeper of the Coffee
House turned it out of doors, on account of its old-fashioned aspect.
Perhaps he sold it as a curiosity. Perhaps it was taken, without leave, by
some person who regarded it as public property, because it had once
figured under Liberty Tree. Or, perhaps, the old chair, being of a
peaceable disposition, had made use of its four oaken legs, and run away
from the seat of war.

"It would have made a terrible clattering over the pavement," said
Charley, laughing.

"Meanwhile," continued Grandfather, "during the mysterious non-appearance
of our chair, an army of twenty thousand men had started up, and come to
the siege of Boston. General Gage and his troops were cooped up within the
narrow precincts of the peninsula. On the 17th of June, 1775, the famous
battle of Bunker Hill was fought. Here General Warren fell. The British
got the victory, indeed, but with the loss of more than a thousand
officers and men."

"O, Grandfather," cried Charley, "you must tell us about that famous
battle."

"No, Charley," said Grandfather, "I am not like other historians. Battles
shall not hold a prominent place in the history of our quiet and
comfortable old chair. But, to-morrow evening, Laurence, Clara, and
yourself, and dear little Alice too, shall visit the Diorama of Bunker
Hill. There you shall see the whole business, the burning of Charlestown
and all, with your own eyes, and hear the cannon and musketry with your
own ears."




Chapter VIII


The next evening but one, when the children had given Grandfather a full
account of the Diorama of Bunker Hill, they entreated him not to keep them
any longer in suspense about the fate of his chair. The reader will
recollect, that at the last accounts, it had trotted away upon its poor
old legs, nobody knew whither. But, before gratifying their curiosity,
Grandfather found it necessary to say something about public events.

The continental Congress, which was assembled at Philadelphia, was
composed of delegates from all the colonies. They had now appointed George
Washington, of Virginia, to be commander-in-chief of all the American
armies. He was, at that time, a member of Congress, but immediately left
Philadelphia, and began his journey to Massachusetts. On the 3d of July,
1775, he arrived at Cambridge, and took command of the troops which were
besieging General Gage.

"O, Grandfather," exclaimed Laurence, "it makes my heart throb to think
what is coming now. We are to see General Washington himself."

The children crowded around Grandfather, and looked earnestly into his
face. Even little Alice opened her sweet blue eyes, with her lips apart,
and almost held her breath to listen; so instinctive is the reverence of
childhood for the father of his country. Grandfather paused a moment; for
he felt as if it might be irreverent to introduce the hallowed shade of
Washington into a history, where an ancient elbow chair occupied the most
prominent place. However, he determined to proceed with his narrative, and
speak of the hero when it was needful, but with an unambitious simplicity.

So Grandfather told his auditors, that, on General Washington’s arrival at
Cambridge, his first care was, to reconnoitre the British troops with his
spy-glass, and to examine the condition of his own army. He found that the
American troops amounted to about fourteen thousand men. They were
extended all round the peninsula of Boston, a space of twelve miles, from
the high grounds of Roxbury on the right, to Mystic river on the left.
Some were living in tents of sail-cloth, some in shanties, rudely
constructed of boards, some in huts of stone or turf, with curious windows
and doors of basket-work.

In order to be near the centre, and oversee the whole of this
wide-stretched army, the commander-in-chief made his head-quarters at
Cambridge, about half a mile from the colleges. A mansion-house, which
perhaps had been the country-seat of some tory gentleman, was provided for
his residence.

"When General Washington first entered this mansion," said Grandfather,
"he was ushered up the stair-case, and shown into a handsome apartment. He
sat down in a large chair, which was the most conspicuous object in the
room. The noble figure of Washington would have done honor to a throne. As
he sat there, with his hand resting on the hilt of his sheathed sword,
which was placed between his knees, his whole aspect well befitted the
chosen man on whom his country leaned for the defence of her dearest
rights. America seemed safe, under his protection. His face was grander
than any sculptor had ever wrought in marble; none could behold him
without awe and reverence. Never before had the lion’s head, at the summit
of the chair, looked down upon such a face and form as Washington’s!"

"Why! Grandfather," cried Clara, clasping her hands in amazement, "was it
really so? Did General Washington sit in our great chair?"

"I knew how it would be," said Laurence; "I foresaw it, the moment
Grandfather began to speak."

Grandfather smiled. But, turning from the personal and domestic life of
the illustrious leader, he spoke of the methods which Washington adopted
to win back the metropolis of New England from the British.

The army, when he took command of it, was without any discipline or order.
The privates considered themselves as good as their officers, and seldom
thought it necessary to obey their commands, unless they understood the
why and wherefore. Moreover, they were enlisted for so short a period,
that, as soon as they began to be respectable soldiers, it was time to
discharge them. Then came new recruits, who had to be taught their duty,
before they could be of any service. Such was the army, with which
Washington had to contend against more than twenty veteran British
regiments.

Some of the men had no muskets, and almost all were without bayonets.
Heavy cannon, for battering the British fortifications, were much wanted.
There was but a small quantity of powder and ball, few tools to build
entrenchments with, and a great deficiency of provisions and clothes for
the soldiers. Yet, in spite of these perplexing difficulties, the eyes of
the whole people were fixed on General Washington, expecting him to
undertake some great enterprise against the hostile army.

The first thing that he found necessary, was to bring his own men into
better order and discipline. It is wonderful how soon he transformed this
rough mob of country people into the semblance of a regular army. One of
Washington’s most invaluable characteristics, was the faculty of bringing
order out of confusion. All business, with which he had any concern,
seemed to regulate itself, as if by magic. The influence of his mind was
like light, gleaming through an unshaped world. It was this faculty, more
than any other, that made him so fit to ride upon the storm of the
Revolution, when every thing was unfixed, and drifting about in a troubled
sea.

"Washington had not been long at the head of the army," proceeded
Grandfather, "before his soldiers thought as highly of him, as if he had
led them to a hundred victories. They knew that he was the very man whom
the country needed, and the only one who could bring them safely through
the great contest against the might of England. They put entire confidence
in his courage, wisdom, and integrity."

"And were not they eager to follow him against the British?" asked
Charley.

"Doubtless they would have gone whithersoever his sword pointed the way,"
answered Grandfather; "and Washington was anxious to make a decisive
assault upon the enemy. But as the enterprise was very hazardous, he
called a council of all the generals in the army. Accordingly, they came
from their different posts, and were ushered into the reception room. The
commander-in-chief arose from our great chair to greet them."

"What were their names?" asked Charley.

"There was General Artemas Ward," replied Grandfather, a "lawyer by
profession. He had commanded the troops before Washington’s arrival.
Another was General Charles Lee, who had been a colonel in the English
army, and was thought to possess vast military science. He came to the
council, followed by two or three dogs, who were always at his heels.
There was General Putnam, too, who was known all over New England by the
name of Old Put."

"Was it he who killed the wolf?" inquired Charley.

"The same," said Grandfather; "and he had done good service in the Old
French War. His occupation was that of a farmer; but he left his plough in
the furrow, at the news of Lexington battle. Then there was General Gates,
who afterward gained great renown at Saratoga, and lost it again at
Camden. General Greene, of Rhode Island, was likewise at the council.
Washington soon discovered him to be one of the best officers in the
army."

When the Generals were all assembled, Washington consulted them about a
plan for storming the English batteries. But it was their unanimous
opinion that so perilous an enterprise ought not to be attempted. The
army, therefore, continued to besiege Boston, preventing the enemy from
obtaining supplies of provisions, but without taking any immediate
measures to get possession of the town. In this manner, the summer,
autumn, and winter passed away.

"Many a night, doubtless," said Grandfather, "after Washington had been
all day on horseback, galloping from one post of the army to another, he
used to sit in our great chair, wrapt in earnest thought. Had you seen
him, you might have supposed that his whole mind was fixed on the blue
china tiles, which adorned the old fashioned fire-place. But, in reality,
he was meditating how to capture the British army, or drive it out of
Boston. Once, when there was a hard frost, he formed a scheme to cross the
Charles River on the ice. But the other Generals could not be persuaded
that there was any prospect of success."

"What were the British doing, all this time?" inquired Charley.

"They lay idle in the town," replied Grandfather. "General Gage had been
recalled to England, and was succeeded by Sir William Howe. The British
army, and the inhabitants of Boston, were now in great distress. Being
shut up in the town so long, they had consumed almost all their
provisions, and burnt up all their fuel. The soldiers tore down the Old
North church, and used its rotten boards and timbers for fire-wood. To
heighten their distress, the small pox broke out. They probably lost far
more men by cold, hunger, and sickness, than had been slain at Lexington
and Bunker Hill."

"What a dismal time for the poor women and children!" exclaimed Clara.

"At length," continued Grandfather, "in March, 1776, General Washington,
who had now a good supply of powder, began a terrible cannonade and
bombardment from Dorchester heights. One of the cannon balls which he
fired into the town, struck the tower of the Brattle Street church, where
it may still be seen. Sir William Howe made preparations to cross over in
boats, and drive the Americans from their batteries, but was prevented by
a violent gale and storm. General Washington next erected a battery on
Nook’s hill, so near the enemy, that it was impossible for them to remain
in Boston any longer."

"Hurra! Hurra!" cried Charley, clapping his hands triumphantly. "I wish I
had been there, to see how sheepish the Englishmen looked."

And, as Grandfather thought that Boston had never witnessed a more
interesting period than this, when the royal power was in its death agony,
he determined to take a peep into the town, and imagine the feelings of
those who were quitting it forever.




Chapter IX


"Alas! for the poor tories!" said Grandfather. "Until the very last
morning after Washington’s troops had shown themselves on Nook’s hill,
these unfortunate persons could not believe that the audacious rebels, as
they called the Americans, would ever prevail against King George’s army.
But, when they saw the British soldiers preparing to embark on board of
the ships of war, then they knew that they had lost their country. Could
the patriots have known how bitter were their regrets, they would have
forgiven them all their evil deeds, and sent a blessing after them as they
sailed away from their native shore."

In order to make the children sensible of the pitiable condition of these
men, Grandfather singled out Peter Oliver, chief justice of Massachusetts
under the crown, and imagined him walking through the streets of Boston,
on the morning before he left it forever.

This effort of Grandfather’s fancy may be called—



THE TORY’S FAREWELL


Old Chief Justice Oliver threw on his red cloak, and placed his
three-cornered hat on the top of his white wig. In this garb he intended
to go forth and take a parting look at objects that had been familiar to
him from his youth. Accordingly, he began his walk in the north part of
the town, and soon came to Faneuil Hall. This edifice, the cradle of
liberty, had been used by the British officers as a play-house.

"Would that I could see its walls crumble to dust!" thought the chief
justice; and, in the bitterness of his heart, he shook his fist at the
famous hall. "There began the mischief which now threatens to rend asunder
the British empire. The seditious harangues of demagogues in Faneuil Hall,
have made rebels of a loyal people, and deprived me of my country."

He then passed through a narrow avenue, and found himself in King Street,
almost in the very spot which, six years before, had been reddened by the
blood of the Boston Massacre. The chief justice stept cautiously, and
shuddered, as if he were afraid, that, even now, the gore of his
slaughtered countrymen might stain his feet.

Before him rose the town house, on the front of which were still displayed
the royal arms. Within that edifice he had dispensed justice to the
people, in the days when his name was never mentioned without honor.
There, too, was the balcony whence the trumpet had been sounded, and the
proclamation read to an assembled multitude, whenever a new king of
England ascended the throne.

"I remember—I remember," said Chief Justice Oliver to himself, "when his
present most sacred majesty was proclaimed. Then how the people shouted.
Each man would have poured out his life-blood to keep a hair of King
George’s head from harm. But now, there is scarcely a tongue in all New
England that does not imprecate curses on his name. It is ruin and
disgrace to love him. Can it be possible that a few fleeting years have
wrought such a change!"

It did not occur to the chief justice, that nothing but the most grievous
tyranny could so soon have changed the people’s hearts. Hurrying from the
spot, he entered Cornhill, as the lower part of Washington Street was then
called. Opposite to the town house was the waste foundation of the Old
North church. The sacrilegious hands of the British soldiers had torn it
down, and kindled their barrack fires with the fragments.

Further on, he passed beneath the tower of the Old South. The threshold of
this sacred edifice was worn by the iron tramp of horse’s feet: for the
interior had been used as a riding-school and rendezvous, for a regiment
of dragoons. As the chief justice lingered an instant at the door, a
trumpet sounded within, and the regiment came clattering forth, and
galloped down the street. They were proceeding to the place of
embarkation.

"Let them go!" thought the chief justice, with somewhat of an old puritan
feeling in his breast. "No good can come of men who desecrate the house of
God."

He went on a few steps further, and paused before the Province House. No
range of brick stores had then sprung up to hide the mansion of the royal
governors from public view. It had a spacious court-yard, bordered with
trees, and enclosed with a wrought-iron fence. On the cupola, that
surmounted the edifice, was the gilded figure of an Indian chief, ready to
let fly an arrow from his bow. Over the wide front door was a balcony, in
which the chief justice had often stood, when the governor and high
officers of the province showed themselves to the people.

While Chief Justice Oliver gazed sadly at the Province House, before which
a sentinel was pacing, the double leaves of the door were thrown open, and
Sir William Howe made his appearance. Behind him came a throng of
officers, whose steel scabbards clattered against the stones, as they
hastened down the court-yard. Sir William Howe was a dark-complexioned
man, stern and haughty in his deportment. He stepped as proudly, in that
hour of defeat, as if he were going to receive the submission of the rebel
general.

The chief justice bowed and accosted him.

"This is a grievous hour for both of us, Sir William," said he.

"Forward! gentlemen," said Sir William Howe to the officers who attended
him: "we have no time to hear lamentations now!"

And, coldly bowing, he departed. Thus, the chief justice had a foretaste
of the mortifications which the exiled New Englanders afterwards suffered
from the haughty Britons. They were despised even by that country which
they had served more faithfully than their own.

A still heavier trial awaited Chief Justice Oliver, as he passed onward
from the Province House. He was recognized by the people in the street.
They had long known him as the descendant of an ancient and honorable
family. They had seen him sitting, in his scarlet robes, upon the judgment
seat. All his life long, either for the sake of his ancestors, or on
account of his own dignified station and unspotted character, he had been
held in high respect. The old gentry of the province were looked upon
almost as noblemen, while Massachusetts was under royal government.

But now, all hereditary reverence for birth and rank was gone. The
inhabitants shouted in derision, when they saw the venerable form of the
old chief justice. They laid the wrongs of the country, and their own
sufferings during the siege—their hunger, cold, and sickness—partly to his
charge, and to that of his brother Andrew, and his kinsman Hutchinson. It
was by their advice that the king had acted, in all the colonial troubles.
But the day of recompense was come.

"See the old tory!" cried the people, with bitter laughter. "He is taking
his last look at us. Let him show his white wig among us an hour hence,
and we’ll give him a coat of tar and feathers!"

The chief justice, however, knew that he need fear no violence, so long as
the British troops were in possession of the town. But alas! it was a
bitter thought, that he should leave no loving memory behind him. His
forefathers, long after their spirits left the earth, had been honored in
the affectionate remembrance of the people. But he, who would henceforth
be dead to his native land, would have no epitaph save scornful and
vindictive words. The old man wept.

"They curse me—they invoke all kinds of evil on my head!" thought he, in
the midst of his tears. "But, if they could read my heart, they would know
that I love New England well. Heaven bless her, and bring her again under
the rule of our gracious king! A blessing, too, on these poor, misguided
people!"

The chief justice flung out his hands with a gesture, as if he were
bestowing a parting benediction on his countrymen. He had now reached the
southern portion of the town, and was far within the range of cannon shot
from the American batteries. Close beside him was the broad stump of a
tree, which appeared to have been recently cut down. Being weary and heavy
at heart, he was about to sit down upon the stump.

Suddenly, it flashed upon his recollection, that this was the stump of
Liberty Tree! The British soldiers had cut it down, vainly boasting that
they could as easily overthrow the liberties of America. Under its shadowy
branches, ten years before, the brother of Chief Justice Oliver had been
compelled to acknowledge the supremacy of the people, by taking the oath
which they prescribed. This tree was connected with all the events that
had severed America from England.

"Accursed tree!" cried the chief justice, gnashing his teeth: for anger
overcame his sorrow. "Would that thou hadst been left standing, till
Hancock, Adams, and every other traitor, were hanged upon thy branches!
Then fitly mightest thou have been hewn down, and cast into the flames."

He turned back, hurried to Long Wharf without looking behind him, embarked
with the British troops for Halifax, and never saw his country more.
Throughout the remainder of his days, Chief Justice Oliver was agitated
with those same conflicting emotions, that had tortured him, while taking
his farewell walk through the streets of Boston. Deep love and fierce
resentment burned in one flame within his breast. Anathemas struggled with
benedictions. He felt as if one breath of his native air would renew his
life, yet would have died, rather than breathe the same air with rebels.

And such, likewise, were the feelings of the other exiles, a thousand in
number, who departed with the British army. Were they not the most
unfortunate of men?



"The misfortunes of these exiled tories," observed Laurence, "must have
made them think of the poor exiles of Acadia."

"They had a sad time of it, I suppose," said Charley. "But I choose to
rejoice with the patriots, rather than be sorrowful with the tories.
Grandfather, what did General Washington do now?"

"As the rear of the British army embarked from the wharf," replied
Grandfather, "General Washington’s troops marched over the neck, through
the fortification gates, and entered Boston in triumph. And now, for the
first time since the pilgrims landed, Massachusetts was free from the
dominion of England. May she never again be subjected to foreign
rule—never again feel the rod of oppression!"

"Dear Grandfather," asked little Alice, "did General Washington bring our
chair back to Boston?"

"I know not how long the chair remained at Cambridge," said Grandfather.
"Had it staid there till this time, it could not have found a better or
more appropriate shelter. The mansion which General Washington occupied is
still standing; and his apartments have since been tenanted by several
eminent men. Governor Everett, while a professor in the university,
resided there. So at an after period, did Mr. Sparks, whose invaluable
labors have connected his name with the immortality of Washington. And, at
this very time, a venerable friend and contemporary of your Grandfather,
after long pilgrimages beyond the sea, has set up his staff of rest at
Washington’s head-quarters."

"You mean Professor Longfellow, Grandfather," said Laurence. "Oh, how I
should love to see the author of those beautiful VOICES OF THE NIGHT!"

"We will visit him next summer," answered Grandfather, "and take Clara and
little Alice with us—and Charley, too, if he will be quiet."




Chapter X


When Grandfather resumed his narrative, the next evening, he told the
children that he had some difficulty in tracing the movements of the
chair, during a short period after General Washington’s departure from
Cambridge.

Within a few months, however, it made its appearance at a shop in Boston,
before the door of which was seen a striped pole. In the interior was
displayed a stuffed alligator, a rattlesnake’s skin, a bundle of Indian
arrows, an old-fashioned matchlock gun, a walking-stick of Governor
Winthrop’s, a wig of old Cotton Mather’s, and a colored print of the
Boston Massacre. In short, it was a barber’s shop, kept by a Mr. Pierce,
who prided himself on having shaved General Washington, Old Put, and many
other famous persons.

"This was not a very dignified situation for our venerable chair,"
continued Grandfather; "but, you know, there is no better place for news,
than a barber’s shop. All the events of the revolutionary war were heard
of there, sooner than anywhere else. People used to sit in the chair,
reading the newspaper or talking, and waiting to be shaved, while Mr.
Pierce with his scissors and razor, was at work upon the heads or chins of
his other customers."

"I am sorry the chair could not betake itself to some more suitable place
of refuge," said Laurence. "It was old now, and must have longed for
quiet. Besides, after it had held Washington in its arms, it ought not to
have been compelled to receive all the world. It should have been put into
the pulpit of the Old South Church, or some other consecrated place."

"Perhaps so," answered Grandfather. "But the chair, in the course of its
varied existence, had grown so accustomed to general intercourse with
society, that I doubt whether it would have contented itself in the pulpit
of the Old South. There it would have stood solitary, or with no livelier
companion than the silent organ, in the opposite gallery, six days out of
seven. I incline to think, that it had seldom been situated more to its
mind, than on the sanded floor of the snug little barber’s shop."

Then Grandfather amused his children and himself, with fancying all the
different sorts of people who had occupied our chair, while they awaited
the leisure of the barber.

There was the old clergyman, such as Dr. Chauncey, wearing a white wig,
which the barber took from his head, and placed upon a wig-block. Half an
hour, perhaps, was spent in combing and powdering this reverend appendage
to a clerical skull. There too, were officers of the continental army, who
required their hair to be pomatumed and plastered, so as to give them a
bold and martial aspect. There, once in a while, was seen the thin,
care-worn, melancholy visage of an old tory, with a wig that, in times
long past, had perhaps figured at a Province House ball. And there, not
unfrequently, sat the rough captain of a privateer, just returned from a
successful cruise, in which he had captured half a dozen richly laden
vessels, belonging to King George’s subjects. And, sometimes, a rosy
little school-boy climbed into our chair, and sat staring, with wide-open
eyes, at the alligator, the rattlesnake, and the other curiosities of the
barber’s shop. His mother had sent him, with sixpence in his hand, to get
his glossy curls cropped off. The incidents of the Revolution plentifully
supplied the barber’s customers with topics of conversation. They talked
sorrowfully of the death of General Montgomery, and the failure of our
troops to take Quebec; for the New Englanders were now as anxious to get
Canada from the English, as they had formerly been to conquer it from the
French.

"But, very soon," said Grandfather, "came news from Philadelphia, the most
important that America had ever heard of. On the 4th of July, 1776,
Congress had signed the Declaration of Independence. The thirteen colonies
were now free and independent states. Dark as our prospects were, the
inhabitants welcomed these glorious tidings, and resolved to perish,
rather than again bear the yoke of England!"

"And I would perish too!" cried Charley.

"It was a great day—a glorious deed!" said Laurence, coloring high with
enthusiasm. "And, Grandfather, I love to think that the sages in Congress
showed themselves as bold and true as the soldiers in the field. For it
must have required more courage to sign the Declaration of Independence,
than to fight the enemy in battle."

Grandfather acquiesced in Laurence’s view of the matter. He then touched
briefly and hastily upon the prominent events of the Revolution. The
thunder-storm of war had now rolled southward, and did not again burst
upon Massachusetts, where its first fury had been felt. But she
contributed her full share to the success of the contest. Wherever a
battle was fought—whether at Long Island, White Plains, Trenton,
Princeton, Brandywine, or German-town—some of her brave sons were found
slain upon the field.

In October, 1777, General Burgoyne surrendered his army, at Saratoga, to
the American general, Gates. The captured troops were sent to
Massachusetts. Not long afterwards, Doctor Franklin and other American
commissioners made a treaty at Paris, by which France bound herself to
assist our countrymen. The gallant Lafayette was already fighting for our
freedom, by the side of Washington. In 1778, a French fleet, commanded by
Count d’Estaing, spent a considerable time in Boston Harbor. It marks the
vicissitudes of human affairs, that the French, our ancient enemies,
should come hither as comrades and brethren, and that kindred England
should be our foe.

"While the war was raging in the Middle and Southern States," proceeded
Grandfather, "Massachusetts had leisure to settle a new constitution of
government, instead of the royal charter. This was done in 1780. In the
same year, John Hancock, who had been president of Congress, was chosen
governor of the state. He was the first whom the people had elected, since
the days of old Simon Bradstreet."

"But, Grandfather, who had been governor since the British were driven
away?" inquired Laurence. "General Gage and Sir William Howe were the last
whom you have told us of."

"There had been no governor for the last four years," replied Grandfather.
"Massachusetts had been ruled by the legislature, to whom the people paid
obedience of their own accord. It is one of the most remarkable
circumstances in our history, that, when the charter government was
overthrown by the war, no anarchy, nor the slightest confusion ensued.
This was a great honor to the people. But now, Hancock was proclaimed
governor by sound of trumpet; and there was again a settled government."

Grandfather again adverted to the progress of the war. In 1781, General
Greene drove the British from the Southern States. In October, of the same
year, General Washington compelled Lord Cornwallis to surrender his army,
at Yorktown, in Virginia. This was the last great event of the
revolutionary contest. King George and his ministers perceived, that all
the might of England could not compel America to renew her allegiance to
the crown. After a great deal of discussion, a treaty of peace was signed,
in September, 1783.

"Now, at last," said Grandfather, "after weary years of war, the regiments
of Massachusetts returned in peace to their families. Now, the stately and
dignified leaders, such as General Lincoln and General Knox, with their
pondered hair and their uniforms of blue and buff, were seen moving about
the streets."

"And little boys ran after them, I suppose," remarked Charley; "and the
grown people bowed respectfully."

"They deserved respect, for they were good men, as well as brave,"
answered Grandfather. "Now, too, the inferior officers and privates came
home, to seek some peaceful occupation. Their friends remembered them as
slender and smooth-cheeked young men; but they returned with the erect and
rigid mien of disciplined soldiers. Some hobbled on crutches and wooden
legs; others had received wounds, which were still rankling in their
breasts. Many, alas! had fallen in battle, and perhaps were left unburied
on the bloody field."

"The country must have been sick of war," observed Laurence.

"One would have thought so," said Grandfather. "Yet only two or three
years elapsed, before the folly of some misguided men caused another
mustering of soldiers. This affair was called Shays’ War, because a
Captain Shays was the chief leader of the insurgents."

"O Grandfather, don’t let there be another war!" cried little Alice,
piteously.

Grandfather comforted his dear little girl, by assuring her that there was
no great mischief done. Shays’s War happened in the latter part of 1786,
and the beginning of the following year. Its principal cause was the
badness of the times. The State of Massachusetts, in its public capacity,
was very much in debt. So, likewise, were many of the people. An
insurrection took place, the object of which seems to have been, to
interrupt the course of law, and get rid of debts and taxes.

James Bowdoin, a good and able man, was now governor of Massachusetts. He
sent General Lincoln, at the head of four thousand men, to put down the
insurrection. This general, who had fought through several hard campaigns
in the Revolution, managed matters like an old soldier, and totally
defeated the rebels, at the expense of very little blood.

"There is but one more public event to be recorded in the history of our
chair," proceeded Grandfather. "In the year 1794, Samuel Adams was elected
governor of Massachusetts. I have told you what a distinguished patriot he
was, and how much he resembled the stern old Puritans. Could the ancient
freemen of Massachusetts, who lived in the days of the first charter, have
arisen from their graves, they would probably have voted for Samuel Adams
to be governor."

"Well, Grandfather, I hope he sat in our chair!" said Clara.

"He did," replied Grandfather. "He had long been in the habit of visiting
the barber’s shop, where our venerable chair, philosophically forgetful of
its former dignities, had now spent nearly eighteen not uncomfortable
years. Such a remarkable piece of furniture, so evidently a relic of
long-departed times, could not escape the notice of Samuel Adams. He made
minute researches into its history, and ascertained what a succession of
excellent and famous people had occupied it."

"How did he find it out?" asked Charley. "For I suppose the chair could
not tell its own history."

"There used to be a vast collection of ancient letters and other
documents, in the tower of the old South Church," answered Grandfather.
"Perhaps the history of our chair was contained among these. At all
events, Samuel Adams appears to have been well acquainted with it. When he
became governor, he felt that he could have no more honorable seat, than
that which had been the ancient Chair of State. He therefore purchased it
for a trifle, and filled it worthily for three years, as governor of
Massachusetts."

"And what next?" asked Charley.

"That is all," said Grandfather, heaving a sigh; for he could not help
being a little sad, at the thought that his stories must close here.
"Samuel Adams died in 1803, at the age of above threescore and ten. He was
a great patriot but a poor man. At his death, he left scarcely property
enough to pay the expenses of his funeral. This precious chair, among his
other effects, was sold at auction; and your Grandfather, who was then in
the strength of his years, became the purchaser."

Laurence, with a mind full of thoughts, that struggled for expression, but
could find none, looked steadfastly at the chair.

He had now learned all its history, yet was not satisfied.

"Oh, how I wish that the chair could speak!" cried he. "After its long
intercourse with mankind—after looking upon the world for ages—what
lessons of golden wisdom it might utter! It might teach a private person
how to lead a good and happy life—or a statesman how to make his country
prosperous!"




Chapter XI


Grandfather was struck by Laurence’s idea, that the historic chair should
utter a voice, and thus pour forth the collected wisdom of two centuries.
The old gentleman had once possessed no inconsiderable share of fancy;
and, even now, its fading sunshine occasionally glimmered among his more
sombre reflections.

As the history of the chair had exhausted all his facts, Grandfather
determined to have recourse to fable. So, after warning the children that
they must not mistake this story for a true one, he related what we shall
call,—



GRANDFATHER’S DREAM


Laurence and Clara, where were you last night? Where were you, Charley,
and dear little Alice? You had all gone to rest, and left old Grandfather
to meditate alone, in his great chair. The lamp had grown so dim, that its
light hardly illuminated the alabaster shade. The wood fire had crumbled
into heavy embers, among which the little flames danced, and quivered, and
sported about, like fairies.

And here sat Grandfather, all by himself. He knew that it was bedtime; yet
he could not help longing to hear your merry voices, or to hold a
comfortable chat with some old friend; because then his pillow would be
visited by pleasant dreams. But, as neither children nor friends were at
hand, Grandfather leaned back in the great chair, and closed his eyes, for
the sake of meditating more profoundly.

And, when Grandfather’s meditations had grown very profound indeed, he
fancied that he heard a sound over his head, as if somebody were preparing
to speak.

"Hem!" it said, in a dry, husky tone. "H-e-m! Hem!"

As Grandfather did not know that any person was in the room, he started up
in great surprise, and peeped hither and thither, behind the chair, and
into the recess by the fireside, and at the dark nook yonder, near the
bookcase. Nobody could he see.

"Pooh!" said Grandfather to himself, "I must have been dreaming."

But, just as he was going to resume his seat, Grandfather happened to look
at the great chair. The rays of fire-light were flickering upon it in such
a manner that it really seemed as if its oaken frame were all alive. What!
Did it not move its elbow? There, too! It certainly lifted one of its
ponderous fore-legs, as if it had a notion of drawing itself a little
nearer to the fire. Meanwhile, the lion’s head nodded at Grandfather, with
as polite and sociable a look as a lion’s visage, carved in oak, could
possibly be expected to assume. Well, this is strange!

"Good evening, my old friend," said the dry and husky voice, now a little
clearer than before. "We have been intimately acquainted so long, that I
think it high time we have a chat together."

Grandfather was looking straight at the lion’s head, and could not be
mistaken in supposing that it moved its lips. So here the mystery was all
explained.

"I was not aware," said Grandfather, with a civil salutation to his oaken
companion, "that you possessed the faculty of speech. Otherwise, I should
often have been glad to converse with such a solid, useful, and
substantial, if not brilliant member of society."

"Oh!" replied the ancient chair, in a quiet and easy tone, for it had now
cleared its throat of the dust of ages. "I am naturally a silent and
incommunicative sort of character. Once or twice, in the course of a
century, I unclose my lips. When the gentle Lady Arbella departed this
life, I uttered a groan. When the honest mint-master weighed his plump
daughter against the pine-tree shillings, I chuckled audibly at the joke.
When old Simon Bradstreet took the place of the tyrant Andros, I joined in
the general huzza, and capered upon my wooden legs, for joy. To be sure,
the bystanders were so fully occupied with their own feelings, that my
sympathy was quite unnoticed."

"And have you often held a private chat with your friends?" asked
Grandfather.

"Not often," answered the chair. "I once talked with Sir William Phips,
and communicated my ideas about the witchcraft delusion. Cotton Mather had
several conversations with me, and derived great benefit from my
historical reminiscences. In the days of the Stamp Act, I whispered in the
ear of Hutchinson, bidding him to remember what stock his countrymen were
descended of, and to think whether the spirit of their forefathers had
utterly departed from them. The last man whom I favored with a colloquy,
was that stout old republican, Samuel Adams."

"And how happens it," inquired Grandfather, "that there is no record nor
tradition of your conversational abilities? It is an uncommon thing to
meet with a chair that can talk."

"Why, to tell you the truth," said the chair, giving itself a hitch nearer
to the hearth, "I am not apt to choose the most suitable moments for
unclosing my lips. Sometimes I have inconsiderately begun to speak, when
my occupant, lolling back in my arms, was inclined to take an after-dinner
nap. Or, perhaps, the impulse to talk may be felt at midnight, when the
lamp burns dim, and the fire crumbles into decay, and the studious or
thoughtful man finds that his brain is in a mist. Oftenest, I have
unwisely uttered my wisdom in the ears of sick persons, when the
inquietude of fever made them toss about, upon my cushion. And so it
happens, that, though my words make a pretty strong impression at the
moment, yet my auditors invariably remember them only as a dream. I should
not wonder if you, my excellent friend, were to do the same, to-morrow
morning."

"Nor I either," thought Grandfather to himself. However, he thanked this
respectable old chair for beginning the conversation, and begged to know
whether it had any thing particular to communicate.

"I have been listening attentively to your narrative of my adventures,"
replied the chair, "and it must be owned, that your correctness entitles
you to be held up as a pattern to biographers. Nevertheless, there are a
few omissions, which I should be glad to see supplied. For instance, you
make no mention of the good knight, Sir Richard Saltonstall, nor of the
famous Hugh Peters, nor of those old regicide judges, Whalley, Goffe, and
Dixwell. Yet I have borne the weight of all these distinguished
characters, at one time or another."

Grandfather promised amendment, if ever he should have an opportunity to
repeat his narrative. The good old chair, which still seemed to retain a
due regard for outward appearance, then reminded him how long a time had
passed, since it had been provided with a new cushion. It likewise
expressed the opinion, that the oaken figures on its back would show to
much better advantage, by the aid of a little varnish.

"And I have had a complaint in this joint," continued the chair,
endeavoring to lift one of its legs, "ever since Charley trundled his
wheelbarrow against me."

"It shall be attended to," said Grandfather. "And now, venerable chair, I
have a favor to solicit. During an existence of more than two centuries,
you have had a familiar intercourse with men who were esteemed the wisest
of their day. Doubtless, with your capacious understanding, you have
treasured up many an invaluable lesson of wisdom. You certainly have had
time enough to guess the riddle of life. Tell us poor mortals, then, how
we may be happy!"

The lion’s head fixed its eyes thoughtfully upon the fire, and the whole
chair assumed an aspect of deep meditation. Finally, it beckoned to
Grandfather with its elbow, and made a step sideways towards him, as if it
had a very important secret to communicate.

"As long as I have stood in the midst of human affairs," said the chair,
with a very oracular enunciation, "I have constantly observed that
JUSTICE, TRUTH, and LOVE, are the chief ingredients of every happy life."

"Justice, Truth, and Love!" exclaimed Grandfather. "We need not exist two
centuries to find out that these qualities are essential to our happiness.
This is no secret. Every human being is born with the instinctive
knowledge of it."

"Ah!" cried the chair, drawing back in surprise. "From what I have
observed of the dealings of man with man, and nation with nation, I never
should have suspected that they knew this all-important secret. And, with
this eternal lesson written in your soul, do you ask me to sift new wisdom
for you, out of my petty existence of two or three centuries?"

"But, my dear chair—" said Grandfather.

"Not a word more," interrupted the chair; "here I close my lips for the
next hundred years. At the end of that period, if I shall have discovered
any new precepts of happiness, better than what Heaven has already taught
you, they shall assuredly be given to the world."

In the energy of its utterance, the oaken chair seemed to stamp its foot,
and trod, (we hope unintentionally) upon Grandfather’s toe. The old
gentleman started, and found that he had been asleep in the great chair,
and that his heavy walking stick had fallen down across his foot.



"Grandfather," cried little Alice, clapping her hands, "you must dream a
new dream, every night, about our chair!"

Laurence, and Clara, and Charley, said the same. But the good old
gentleman shook his head, and declared that here ended the history, real
or fabulous, of GRANDFATHER’S CHAIR.





BIOGRAPHICAL STORIES


BENJAMIN WEST,
SIR ISAAC NEWTON,
SAMUEL JOHNSON
OLIVER CROMWELL,
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN,
QUEEN CHRISTINA.


    This small volume, and others of a similar character, from the
    same hand, have not been composed without a deep sense of
    responsibility. The author regards children as sacred, and would
    not, for the world, cast any thing into the fountain of a young
    heart, that might embitter and pollute its waters. And, even in
    point of the reputation to be aimed at, juvenile literature is as
    well worth cultivating as any other. The writer, if he succeed in
    pleasing his little readers, may hope to be remembered by them
    till their own old age—a far longer period of literary existence
    than is generally attained, by those who seek immortality from the
    judgments of full grown men.




Chapter I


When Edward Temple was about eight or nine years old, he was afflicted
with a disorder of the eyes. It was so severe, and his sight was naturally
so delicate, that the surgeon felt some apprehensions lest the boy should
become totally blind. He therefore gave strict directions to keep him in a
darkened chamber, with a bandage over his eyes. Not a ray of the blessed
light of Heaven could be suffered to visit the poor lad.

This was a sad thing for Edward! It was just the same as if there were to
be no more sunshine, nor moonlight, nor glow of the cheerful fire, nor
light of lamps. A night had begun which was to continue perhaps for
months,—a longer and drearier night than that which voyagers are compelled
to endure, when their ship is ice-bound, throughout the winter, in the
Arctic Ocean. His dear father and mother, his brother George, and the
sweet face of little Emily Robinson, must all vanish, and leave him in
utter darkness and solitude. Their voices and footsteps, it is true, would
be heard around him; he would feel his mother’s embrace, and the kind
pressure of all their hands; but still it would seem as if they were a
thousand miles away.

And then his studies! They were to be entirely given up. This was another
grievous trial; for Edward’s memory hardly went back to the period when he
had not known how to read. Many and many a holiday had he spent at his
book, poring over its pages until the deepening twilight confused the
print, and made all the letters run into long words. Then would he press
his hands across his eyes, and wonder why they pained him so, and, when
the candles were lighted, what was the reason that they burned so dimly,
like the moon in a foggy night. Poor little fellow! So far as his eyes
were concerned, he was already an old man, and needed a pair of spectacles
almost as much as his own grandfather did.

And now, alas! the time was come, when even grandfather’s spectacles could
not have assisted Edward to read. After a few bitter tears, which only
pained his eyes the more, the poor boy submitted to the surgeon’s orders.
His eyes were bandaged, and, with his mother on one side, and his little
friend Emily on the other, he was led into a darkened chamber.

"Mother, I shall be very miserable," said Edward, sobbing.

"Oh, no, my dear child!" replied his mother, cheerfully. "Your eyesight
was a precious gift of Heaven, it is true; but you would do wrong to be
miserable for its loss, even if there were no hope of regaining it. There
are other enjoyments, besides what come to us through our eyes."

"None that are worth having," said Edward.

"Ah! but you will not think so long," rejoined Mrs. Temple, with
tenderness. "All of us—your father, and myself, and George, and our sweet
Emily—will try to find occupation and amusement for you. We will use all
our eyes to make you happy. Will not they be better than a single pair?"

"I will sit by you all day long," said Emily, in her low, sweet voice,
putting her hand into that of Edward.

"And so will I, Ned," said George, his elder brother,—"school time and
all, if my father will permit me."

Edward’s brother George was three or four years older than himself, a
fine, hardy lad, of a bold and ardent temper. He was the leader of his
comrades in all their enterprises and amusements. As to his proficiency at
study, there was not much to be said. He had sense and ability enough to
have made himself a scholar, but found so many pleasanter things to do,
that he seldom took hold of a book with his whole heart. So fond was
George of boisterous sports and exercises, that it was really a great
token of affection and sympathy, when he offered to sit all day long in a
dark chamber, with his poor brother Edward.

As for little Emily Robinson, she was the daughter of one of Mr. Temple’s
dearest friends. Ever since her mother went to Heaven, (which was soon
after Emily’s birth,) the little girl had dwelt in the household where we
now find her. Mr. and Mrs. Temple seemed to love her as well as their own
children; for they had no daughter except Emily; nor would the boys have
known the blessing of a sister, had not this gentle stranger come to teach
them what it was. If I could show you Emily’s face, with her dark hair
smoothed away from her forehead, you would be pleased with her look of
simplicity and loving-kindness, but might think that she was somewhat too
grave for a child of seven years old. But you would not love her the less
for that.

So brother George, and this loving little girl, were to be Edward’s
companions and playmates, while he should be kept prisoner in the dark
chamber. When the first bitterness of his grief was over, he began to feel
that there might be some comforts and enjoyments in life, even for a boy
whose eyes were covered with a bandage.

"I thank you, dear mother," said he, with only a few sobs, "and you,
Emily; and you too, George. You will all be very kind to me, I know. And
my father—will not he come and see me, every day?"

"Yes, my dear boy," said Mr. Temple; for, though invisible to Edward, he
was standing close beside him. "I will spend some hours of every day with
you. And as I have often amused you by relating stories and adventures,
while you had the use of your eyes, I can do the same, now that you are
unable to read. Will this please you, Edward?"

"Oh, very much!" replied Edward.

"Well then," said his father, "this evening we will begin the series of
Biographical Stories, which I promised you some time ago."




Chapter II


When evening came, Mr. Temple found Edward considerably revived in
spirits, and disposed to be resigned to his misfortune. Indeed, the figure
of the boy, as it was dimly seen by the fire-light, reclining in a well
stuffed easy-chair, looked so very comfortable that many people might have
envied him. When a man’s eyes have grown old with gazing at the ways of
the world, it does not seem such a terrible misfortune to have them
bandaged.

Little Emily Robinson sat by Edward’s side, with the air of an
accomplished nurse. As well as the duskiness of the chamber would permit,
she watched all his motions, and each varying expression of his face, and
tried to anticipate her patient’s wishes, before his tongue could utter
them. Yet it was noticeable, that the child manifested an indescribable
awe and disquietude, whenever she fixed her eyes on the bandage; for to
her simple and affectionate heart, it seemed as if her dear friend Edward
was separated from her, because she could not see his eyes. A friend’s
eyes tell us many things, which could never be spoken by the tongue.

George, likewise, looked awkward and confused, as stout and healthy boys
are accustomed to do, in the society of the sick or afflicted. Never
having felt pain or sorrow, they are abashed, from not knowing how to
sympathize with the sufferings of others.

"Well, my dear Edward," inquired Mrs. Temple, "is your chair quite
comfortable? and has your little nurse provided for all your wants? If so,
your father is ready to begin his stories."

"Oh, I am very well now," answered Edward, with a faint smile. "And my
ears have not forsaken me, though my eyes are good for nothing. So, pray,
dear father, begin!"

It was Mr. Temple’s design to tell the children a series of true stories,
the incidents of which should be taken from the childhood and early life
of eminent people. Thus he hoped to bring George, and Edward, and Emily,
into closer acquaintance with the famous persons who have lived in other
times, by showing that they also had been children once. Although Mr.
Temple was scrupulous to relate nothing but what was founded on fact, yet
he felt himself at liberty to clothe the incidents of his narrative in a
new coloring, so that his auditors might understand them the better.

"My first story," said he, "shall be about a painter of pictures."

"Dear me!" cried Edward, with a sigh. "I am afraid I shall never look at
pictures any more."

"We will hope for the best," answered his father. "In the mean time, you
must try to see things within your own mind."

Mr. Temple then began the following story:



BENJAMIN WEST


BORN 1738. DIED 1820.

In the year 1738, there came into the world, in the town of Springfield,
Pennsylvania, a Quaker infant, from whom his parents and neighbors looked
for wonderful things. A famous preacher of the Society of Friends had
prophesied about little Ben, and foretold that he would be one of the most
remarkable characters that had appeared on earth since the days of William
Penn. On this account, the eyes of many people were fixed upon the boy.
Some of his ancestors had won great renown in the old wars of England and
France; but it was probably expected that Ben would become a preacher, and
would convert multitudes to the peaceful doctrines of the Quakers. Friend
West and his wife were thought to be very fortunate in having such a son.

Little Ben lived to the ripe age of six years, without doing any thing
that was worthy to be told in history. But, one summer afternoon, in his
seventh year, his mother put a fan into his hand, and bade him keep the
flies away from the face of a little babe, who lay fast asleep in the
cradle. She then left the room.

The boy waved the fan to-and-fro, and drove away the buzzing flies
whenever they had the impertinence to come near the baby’s face. When they
had all flown out of the window, or into distant parts of the room, he
bent over the cradle, and delighted himself with gazing at the sleeping
infant. It was, indeed, a very pretty sight. The little personage in the
cradle slumbered peacefully, with its waxen hands under its chin, looking
as full of blissful quiet as if angels were singing lullabies in its ear.
Indeed, it must have been dreaming about Heaven; for, while Ben stooped
over the cradle, the little baby smiled.

"How beautiful she looks!" said Ben to himself. "What a pity it is, that
such a pretty smile should not last forever!"

Now Ben, at this period of his life, had never heard of that wonderful
art, by which a look, that appears and vanishes in a moment, may be made
to last for hundreds of years. But, though nobody had told him of such an
art, he may be said to have invented it for himself. On a table, near at
hand, there were pens and paper, and ink of two colors, black and red. The
boy seized a pen and sheet of paper, and kneeling down beside the cradle,
began to draw a likeness of the infant. While he was busied in this
manner, he heard his mother’s step approaching, and hastily tried to
conceal the paper.

"Benjamin, my son, what hast thou been doing?" inquired his mother,
observing marks of confusion in his face.

At first, Ben was unwilling to tell; for he felt as if there might be
something wrong in stealing the baby’s face, and putting it upon a sheet
of paper. However, as his mother insisted, he finally put the sketch into
her hand, and then hung his head, expecting to be well scolded. But when
the good lady saw what was on the paper, in lines of red and black ink,
she uttered a scream of surprise and joy.

"Bless me!" cried she. "It is a picture of little Sally!"

And then she threw her arms round our friend Benjamin, and kissed him so
tenderly, that he never afterwards was afraid to show his performances to
his mother.

As Ben grew older, he was observed to take vast delight in looking at the
hues and forms of nature. For instance, he was greatly pleased with the
blue violets of spring, the wild roses of summer, and the scarlet
cardinal-flowers of early autumn. In the decline of the year, when the
woods were variegated with all the colors of the rainbow, Ben seemed to
desire nothing better than to gaze at them from morn till night. The
purple and golden clouds of sunset were a joy to him. And he was
continually endeavoring to draw the figures of trees, men, mountains,
houses, cattle, geese, ducks, and turkeys, with a piece of chalk, on
barn-doors, or on the floor.

In these old times, the Mohawk Indians were still numerous in
Pennsylvania. Every year a party of them used to pay a visit to
Springfield, because the wigwams of their ancestors had formerly stood
there. These wild men grew fond of little Ben, and made him very happy by
giving him some of the red and yellow paint with which they were
accustomed to adorn their faces. His mother, too, presented him with a
piece of indigo. Thus he now had three colors,—red, blue, and yellow—and
could manufacture green, by mixing the yellow with the blue. Our friend
Ben was overjoyed, and doubtless showed his gratitude to the Indians by
taking their likenesses, in the strange dresses which they wore, with
feathers, tomahawks, and bows and arrows.

But, all this time, the young artist had no paint-brushes, nor were there
any to be bought, unless he had sent to Philadelphia on purpose. However,
he was a very ingenious boy, and resolved to manufacture paint-brushes for
himself. With this design, he laid hold upon—what do you think? why, upon
a respectable old black cat, who was sleeping quietly by the fireside.

"Puss," said little Ben to the cat, "pray give me some of the fur from the
tip of thy tail!"

Though he addressed the black cat so civilly, yet Ben was determined to
have the fur, whether she were willing or not. Puss, who had no great zeal
for the fine arts, would have resisted if she could; but the boy was armed
with his mother’s scissors, and very dexterously clipped off fur enough to
make a paint-brush. This was of so much use to him, that he applied to
Madam Puss again and again, until her warm coat of fur had become so thin
and ragged, that she could hardly keep comfortable through the winter.
Poor thing! she was forced to creep close into the chimney-corner, and
eyed Ben with a very rueful physiognomy. But Ben considered it more
necessary that he should have paint-brushes, than that Puss should be
warm.

About this period, Friend West received a visit from Mr. Pennington, a
merchant of Philadelphia, who was likewise a member of the Society of
Friends. The visitor, on entering the parlor, was surprised to see it
ornamented with drawings of Indian chiefs, and of birds with beautiful
plumage, and of the wild flowers of the forest. Nothing of the kind was
ever seen before in the habitation of a Quaker farmer.

"Why, Friend West," exclaimed the Philadelphia merchant, "what has
possessed thee to cover thy walls with all these pictures? Where on earth
didst thou get them?"

Then Friend West explained, that all these pictures were painted by little
Ben, with no better materials than red and yellow ochre and a piece of
indigo, and with brushes made of the black cat’s fur.

"Verily," said Mr. Pennington, "the boy hath a wonderful faculty. Some of
our friends might look upon these matters as vanity; but little Benjamin
appears to have been born a painter; and Providence is wiser than we are."

The good merchant patted Benjamin on the head, and evidently considered
him a wonderful boy. When his parents saw how much their son’s
performances were admired, they no doubt remembered the prophecy of the
old Quaker preacher, respecting Ben’s future eminence. Yet they could not
understand how he was ever to become a very great and useful man, merely
by making pictures.

One evening, shortly after Mr. Pennington’s return to Philadelphia, a
package arrived at Springfield, directed to our little friend Ben.

"What can it possibly be?" thought Ben, when it was put into his hands.
"Who can have sent me such a great square package as this!"

On taking off the thick brown paper which enveloped it, behold! there was
a paint-box, with a great many cakes of paint, and brushes of various
sizes. It was the gift of good Mr. Pennington. There were likewise several
squares of canvas, such as artists use for painting pictures upon, and, in
addition to all these treasures, some beautiful engravings of landscapes.
These were the first pictures that Ben had ever seen, except those of his
own drawing.

What a joyful evening was this for the little artist! At bedtime, he put
the paint-box under his pillow, and got hardly a wink of sleep; for, all
night long, his fancy was painting pictures in the darkness. In the
morning, he hurried to the garret, and was seen no more till the
dinner-hour; nor did he give himself time to eat more than a mouthful or
two of food, before he hurried back to the garret again. The next day, and
the next, he was just as busy as ever; until at last his mother thought it
time to ascertain what he was about. She accordingly followed him to the
garret.

On opening the door, the first object that presented itself to her eyes
was our friend Benjamin, giving the last touches to a beautiful picture.
He had copied portions of two of the engravings, and made one picture out
of both, with such admirable skill that it was far more beautiful than the
originals. The grass, the trees, the water, the sky, and the houses, were
all painted in their proper colors. There, too, was the sunshine and the
shadow, looking as natural as life.

"My dear child, thou hast done wonders!" cried his mother.

The good lady was in an ecstasy of delight. And well might she be proud of
her boy; for there were touches in this picture, which old artists, who
had spent a lifetime in the business, need not have been ashamed of. Many
a year afterwards, this wonderful production was exhibited at the Royal
Academy in London.

When Benjamin was quite a large lad, he was sent to school at
Philadelphia. Not long after his arrival, he had a slight attack of fever,
which confined him to his bed. The light, which would otherwise have
disturbed him, was excluded from his chamber by means of closed wooden
shutters. At first, it appeared so totally dark, that Ben could not
distinguish any object in the room. By degrees, however, his eyes became
accustomed to the scanty light.

He was lying on his back, looking up towards the ceiling, when suddenly he
beheld the dim apparition of a white cow, moving slowly over his head! Ben
started, and rubbed his eyes, in the greatest amazement.

"What can this mean?" thought he.

The white cow disappeared; and next came several pigs, who trotted along
the ceiling, and vanished into the darkness of the chamber. So lifelike
did these grunters look, that Ben almost seemed to hear them squeak.

"Well, this is very strange!" said Ben to himself.

When the people of the house came to see him, Benjamin told them of the
marvellous circumstance which had occurred. But they would not believe
him.

"Benjamin, thou art surely out of thy senses!" cried they. "How is it
possible that a white cow and a litter of pigs should be visible on the
ceiling of a dark chamber?"

Ben, however, had great confidence in his own eyesight, and was determined
to search the mystery to the bottom. For this purpose, when he was again
left alone, he got out of bed, and examined the window-shutters. He soon
perceived a small chink in one of them, through which a ray of light found
its passage, and rested upon the ceiling. Now the science of optics will
inform us, that the pictures of the white cow and the pigs, and of other
objects out of doors, came into the dark chamber, through this narrow
chink, and were painted over Benjamin’s head. It is greatly to his credit,
that he discovered the scientific principle of this phenomenon, and, by
means of it, constructed a Camera Obscura, or Magic Lantern, out of a
hollow box. This was of great advantage to him in drawing landscapes.

Well; time went on, and Benjamin continued to draw and paint pictures,
until he had now reached the age when it was proper that he should choose
a business for life. His father and mother were in considerable perplexity
about him. According to the ideas of the Quakers it is not right for
people to spend their lives in occupations that are of no real and
sensible advantage to the world. Now, what advantage could the world
expect from Benjamin’s pictures? This was a difficult question; and, in
order to set their minds at rest, his parents determined to consult the
preachers and wise men of their society. Accordingly, they all assembled
in the meeting-house, and discussed the matter from beginning to end.

Finally, they came to a very wise decision. It seemed so evident that
Providence had created Benjamin to be a painter, and had given him
abilities which would be thrown away in any other business, that the
Quakers resolved not to oppose his inclination. They even acknowledged
that the sight of a beautiful picture might convey instruction to the
mind, and might benefit the heart, as much as a good book or a wise
discourse. They therefore committed the youth to the direction of God,
being well assured that he best knew what was his proper sphere of
usefulness. The old men laid their hands upon Benjamin’s head, and gave
him their blessing, and the women kissed him affectionately. All consented
that he should go forth into the world, and learn to be a painter, by
studying the best pictures of ancient and modern times.

So our friend Benjamin left the dwelling of his parents, and his native
woods and streams, and the good Quakers of Springfield, and the Indians
who had given him his first colors,—he left all the places and persons
whom he had hitherto known,—and returned to them no more. He went first to
Philadelphia, and afterwards to Europe. Here he was noticed by many great
people, but retained all the sobriety and simplicity which he had learned
among the Quakers. It is related of him, that, when he was presented at
the court of the Prince of Parma, he kept his hat upon his head, even
while kissing the Prince’s hand.

When he was twenty-five years old, he went to London, and established
himself there as an artist. In due course of time, he acquired great fame
by his pictures, and was made chief painter to King George the Third, and
President of the Royal Academy of Arts. When the Quakers of Pennsylvania
heard of his success, they felt that the prophecy of the old preacher, as
to little Ben’s future eminence, was now accomplished. It is true, they
shook their heads at his pictures of battle and bloodshed, such as the
Death of Wolfe,—thinking that these terrible scenes should not be held up
to the admiration of the world.

But they approved of the great paintings in which he represented the
miracles and sufferings of the Redeemer of Mankind. King George employed
him to adorn a large and beautiful chapel, at Windsor Castle, with
pictures of these sacred subjects. He likewise painted a magnificent
picture of Christ Healing the Sick, which he gave to the Hospital at
Philadelphia. It was exhibited to the public, and produced so much profit
that the Hospital was enlarged, so as to accommodate thirty more patients.
If Benjamin West had done no other good deed than this, yet it would have
been enough to entitle him to an honorable remembrance forever. At this
very day, there are thirty poor people in the Hospital, who owe all their
comforts to that same picture.

We shall mention only a single incident more. The picture of Christ
Healing the Sick was exhibited at the Royal Academy in London, where it
covered a vast space, and displayed a multitude of figures as large as
life. On the wall, close beside this admirable picture, hung a small and
faded landscape. It was the same that little Ben had painted in his
father’s garret, after receiving the paint-box and engravings from good
Mr. Pennington.

He lived many years, in peace and honor, and died in 1820, at the age of
eighty-two. The story of his life is almost as wonderful as a fairy tale;
for there are few stranger transformations than that of a little unknown
Quaker boy, in the wilds of America, into the most distinguished English
painter of his day. Let us each make the best use of our natural
abilities, as Benjamin West did; and with the blessing of Providence, we
shall arrive at some good end. As for fame, it is but little matter
whether we acquire it or not.



"Thank you for the story, my dear father," said Edward, when it was
finished. "Do you know, that it seems as if I could see things without the
help of my eyes? While you were speaking, I have seen little Ben, and the
baby in its cradle, and the Indians, and the white cow and the pigs, and
kind Mr. Pennington, and all the good old Quakers, almost as plainly as if
they were in this very room."

"It is because your attention was not disturbed by outward objects,"
replied Mr. Temple. "People, when deprived of sight, often have more vivid
ideas than those who possess the perfect use of their eyes. I will venture
to say that George has not attended to the story quite so closely."

"No indeed," said George, "but it was a very pretty story for all that.
How I should have laughed to see Ben making a paint-brush out of the black
cat’s tail! I intend to try the experiment with Emily’s kitten."

"Oh, no, no, George!" cried Emily, earnestly. "My kitten cannot spare her
tail."

Edward being an invalid, it was now time for him to retire to bed. When
the family bade him good night, he turned his face towards them, looking
very loth to part.

"I shall not know when morning comes," said he sorrowfully. "And besides I
want to hear your voices all the time; for, when nobody is speaking, it
seems as if I were alone in a dark world!"

"You must have faith, my dear child," replied his mother. "Faith is the
soul’s eyesight; and when we possess it, the world is never dark nor
lonely."




Chapter III


The next day, Edward began to get accustomed to his new condition of life.
Once, indeed, when his parents were out of the way, and only Emily was
left to take care of him, he could not resist the temptation to thrust
aside the bandage, and peep at the anxious face of his little nurse. But,
in spite of the dimness of the chamber, the experiment caused him so much
pain, that he felt no inclination to take another look. So, with a deep
sigh, he resigned himself to his fate.

"Emily, pray talk to me!" said he, somewhat impatiently.

Now, Emily was a remarkably silent little girl, and did not possess that
liveliness of disposition which renders some children such excellent
companions. She seldom laughed, and had not the faculty of making many
words about small matters. But the love and earnestness of her heart
taught her how to amuse poor Edward, in his darkness. She put her
knitting-work into his hands.

"You must learn how to knit," said she.

"What! without using my eyes?" cried Edward.

"I can knit with my eyes shut," replied Emily.

Then, with her own little hands, she guided Edward’s fingers, while he set
about this new occupation. So awkward were his first attempts, that any
other little girl would have laughed heartily. But Emily preserved her
gravity, and showed the utmost patience in taking up the innumerable
stitches which he let down. In the course of an hour or two, his progress
was quite encouraging.

When evening came, Edward acknowledged that the day had been far less
wearisome than he anticipated. But he was glad, nevertheless, when his
father and mother, and George and Emily, all took their seats around his
chair. He put out his hand to grasp each of their hands, and smiled with a
very bright expression upon his lips.

"Now I can see you all, with my mind’s eye," said he; "and now, father,
pray tell us another story."

So Mr. Temple began.



SIR ISAAC NEWTON


BORN 1642. DIED 1727.

On Christmas-day, in the year 1642, Isaac Newton was born, at the small
village of Woolsthorpe, in England. Little did his mother think, when she
beheld her new-born babe, that he was destined to explain many matters
which had been a mystery ever since the creation of the world.

Isaac’s father being dead, Mrs. Newton was married again to a clergyman,
and went to reside at North Witham. Her son was left to the care of his
good old grandmother, who was very kind to him, and sent him to school. In
his early years, Isaac did not appear to be a very bright scholar, but was
chiefly remarkable for his ingenuity in all mechanical occupations. He had
a set of little tools, and saws of various sizes, manufactured by himself.
With the aid of these, Isaac contrived to make many curious articles, at
which he worked with so much skill, that he seemed to have been born with
a saw or chisel in his hand.

The neighbors looked with vast admiration at the things which Isaac
manufactured. And his old grandmother, I suppose, was never weary of
talking about him.

"He’ll make a capital workman, one of these days," she would probably say.
"No fear but what Isaac will do well in the world, and be a rich man
before he dies."

It is amusing to conjecture what were the anticipations of his grandmother
and the neighbors, about Isaac’s future life. Some of them, perhaps,
fancied that he would make beautiful furniture of mahogany, rose-wood, or
polished oak, inlaid with ivory and ebony, and magnificently gilded. And
then, doubtless, all the rich people would purchase these fine things, to
adorn their drawing-rooms. Others probably thought that little Isaac was
destined to be an architect, and would build splendid mansions for the
nobility and gentry, and churches too, with the tallest steeples that had
ever been seen in England.

Some of his friends, no doubt, advised Isaac’s grandmother to apprentice
him to a clockmaker; for, besides his mechanical skill, the boy seemed to
have a taste for mathematics, which would be very useful to him in that
profession. And then, in due time, Isaac would set up for himself, and
would manufacture curious clocks, like those that contain sets of dancing
figures, which issue from the dial-plate when the hour is struck; or like
those, where a ship sails across the face of the clock, and is seen
tossing up and down on the waves, as often as the pendulum vibrates.

Indeed, there was some ground for supposing that Isaac would devote
himself to the manufacture of clocks; since he had already made one, of a
kind which nobody had ever heard of before. It was set a-going, not by
wheels and weights, like other clocks, but by the dropping of water. This
was an object of great wonderment to all the people roundabout; and it
must be confessed that there are few boys, or men either, who could
contrive to tell what o’clock it is, by means of a bowl of water.

Besides the water-clock, Isaac made a sun-dial. Thus his grandmother was
never at a loss to know the hour; for the water-clock would tell it in the
shade, and the dial in the sunshine. The sun-dial is said to be still in
existence at Woolsthorpe, on the corner of the house where Isaac dwelt. If
so, it must have marked the passage of every sunny hour that has elapsed,
since Isaac Newton was a boy. It marked all the famous moments of his
life; it marked the hour of his death; and still the sunshine creeps
slowly over it, as regularly as when Isaac first set it up.

Yet we must not say that the sun-dial has lasted longer than its maker;
for Isaac Newton will exist, long after the dial—yea, and long after the
sun itself—shall have crumbled to decay.

Isaac possessed a wonderful faculty of acquiring knowledge by the simplest
means. For instance, what method do you suppose he took, to find out the
strength of the wind? You will never guess how the boy could compel that
unseen, inconstant, and ungovernable wanderer, the wind, to tell him the
measure of its strength. Yet nothing can be more simple. He jumped against
the wind; and by the length of his jump, he could calculate the force of a
gentle breeze, a brisk gale, or a tempest. Thus, even in his boyish
sports, he was continually searching out the secrets of philosophy.

Not far from his grandmother’s residence there was a windmill, which
operated on a new plan. Isaac was in the habit of going thither
frequently, and would spend whole hours in examining its various parts.
While the mill was at rest, he pryed into its internal machinery. When its
broad sails were set in motion by the wind, he watched the process by
which the mill-stones were made to revolve, and crush the grain that was
put into the hopper. After gaining a thorough knowledge of its
construction, he was observed to be unusually busy with his tools.

It was not long before his grandmother, and all the neighborhood, knew
what Isaac had been about. He had constructed a model of the windmill.
Though not so large, I suppose as one of the box-traps which boys set to
catch squirrels, yet every part of the mill and its machinery was
complete. Its little sails were neatly made of linen, and whirled round
very swiftly when the mill was placed in a draught of air. Even a puff of
wind from Isaac’s mouth, or from a pair of bellows, was sufficient to set
the sails in motion. And—what was most curious—if a handful of grains of
wheat were put into the little hopper, they would soon be converted into
snow-white flour.

Isaac’s playmates were enchanted with his new windmill. They thought that
nothing so pretty, and so wonderful, had ever been seen in the whole
world.

"But, Isaac," said one of them, "you have forgotten one thing that belongs
to a mill."

"What is that?" asked Isaac; for he supposed, that, from the roof of the
mill to its foundation, he had forgotten nothing.

"Why, where is the miller?" said his friend.

"That is true!—I must look out for one," said Isaac; and he set himself to
consider how the deficiency should be supplied.

He might easily have made the miniature figure of a man; but then it would
not have been able to move about, and perform the duties of a miller. As
Captain Lemuel Gulliver had not yet discovered the island of Lilliput,
Isaac did not know that there were little men in the world, whose size was
just suited to his windmill. It so happened, however, that a mouse had
just been caught in the trap; and, as no other miller could be found, Mr.
Mouse was appointed to that important office. The new miller made a very
respectable appearance in his dark gray coat. To be sure, he had not a
very good character for honesty, and was suspected of sometimes stealing a
portion of the grain which was given him to grind. But perhaps some
two-legged millers are quite as dishonest as this small quadruped.

As Isaac grew older, it was found that he had far more important matters
in his mind than the manufacture of toys, like the little windmill. All
day long, if left to himself, he was either absorbed in thought, or
engaged in some book of mathematics, or natural philosophy. At night, I
think it probable, he looked up with reverential curiosity to the stars,
and wondered whether they were worlds, like our own,—and how great was
their distance from the earth,—and what was the power that kept them in
their courses. Perhaps, even so early in life, Isaac Newton felt a
presentiment that he should be able, hereafter, to answer all these
questions.

When Isaac was fourteen years old, his mother’s second husband being now
dead, she wished her son to leave school, and assist her in managing the
farm at Woolsthorpe. For a year or two, therefore, he tried to turn his
attention to farming. But his mind was so bent on becoming a scholar, that
his mother sent him back to school, and afterwards to the University of
Cambridge.

I have now finished my anecdotes of Isaac Newton’s boyhood. My story would
be far too long, were I to mention all the splendid discoveries which he
made, after he came to be a man. He was the first that found out the
nature of Light; for, before his day, nobody could tell what the sunshine
was composed of. You remember, I suppose, the story of an apple’s falling
on his head, and thus leading him to discover the force of gravitation,
which keeps the heavenly bodies in their courses. When he had once got
hold of this idea, he never permitted his mind to rest, until he had
searched out all the laws, by which the planets are guided through the
sky. This he did as thoroughly as if he had gone up among the stars, and
tracked them in their orbits. The boy had found out the mechanism of a
windmill; the man explained to his fellow-men the mechanism of the
universe.

While making these researches he was accustomed to spend night after night
in a lofty tower, gazing at the heavenly bodies through a telescope. His
mind was lifted far above the things of this world. He may be said,
indeed, to have spent the greater part of his life in worlds that lie
thousands and millions of miles away; for where the thoughts and the heart
are, there is our true existence.

Did you never hear the story of Newton and his little dog Diamond? One
day, when he was fifty years old, and had been hard at work more than
twenty years, studying the theory of Light, he went out of his chamber,
leaving his little dog asleep before the fire. On the table lay a heap of
manuscript papers, containing all the discoveries which Newton had made
during those twenty years. When his master was gone, up rose little
Diamond, jumped upon the table, and overthrew the lighted candle. The
papers immediately caught fire.

Just as the destruction was completed, Newton opened the chamber-door, and
perceived that the labors of twenty years were reduced to a heap of ashes.
There stood little Diamond, the author of all the mischief. Almost any
other man would have sentenced the dog to immediate death. But Newton
patted him on the head with his usual kindness, although grief was at his
heart.

"Oh, Diamond, Diamond," exclaimed he, "thou little knowest the mischief
thou hast done."

This incident affected his health and spirits for some time afterwards;
but, from his conduct towards the little dog, you may judge what was the
sweetness of his temper.

Newton lived to be a very old man, and acquired great renown, and was made
a Member of Parliament, and received the honor of knighthood from the
king. But he cared little for earthly fame and honors, and felt no pride
in the vastness of his knowledge. All that he had learned only made him
feel how little he knew in comparison to what remained to be known.

"I seem to myself like a child," observed he, "playing on the sea-shore,
and picking up here and there a curious shell or a pretty pebble, while
the boundless ocean of Truth lies undiscovered before me."

At last, in 1727, when he was fourscore and five years old, Sir Isaac
Newton died,—or rather he ceased to live on earth. We may be permitted to
believe that he is still searching out the infinite wisdom and goodness of
the Creator, as earnestly, and with even more success, than while his
spirit animated a mortal body. He has left a fame behind him, which will
be as endurable as if his name were written in letters of light, formed by
the stars upon the midnight sky.



"I love to hear about mechanical contrivances—such as the water-clock and
the little windmill," remarked George. "I suppose if Sir Isaac Newton had
only thought of it, he might have found out the steam-engine, and
railroads, and all the other famous inventions that have come into use
since his day."

"Very possibly he might," replied Mr. Temple; "and, no doubt, a great many
people would think it more useful to manufacture steam-engines, than to
search out the system of the universe. Other great astronomers, besides
Newton, have been endowed with mechanical genius. There was David
Rittenhouse, an American,—he made a perfect little water-mill, when he was
only seven or eight years old. But this sort of ingenuity is but a mere
trifle in comparison with the other talents of such men."

"It must have been beautiful," said Edward, "to spend whole nights in a
high tower, as Newton did, gazing at the stars, and the comets, and the
meteors. But what would Newton have done, had he been blind? or if his
eyes had been no better than mine?"

"Why, even then, my dear child," observed Mrs. Temple, "he would have
found out some way of enlightening his mind, and of elevating his soul.
But, come! little Emily is waiting to bid you good night. You must go to
sleep, and dream of seeing all our faces."

"But how sad it will be, when I awake!" murmured Edward.




Chapter IV


In the course of the next day, the harmony of our little family was
disturbed by something like a quarrel between George and Edward.

The former, though he loved his brother dearly, had found it quite too
great a sacrifice of his own enjoyments, to spend all his playtime in a
darkened chamber. Edward, on the other hand, was inclined to be despotic.
He felt as if his bandaged eyes entitled him to demand that everybody, who
enjoyed the blessing of sight, should contribute to his comfort and
amusement. He therefore insisted that George, instead of going out to play
at foot-ball, should join with himself and Emily in a game of questions
and answers.

George resolutely refused, and ran out of the house. He did not revisit
Edward’s chamber till the evening, when he stole in, looking confused, yet
somewhat sullen, and sat down beside his father’s chair. It was evident,
by a motion of Edward’s head and a slight trembling of his lips, that he
was aware of George’s entrance, though his footsteps had been almost
inaudible. Emily, with her serious and earnest little face, looked from
one to the other, as if she longed to be a messenger of peace between
them.

Mr. Temple, without seeming to notice any of these circumstances, began a
story.



SAMUEL JOHNSON


BORN 1709. DIED 1784.

"Sam," said Mr. Michael Johnson of Lichfield, one morning, "I am very
feeble and ailing to-day. You must go to Uttoxeter in my stead, and tend
the bookstall in the market-place there."

This was spoken, above a hundred years ago, by an elderly man, who had
once been a thriving bookseller at Lichfield, in England. Being now in
reduced circumstances, he was forced to go, every market-day, and sell
books at a stall, in the neighboring village of Uttoxeter.

His son, to whom Mr. Johnson spoke, was a great boy of very singular
aspect. He had an intelligent face; but it was seamed and distorted by a
scrofulous humor, which affected his eyes so badly, that sometimes he was
almost blind. Owing to the same cause, his head would often shake with a
tremulous motion, as if he were afflicted with the palsy. When Sam was an
infant, the famous Queen Anne had tried to cure him of this disease, by
laying her royal hands upon his head. But though the touch of a king or
Queen was supposed to be a certain remedy for scrofula, it produced no
good effect upon Sam Johnson.

At the time which we speak of, the poor lad was not very well dressed, and
wore shoes from which his toes peeped out; for his old father had barely
the means of supporting his wife and children. But, poor as the family
were, young Sam Johnson had as much pride as any nobleman’s son in
England. The fact was, he felt conscious of uncommon sense and ability,
which, in his own opinion, entitled him to great respect from the world.
Perhaps he would have been glad, if grown people had treated him as
reverentially as his school-fellows did. Three of them were accustomed to
come for him, every morning; and while he sat upon the back of one, the
two others supported him on each side, and thus he rode to school in
triumph!

Being a personage of so much importance, Sam could not bear the idea of
standing all day in Uttoxeter market, offering books to the rude and
ignorant country-people. Doubtless he felt the more reluctant on account
of his shabby clothes, and the disorder of his eyes, and the tremulous
motion of his head.

When Mr. Michael Johnson spoke, Sam pouted, and made an indistinct
grumbling in his throat; then he looked his old father in the face, and
answered him loudly and deliberately.

"Sir," said he, "I will not go to Uttoxeter market!"

Mr. Johnson had seen a great deal of the lad’s obstinacy ever since his
birth; and while Sam was younger, the old gentleman had probably used the
rod, whenever occasion seemed to require. But he was now too feeble, and
too much out of spirits, to contend with this stubborn and
violent-tempered boy. He therefore gave up the point at once, and prepared
to go to Uttoxeter himself.

"Well Sam," said Mr. Johnson, as he took his hat and staff, "If, for the
sake of your foolish pride, you can suffer your poor sick father to stand
all day in the noise and confusion of the market, when he ought to be in
his bed, I have no more to say. But you will think of this, Sam, when I am
dead and gone!"

So the poor old man (perhaps with a tear in his eye, but certainly with
sorrow in his heart) set forth towards Uttoxeter. The gray-haired, feeble,
melancholy Michael Johnson! How sad a thing it was, that he should be
forced to go, in his sickness, and toil for the support of an ungrateful
son, who was too proud to do any thing for his father, or his mother, or
himself! Sam looked after Mr. Johnson, with a sullen countenance, till he
was out of sight.

But when the old man’s figure, as he went stooping along the street, was
no more to be seen, the boy’s heart began to smite him. He had a vivid
imagination, and it tormented him with the image of his father, standing
in the market-place of Uttoxeter and offering his books to the noisy crowd
around him, Sam seemed to behold him, arranging his literary merchandise
upon the stall in such a way as was best calculated to attract notice.
Here was Addison’s Spectator, a long row of little volumes; here was
Pope’s translation of the Iliad and Odyssey; here were Dryden’s poems, or
those of Prior. Here, likewise, were Gulliver’s Travels, and a variety of
little gilt-covered children’s books, such as Tom Thumb, Jack the
Giant-queller, Mother Goose’s Melodies, and others which our
great-grandparents used to read in their childhood. And here were sermons
for the pious, and pamphlets for the politicians, and ballads, some merry
and some dismal ones, for the country people to sing.

Sam, in imagination, saw his father offer these books, pamphlets, and
ballads, now to the rude yeomen, who perhaps could not read a word,—now to
the country squires, who cared for nothing but to hunt hares and
foxes,—now to the children, who chose to spend their coppers for
sugar-plums or gingerbread, rather than for picture-books. And if Mr.
Johnson should sell a book to man, woman, or child, it would cost him an
hour’s talk to get a profit of only sixpence.

"My poor father!" thought Sam to himself. "How his head will ache, and how
heavy his heart will be! I am almost sorry that I did not do as he bade
me!"

Then the boy went to his mother, who was busy about the house. She did not
know of what had passed between Mr. Johnson and Sam.

"Mother," said he, "did you think father seemed very ill to-day?"

"Yes, Sam," answered his mother, turning with a flushed face from the
fire, where she was cooking their scanty dinner. "Your father did look
very ill; and it is a pity he did not send you to Uttoxeter in his stead.
You are a great boy now, and would rejoice, I am sure, to do something for
your poor father, who has done so much for you."

The lad made no reply. But again his imagination set to work, and conjured
up another picture of poor Michael Johnson. He was standing in the hot
sunshine of the market-place, and looking so weary, sick, and
disconsolate, that the eyes of all the crowd were drawn to him. "Had this
old man no son," the people would say among themselves, "who might have
taken his place at the bookstall, while the father kept his bed?" And
perhaps—but this was a terrible thought for Sam!—perhaps his father would
faint away, and fall down in the market-place, with his gray hair in the
dust, and his venerable face as deathlike as that of a corpse. And there
would be the bystanders gazing earnestly at Mr. Johnson, and whispering,
"Is he dead? Is he dead?"

And Sam shuddered, as he repeated to himself: "Is he dead?"

"Oh, I have been a cruel son!" thought he, within his own heart. "God
forgive me! God forgive me!"

But God could not yet forgive him; for he was not truly penitent. Had he
been so, he would have hastened away that very moment to Uttoxeter, and
have fallen at his father’s feet, even in the midst of the crowded
market-place. There he would have confessed his fault, and besought Mr.
Johnson to go home, and leave the rest of the day’s work to him. But such
was Sam’s pride and natural stubbornness, that he could not bring himself
to this humiliation. Yet he ought to have done so, for his own sake, and
for his father’s sake, and for God’s sake.

After sunset, old Michael Johnson came slowly home, and sat down in his
customary chair. He said nothing to Sam; nor do I know that a single word
ever passed between them, on the subject of the son’s disobedience. In a
few years, his father died and left Sam to fight his way through the world
by himself. It would make our story much too long were I to tell you even
a few of the remarkable events of Sam’s life. Moreover, there is the less
need of this, because many books have been written about that poor boy,
and the fame that he acquired, and all that he did or talked of doing,
after he came to be a man.

But one thing I must not neglect to say. From his boyhood upward, until
the latest day of his life, he never forgot the story of Uttoxeter market.
Often when he was a scholar of the University of Oxford, or master of an
Academy at Edial, or a writer for the London booksellers,—in all his
poverty and toil, and in all his success,—while he was walking the streets
without a shilling to buy food, or when the greatest men of England were
proud to feast him at their table,—still that heavy and remorseful thought
came back to him:—"I was cruel to my poor father in his illness!" Many and
many a time, awake or in his dreams, he seemed to see old Michael Johnson,
standing in the dust and confusion of the market-place, and pressing his
withered hand to his forehead as if it ached.

Alas! my dear children, it is a sad thing to have such a thought as this
to bear us company through life.



Though the story was but half finished, yet, as it was longer than usual,
Mr. Temple here made a short pause. He perceived that Emily was in tears,
and Edward turned his half-veiled face towards the speaker, with an air of
great earnestness and interest. As for George he had withdrawn into the
dusky shadow behind his father’s chair.




Chapter V


In a few moments Mr. Temple resumed the story, as follows:



SAMUEL JOHNSON—CONTINUED.


Well, my children, fifty years had passed away since young Sam Johnson had
shown himself so hard-hearted towards his father. It was now market-day in
the village of Uttoxeter.

In the street of the village, you might see cattle-dealers with cows and
oxen for sale, and pig-drovers, with herds of squeaking swine, and
farmers, with cart-loads of cabbages, turnips, onions, and all other
produce of the soil. Now and then a farmer’s red-faced wife trotted along
on horseback, with butter and cheese in two large panniers. The people of
the village, with country squires and other visitors from the
neighborhood, walked hither and thither, trading, jesting, quarrelling,
and making just such a bustle as their fathers and grandfathers had made
half a century before.

In one part of the street, there was a puppet-show, with a ridiculous
Merry-Andrew, who kept both grown people and children in a roar of
laughter. On the opposite side was the old stone church of Uttoxeter, with
ivy climbing up its walls, and partly obscuring its Gothic windows.

There was a clock in the gray tower of the ancient church; and the hands
on the dial-plate had now almost reached the hour of noon. At this busiest
hour of the market, a strange old gentleman was seen making his way among
the crowd. He was very tall and bulky, and wore a brown coat and small
clothes, with black worsted stockings and buckled shoes. On his head was a
three-cornered hat, beneath which a bushy gray wig thrust itself out, all
in disorder. The old gentleman elbowed the people aside, and forced his
way through the midst of them with a singular kind of gait, rolling his
body hither and thither, so that he needed twice as much room as any other
person there.

"Make way, sir!" he would cry out, in a loud, harsh voice, when somebody
happened to interrupt his progress.—"Sir, you intrude your person into the
public thoroughfare!"

"What a queer old fellow this is!" muttered the people among themselves,
hardly knowing whether to laugh or to be angry.

But, when they looked into the venerable stranger’s face, not the most
thoughtless among them dared to offer him the least impertinence. Though
his features were scarred and distorted with the scrofula, and though his
eyes were dim and bleared, yet there was something of authority and wisdom
in his look, which impressed them all with awe. So they stood aside to let
him pass; and the old gentleman made his way across the market-place, and
paused near the corner of the ivy-mantled church. Just as he reached it,
the clock struck twelve.

On the very spot of ground, where the stranger now stood, some aged people
remembered that old Michael Johnson had formerly kept his bookstall. The
little children, who had once bought picture-books of him, were
grandfathers now.

"Yes; here is the very spot!" muttered the old gentleman to himself.

There this unknown personage took his stand, and removed the
three-cornered hat from his head. It was the busiest hour of the day. What
with the hum of human voices, the lowing of cattle, the squeaking of pigs,
and the laughter caused by the Merry-Andrew, the market-place was in very
great confusion. But the stranger seemed not to notice it, any more than
if the silence of a desert were around him. He was wrapt in his own
thoughts. Sometimes he raised his furrowed brow to heaven, as if in
prayer; sometimes he bent his head, as if an insupportable weight of
sorrow were upon him. It increased the awfulness of his aspect that there
was a motion of his head, and an almost continual tremor throughout his
frame, with singular twitchings and contortions of his features.

The hot sun blazed upon his unprotected head; but he seemed not to feel
its fervor. A dark cloud swept across the sky, and rain-drops pattered
into the market-place; but the stranger heeded not the shower. The people
began to gaze at the mysterious old gentleman, with superstitious fear and
wonder. Who could he be? Whence did he come? Wherefore was he standing
bare-headed in the market-place? Even the school-boys left the
Merry-Andrew, and came to gaze, with wide open eyes, at this tall,
strange-looking old man.

There was a cattle-drover in the village, who had recently made a journey
to the Smithfield market, in London. No sooner had this man thrust his way
through the throng, and taken a look at the unknown personage, than he
whispered to one of his acquaintances:

"I say, neighbor Hutchins, would ye like to know who this old gentleman
is?"

"Ay, that I would," replied neighbor Hutchins; "for a queerer chap I never
saw in my life! Somehow, it makes me feel small to look at him. He’s more
than a common man."

"You may well say so," answered the cattle-drover. "Why, that’s the famous
Doctor Samuel Johnson, who, they say, is the greatest and learnedest man
in England. I saw him in London Streets, walking with one Mr. Boswell."

Yes; the poor boy—the friendless Sam—with, whom we began our story, had
become the famous Doctor Samuel Johnson! He was universally acknowledged
as the wisest man and greatest writer in all England. He had given shape
and permanence to his native language, by his Dictionary. Thousands upon
thousands of people had read his Idler, his Rambler, and his Rasselas.
Noble and wealthy men, and beautiful ladies, deemed it their highest
privilege to be his companions. Even the king of Great Britain had sought
his acquaintance, and told him what an honor he considered it, that such a
man had been born in his dominions. He was now at the summit of literary
renown.

But all his fame could not extinguish the bitter remembrance, which had
tormented him through life. Never, never, had he forgotten his father’s
sorrowful and upbraiding look. Never—though the old man’s troubles had
been over so many years—had he forgiven himself for inflicting such a pang
upon his heart. And now, in his old age, he had come hither to do penance,
by standing at noon-day in the market-place of Uttoxeter, on the very spot
where Michael Johnson had once kept his bookstall. The aged and
illustrious man had done what the poor boy refused to do. By thus
expressing his deep repentance and humiliation of heart, he hoped to gain
peace of conscience, and the forgiveness of God.

My dear children, if you have grieved—I will not say, your parents—but, if
you have grieved the heart of any human being, who has a claim upon your
love, then think of Samuel Johnson’s penance! Will it not be better to
redeem the error now, than to endure the agony of remorse for fifty years?
Would you not rather say to a brother—"I have erred! Forgive me!"—than
perhaps to go hereafter, and shed bitter tears upon his grave?



Hardly was the story concluded, when George hastily arose, and Edward
likewise, stretching forth his hands into the darkness that surrounded
him, to find his brother. Both accused themselves of unkindness; each
besought the other’s forgiveness; and having, done so, the trouble of
their hearts vanished away like a dream.

"I am glad! I am so glad!" said Emily, in a low, earnest voice. "Now I
shall sleep quietly to-night."

"My sweet child," thought Mrs. Temple, as she kissed her, "mayest thou
never know how much strife there is on earth! It would cost thee many a
night’s rest."




Chapter VI


About this period, Mr. Temple found it necessary to take a journey, which
interrupted the series of Biographical Stories for several evenings. In
the interval, Edward practised various methods of employing and amusing
his mind.

Sometimes he meditated upon beautiful objects which he had formerly seen,
until the intensity of his recollection seemed to restore him the gift of
sight, and place every thing anew before his eyes. Sometimes he repeated
verses of poetry, which he did not know to be in his memory, until he
found them there, just at the time of need. Sometimes he attempted to
solve arithmetical questions, which had perplexed him while at school.

Then, with his mother’s assistance, he learned the letters of the
string-alphabet, which is used in some of the Institutions for the Blind,
in Europe. When one of his friends gave him a leaf of Saint Mark’s Gospel,
printed in embossed characters, he endeavored to read it by passing his
fingers over the letters, as blind children do.

His brother George was now very kind, and spent so much time in the
darkened chamber, that Edward often insisted upon his going out to play.
George told him all about the affairs at school, and related many amusing
incidents that happened among his comrades, and informed him what sports
were now in fashion, and whose kite soared the highest, and whose little
ship sailed fleetest on the Frog Pond. As for Emily, she repeated stories
which she had learned from a new book, called THE FLOWER PEOPLE, in which
the snow-drops, the violets, the columbines, the roses, and all that
lovely tribe, are represented as telling their secrets to a little girl.
The flowers talked sweetly, as flowers should; and Edward almost fancied
that he could behold their bloom and smell their fragrant breath.

Thus, in one way or another, the dark days of Edward’s confinement passed
not unhappily. In due time, his father returned; and the next evening,
when the family were assembled, he began a story.

"I must first observe, children," said he, "that some writers deny the
truth of the incident which I am about to relate to you. There certainly
is but little evidence in favor of it. Other respectable writers, however,
tell it for a fact; and, at all events, it is an interesting story, and
has an excellent moral."

So Mr. Temple proceeded to talk about the early days of



OLIVER CROMWELL


BORN 1599. DIED 1658.

Not long after King James the First took the place of Queen Elizabeth on
the throne of England, there lived an English knight at a place called
Hinchinbrooke. His name was Sir Oliver Cromwell. He spent his life, I
suppose, pretty much like other English knights and squires in those days,
hunting hares and foxes, and drinking large quantities of ale and wine.
The old house in which he dwelt, had been occupied by his ancestors before
him, for a good many years. In it there was a great hall, hung round with
coats of arms, and helmets, cuirasses and swords which his forefathers had
used in battle, and with horns of deer and tails of foxes, which they or
Sir Oliver himself had killed in the chase.

This Sir Oliver Cromwell had a nephew, who had been called Oliver, after
himself, but who was generally known in the family by the name of little
Noll. His father was a younger brother of Sir Oliver. The child was often
sent to visit his uncle, who probably found him a troublesome little
fellow to take care of. He was forever in mischief, and always running
into some danger or other from which he seemed to escape only by miracle.

Even while he was an infant in the cradle a strange accident had befallen
him. A huge ape which was kept in the family, snatched up little Noll in
his forepaws and clambered with him to the roof of the house. There this
ugly beast sat grinning at the affrighted spectators, as if he had done
the most praiseworthy thing imaginable. Fortunately, however, he brought
the child safe down again; and the event was afterwards considered an omen
that Noll would reach a very elevated station in the world.

One morning, when Noll was five or six years old, a royal messenger
arrived at Hinchinbrooke, with tidings that King James was coming to dine
with Sir Oliver Cromwell. This was a high honor to be sure, but a very
great trouble; for all the lords and ladies, knights, squires, guards, and
yeomen, who waited on the king, were to be feasted as well as himself; and
more provisions would be eaten, and more wine drunk, in that one day, than
generally in a month. However, Sir Oliver expressed much thankfulness for
the king’s intended visit, and ordered his butler and cook to make the
best preparations in their power. So a great fire was kindled in the
kitchen; and the neighbors knew by the smoke which poured out of the
chimney, that boiling, baking, stewing, roasting, and frying, were going
on merrily.

By and by the sound of trumpets was heard, approaching nearer and nearer;
and a heavy, old-fashioned coach, surrounded by guards on horseback, drove
up to the house. Sir Oliver, with his hat in his hand, stood at the gate
to receive the king. His Majesty was dressed in a suit of green, not very
new; he had a feather in his hat, and a triple ruff round his neck; and
over his shoulder was slung a hunting horn, instead of a sword.
Altogether, he had not the most dignified aspect in the world; but the
spectators gazed at him as if there was something superhuman and divine in
his person. They even shaded their eyes with their hands, as if they were
dazzled by the glory of his countenance.

"How are ye, man?" cried King James, speaking in a Scotch accent; for
Scotland was his native country. "By my crown, Sir Oliver, but I am glad
to see ye!"

The good knight thanked the king, at the same time kneeling down, while
his Majesty alighted. When King James stood on the ground, he directed Sir
Oliver’s attention to a little boy, who had come with him in the coach. He
was six or seven years old, and wore a hat and feather, and was more
richly dressed than the king himself. Though by no means an ill-looking
child; he seemed shy, or even sulky; and his cheeks were rather pale, as
if he had been kept moping within doors, instead of being sent out to play
in the sun and wind.

"I have brought my son Charlie to see ye," said the king. "I hope, Sir
Oliver, ye have a son of your own, to be his playmate?"

Sir Oliver Cromwell made a reverential bow to the little prince, whom one
of the attendants had now taken out of the coach. It was wonderful to see
how all the spectators, even the aged men, with their gray beards, humbled
themselves before this child. They bent their bodies till their beards
almost swept the dust. They looked as if they were ready to kneel down and
worship him.

The poor little prince! From his earliest infancy not a soul had dared to
contradict him; everybody around him had acted as if he were a superior
being; so that, of course, he had imbibed the same opinion of himself. He
naturally supposed that the whole kingdom of Great Britain and all its
inhabitants, had been created solely for his benefit and amusement. This
was a sad mistake; and it cost him dear enough after he had ascended his
father’s throne.

"What a noble little prince he is!" exclaimed Sir Oliver, lifting his
hands in admiration. "No, please your Majesty, I have no son to be the
playmate of his Royal Highness; but there is a nephew of mine, somewhere
about the house. He is near the prince’s age, and will be but too happy to
wait upon his Royal Highness."

"Send for him, man! send for him!" said the king.

But, as it happened, there was no need of sending for Master Noll. While
King James was speaking, a rugged, bold-faced, sturdy little urchin thrust
himself through the throng of courtiers and attendants, and greeted the
prince with a broad stare. His doublet and hose (which had been put on new
and clean in honor of the king’s visit) were already soiled and torn with
the rough play in which he had spent the morning. He looked no more
abashed than if King James were his uncle, and the prince one of his
customary playfellows.

This was little Noll himself.

"Here, please your Majesty, is my nephew," said sir Oliver, somewhat
ashamed of Noll’s appearance and demeanor. "Oliver, make your obeisance to
the king’s Majesty!"

The boy made a pretty respectful obeisance to the king; for, in those
days, children were taught to pay reverence to their elders. King James,
who prided himself greatly on his scholarship, asked Noll a few questions
in the Latin Grammar, and then introduced him to his son. The little
prince in a very grave and dignified manner, extended his hand, not for
Noll to shake, but that he might kneel down and kiss it.

"Nephew," said Sir Oliver, "pay your duty to the prince."

"I owe him no duty," cried Noll, thrusting aside the prince’s hand, with a
rude laugh. "Why should I kiss that boy’s hand?"

All the courtiers were amazed and confounded, and Sir Oliver the most of
all. But the king laughed heartily, saying that little Noll had a stubborn
English spirit, and that it was well for his son to learn betimes what
sort of a people he was to rule over.

So King James and his train entered the house; and the prince, with Noll
and some other children, was sent to play in a separate room while his
Majesty was at dinner. The young people soon became acquainted; for boys,
whether the sons of monarchs or of peasants, all like play, and are
pleased with one another’s society. What games they diverted themselves
with, I cannot tell. Perhaps they played at ball—perhaps at blindman’s
buff—perhaps at leap-frog—perhaps at prison-bars. Such games have been in
use for hundreds of years; and princes as well as poor children have spent
some of their happiest hours in playing at them.

Meanwhile, King James and his nobles were feasting with Sir Oliver, in the
great hall. The king sat in a gilded chair, under a canopy, at the head of
a long table. Whenever any of the company addressed him, it was with the
deepest reverence. If the attendants offered him wine, or the various
delicacies of the festival, it was upon their bended knees. You would have
thought, by these tokens of worship, that the monarch was a supernatural
being; only he seemed to have quite as much need of those vulgar matters,
food and drink, as any other person at the table. But fate had ordained
that good King James should not finish his dinner in peace.

All of a sudden, there arose a terrible uproar in the room where the
children were at play. Angry shouts and shrill cries of alarm were mixed
up together; while the voices of elder persons were likewise heard, trying
to restore order among the children. The king, and everybody else at
table, looked aghast; for perhaps the tumult made them think that a
general rebellion had broken out.

"Mercy on us!" muttered Sir Oliver; "that graceless nephew of mine is in
some mischief or other. The naughty little whelp!"

Getting up from table, he ran to see what was the matter, followed by many
of the guests, and the king among them. They all crowded to the door of
the play-room.

On looking in, they beheld the little Prince Charles, with his rich dress
all torn, and covered with the dust of the floor. His royal blood was
streaming from his nose in great abundance. He gazed at Noll with a
mixture of rage and affright, and at the same time a puzzled expression,
as if he could not understand how any mortal boy should dare to give him a
beating. As for Noll, there stood his sturdy little figure, bold as a
lion, looking as if he were ready to fight not only the prince, but the
king and kingdom too.

"You little villain!" cried his uncle. "What have you been about? Down on
your knees, this instant, and ask the prince’s pardon. How dare you lay
your hands on the king’s Majesty’s royal son?"

"He struck me first," grumbled the valiant little Noll; "and I’ve only
given him his due."

Sir Oliver and the guests lifted up their hands in astonishment and
horror. No punishment seemed severe enough for this wicked little varlet,
who had dared to resent a blow from the king’s own son. Some of the
courtiers were of opinion that Noll should be sent prisoner to the Tower
of London, and brought to trial for high treason. Others, in their great
zeal for the king’s service, were about to lay hands on the boy, and
chastise him in the royal presence.

But King James, who sometimes showed a good deal of sagacity, ordered them
to desist.

"Thou art a bold boy," said he, looking fixedly at little Noll; "and, if
thou live to be a man, my son Charlie would do wisely to be friends with
thee."

"I never will!" cried the little prince, stamping his foot.

"Peace, Charlie, peace!" said the king; then addressing Sir Oliver and the
attendants, "Harm not the urchin; for he has taught my son a good lesson,
if Heaven do but give him grace to profit by it. Hereafter, should he be
tempted to tyrannize over the stubborn race of Englishmen, let him
remember little Noll Cromwell, and his own bloody nose!"

So the king finished his dinner and departed; and, for many a long year,
the childish quarrel between Prince Charles and Noll Cromwell was
forgotten. The prince, indeed, might have lived a happier life, and have
met a more peaceful death, had he remembered that quarrel, and the moral
which his father drew from it. But, when old King James was dead, and
Charles sat upon his throne, he seemed to forget that he was but a man,
and that his meanest subjects were men as well as he. He wished to have
the property and lives of the people of England entirely at his own
disposal. But the Puritans, and all who loved liberty, rose against him,
and beat him in many battles, and pulled him down from his throne.

Throughout this war between the king and nobles on one side, and the
people of England on the other, there was a famous leader, who did more
towards the ruin of royal authority, than all the rest. The contest seemed
like a wrestling-match between King Charles and this strong man. And the
king was overthrown.

When the discrowned monarch was brought to trial, that warlike leader sat
in the judgment-hall. Many judges were present, besides himself; but he
alone had the power to save King Charles, or to doom him to the scaffold.
After sentence was pronounced, this victorious general was entreated by
his own children, on their knees, to rescue his Majesty from death.

"No!" said he sternly. "Better that one man should perish, than that the
whole country should be ruined for his sake. It is resolved that he shall
die!"

When Charles, no longer a king, was led to the scaffold, his great enemy
stood at a window of the royal palace of Whitehall. He beheld the poor
victim of pride, and an evil education, and misused power, as he laid his
head upon the block. He looked on, with a steadfast gaze, while a
black-veiled executioner lifted the fatal axe, and smote off that anointed
head at a single blow.

"It is a righteous deed," perhaps he said to himself. "Now Englishmen may
enjoy their rights."

At night, when the body of Charles was laid in the coffin, in a gloomy
chamber, the general entered, lighting himself with a torch. Its gleam
showed that he was now growing old; his visage was scarred with the many
battles in which he had led the van; his brow was wrinkled with care, and
with the continual exercise of stern authority. Probably there was not a
single trait, either of aspect or manner, that belonged to the little
Noll, who had battled so stoutly with Prince Charles. Yet this was he!

He lifted the coffin-lid, and caused the light of his torch to fall upon
the dead monarch’s face. Then, probably, his mind went back over all the
marvellous events, that had brought the hereditary king of England to this
dishonored coffin, and had raised himself, an humble individual, to the
possession of kingly power. He was a king, though without the empty title,
or the glittering crown.

"Why was it," said Cromwell to himself—or might have said—as he gazed at
the pale features in the coffin,—"Why was it, that this great king fell,
and that poor Noll Cromwell has gained all the power of the realm?"

And, indeed, why was it?

King Charles had fallen, because, in his manhood the same as when a child,
he disdained to feel that every human creature was his brother. He deemed
himself a superior being, and fancied that his subjects were created only
for a king to rule over. And Cromwell rose, because, in spite of his many
faults, he mainly fought for the rights and freedom of his fellow-men; and
therefore the poor and the oppressed all lent their strength to him.



"Dear father, how I should hate to be a king!" exclaimed Edward.

"And would you like to be a Cromwell?" inquired his father.

"I should like it well," replied George, "only I would not have put the
poor old king to death. I would have sent him out of the kingdom, or
perhaps have allowed him to live in a small house, near the gate of the
royal palace. It was too severe, to cut off his head."

"Kings are in such an unfortunate position," said Mr. Temple, "that they
must either be almost deified by their subjects, or else be dethroned and
beheaded. In either case it is a pitiable lot."

"Oh, I had rather be blind than be a king!" said Edward.

"Well, my dear Edward," observed his mother, with a smile, "I am glad you
are convinced that your own lot is not the hardest in the world."




Chapter VII


It was a pleasant sight (for those who had eyes) to see how patiently the
blinded little boy now submitted to what he had at first deemed an
intolerable calamity. The beneficent Creator has not allowed our comfort
to depend on the enjoyment of any single sense. Though he has made the
world so very beautiful, yet it is possible to be happy without ever
beholding the blue sky, or the green and flowery earth, or the kind faces
of those whom we love. Thus it appears that all the external beauty of the
universe is a free gift from God, over and above what is necessary to our
comfort. How grateful, then, should we be to that Divine Benevolence,
which showers even superfluous bounties upon us!

One truth, therefore, which Edward’s blindness had taught him, was, that
his mind and soul could dispense with the assistance of his eyes.
Doubtless, however, he would have found this lesson far more difficult to
learn, had it not been for the affection of those around him. His parents,
and George and Emily, aided him to bear his misfortune; if possible, they
would have lent him their own eyes. And this, too, was a good lesson for
him. It taught him how dependent on one another God has ordained us to be;
insomuch that all the necessities of mankind should incite them to mutual
love.

So Edward loved his friends, and perhaps all the world, better than he
ever did before. And he felt grateful towards his father for spending the
evenings in telling him stories—more grateful, probably, than any of my
little readers will feel towards me for so carefully writing those same
stories down.

"Come, dear father," said he, the next evening, "now tell us all about
some other little boy, who was destined to be a famous man."

"How would you like a story of a Boston boy?" asked his father.

"Oh, pray let us have it!" cried George eagerly. "It will be all the
better if he has been to our schools, and has coasted on the Common, and
sailed boats in the Frog Pond. I shall feel acquainted with him then."

"Well, then," said Mr. Temple, "I will introduce you to a Boston boy, whom
all the world became acquainted with, after he grew to be a man."

The story was as follows:—



BENJAMIN FRANKLIN


BORN 1706. DIED 1790.

In the year 1716, or about that period, a boy used to be seen in the
streets of Boston, who was known among his schoolfellows and playmates by
the name of Ben Franklin. Ben was born in 1706; so that he was now about
ten years old. His father, who had come over from England, was a
soap-boiler and tallow-chandler, and resided in Milk Street, not far from
the old South Church.

Ben was a bright boy at his book, and even a brighter one when at play
with his comrades. He had some remarkable qualities which always seemed to
give him the lead, whether at sport or in more serious matters. I might
tell you a number of amusing anecdotes about him. You are acquainted, I
suppose, with his famous story of the WHISTLE, and how he bought it with a
whole pocketful of coppers, and afterwards repented of his bargain. But
Ben had grown a great boy since those days, and had gained wisdom by
experience; for it was one of his peculiarities, that no incident ever
happened to him without teaching him some valuable lesson. Thus he
generally profited more by his misfortunes, than many people do by the
most favorable events that could befall them.

Ben’s face was already pretty well known to the inhabitants of Boston. The
selectmen, and other people of note, often used to visit his father, for
the sake of talking about the affairs of the town or province. Mr.
Franklin was considered a person of great wisdom and integrity, and was
respected by all who knew him, although he supported his family by the
humble trade of boiling soap, and making tallow-candles.

While his father and the visitors were holding deep consultations about
public affairs, little Ben would sit on his stool in a corner, listening
with the greatest interest, as if he understood every word. Indeed, his
features were so full of intelligence, that there could be but little
doubt, not only that he understood what was said, but that he could have
expressed some very sagacious opinions out of his own mind. But, in those
days, boys were expected to be silent in the presence of their elders.
However, Ben Franklin was looked upon as a very promising lad, who would
talk and act wisely by and by.

"Neighbor Franklin," his father’s friends would sometimes say, "you ought
to send this boy to college and make a minister of him."

"I have often thought of it," his father would reply; "and my brother
Benjamin promises to give him a great many volumes of manuscript sermons
in case he should be educated for the church. But I have a large family to
support, and cannot afford the expense."

In fact, Mr. Franklin found it so difficult to provide bread for his
family, that, when the boy was ten years old, it became necessary to take
him from school. Ben was then employed in cutting candlewicks into equal
lengths, and filling the moulds with tallow; and many families in Boston
spent their evenings by the light of the candles which he had helped to
make. Thus, you see, in his early days, as well as in his manhood his
labors contributed to throw light upon dark matters.

Busy as his life now was, Ben still found time to keep company with his
former schoolfellows. He and the other boys were very fond of fishing, and
spent any of their leisure hours on the margin of the mill-pond, catching
flounders, perch, eels, and tom-cod, which came up thither with the tide.
The place where they fished is now, probably, covered with stone-pavements
and brick buildings, and thronged with people, and with vehicles of all
kinds. But, at that period, it was a marshy spot on the outskirts of the
town, where gulls flitted and screamed overhead, and salt meadow-grass
grew under foot. On the edge of the water there was a deep bed of clay, in
which the boys were forced to stand, while they caught their fish. Here
they dabbled in mud and mire like a flock of ducks.

"This is very uncomfortable," said Ben Franklin one day to his comrades,
while they were standing mid-leg deep in the quagmire.

"So it is," said the other boys. "What a pity we have no better place to
stand!"

If it had not been for Ben, nothing more would have been done or said
about the matter. But it was not in his nature to be sensible of an
inconvenience, without using his best efforts to find a remedy. So, as he
and his comrades were returning from the water-side, Ben suddenly threw
down his string of fish with a very determined air:

"Boys," cried he, "I have thought of a scheme, which will be greatly for
our benefit, and for the public benefit!"

It was queer enough, to be sure, to hear this little chap—this
rosy-cheeked, ten-year-old boy—talking about schemes for the public
benefit! Nevertheless, his companions were ready to listen, being assured
that Ben’s scheme, whatever it was, would be well worth their attention.
They remembered how sagaciously he had conducted all their enterprises,
ever since he had been old enough to wear small-clothes.

They remembered, too, his wonderful contrivance of sailing across the
mill-pond by lying flat on his back, in the water, and allowing himself to
be drawn along by a paper-kite. If Ben could do that, he might certainly
do any thing.

"What is your scheme, Ben?—what is it?" cried they all.

It so happened that they had now come to a spot of ground where a new
house was to be built. Scattered round about lay a great many large
stones, which were to be used for the cellar and foundation. Ben mounted
upon the highest of these stones, so that he might speak with the more
authority.

"You know, lads," said he, "what a plague it is, to be forced to stand in
the quagmire yonder—over shoes and stockings (if we wear any) in mud and
water. See! I am bedaubed to the knees of my small-clothes, and you are
all in the same pickle. Unless we can find some remedy for this evil, our
fishing-business must be entirely given up. And, surely, this would be a
terrible misfortune!"

"That it would!—that it would!" said his comrades, sorrowfully.

"Now I propose," continued Master Benjamin, "that we build a wharf, for
the purpose of carrying on our fisheries. You see these stones. The
workmen mean to use them for the underpinning of a house; but that would
be for only one man’s advantage. My plan is to take these same stones, and
carry them to the edge of the water and build a wharf with them. This will
not only enable us to carry on the fishing business with comfort, and to
better advantage, but it will likewise be a great convenience to boats
passing up and down the stream. Thus, instead of one man, fifty, or a
hundred, or a thousand, besides ourselves, may be benefited by these
stones. What say you, lads?—shall we build the wharf?"

Ben’s proposal was received with one of those uproarious shouts, wherewith
boys usually express their delight at whatever completely suits their
views. Nobody thought of questioning the right and justice of building a
wharf, with stones that belonged to another person.

"Hurrah, hurrah!" shouted they. "Let’s set about it!"

It was agreed that they should all be on the spot, that evening, and
commence their grand public enterprise by moonlight. Accordingly, at the
appointed time, the whole gang of youthful laborers assembled, and eagerly
began to remove the stones. They had not calculated how much toil would be
requisite, in this important part of their undertaking. The very first
stone which they laid hold of, proved so heavy, that it almost seemed to
be fastened to the ground. Nothing but Ben Franklin’s cheerful and
resolute spirit could have induced them to persevere.

Ben, as might be expected, was the soul of the enterprise. By his
mechanical genius, he contrived methods to lighten the labor of
transporting the stones; so that one boy, under his directions, would
perform as much as half a dozen, if left to themselves. Whenever their
spirits flagged, he had some joke ready, which seemed to renew their
strength by setting them all into a roar of laughter. And when, after an
hour or two of hard work, the stones were transported to the water-side,
Ben Franklin was the engineer, to superintend the construction of the
wharf.

The boys, like a colony of ants, performed a great deal of labor by their
multitude, though the individual strength of each could have accomplished
but little. Finally, just as the moon sank below the horizon, the great
work was finished.

"Now, boys," cried Ben, "let’s give three cheers, and go home to bed.
To-morrow, we may catch fish at our ease!" "Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!"
shouted his comrades.

Then they all went home, in such an ecstasy of delight that they could
hardly get a wink of sleep.

The story was not yet finished; but George’s impatience caused him to
interrupt it.

"How I wish that I could have helped to build that wharf!" exclaimed he.
"It must have been glorious fun. Ben Franklin for ever, say I!"

"It was a very pretty piece of work," said Mr. Temple. "But wait till you
hear the end of the story."

"Father," inquired Edward, "whereabouts in Boston was the mill-pond, on
which Ben built his wharf?"

"I do not exactly know," answered Mr. Temple; "but I suppose it to have
been on the northern verge of the town, in the vicinity of what are now
called Merrimack and Charlestown streets. That thronged portion of the
city was once a marsh. Some of it, in fact, was covered with water."




Chapter VIII


As the children had no more questions to ask, Mr. Temple proceeded to
relate what consequences ensued from the building of Ben Franklin’s wharf.



BENJAMIN FRANKLIN—CONTINUED


In the morning, when the early sunbeams were gleaming on the steeples and
roofs of the town, and gilding the water that surrounded it, the masons
came, rubbing their eyes, to begin their work at the foundation of the new
house. But, on reaching the spot, they rubbed their eyes so much the
harder. What had become of their heap of stones!

"Why, Sam," said one to another, in great perplexity, "here’s been some
witchcraft at work, while we were asleep. The stones must have flown away
through the air!"

"More likely they have been stolen!" answered Sam.

"But who on earth would think of stealing a heap of stones?" cried a
third. "Could a man carry them away in his pocket?"

The master-mason, who was a gruff kind of man, stood scratching his head,
and said nothing, at first. But, looking carefully on the ground, he
discerned innumerable tracks of little feet, some with shoes, and some
barefoot. Following these tracks with his eye, he saw that they formed a
beaten path towards the water-side.

"Ah, I see what the mischief is," said he, nodding his head. "Those little
rascals, the boys! they have stolen our stones to build a wharf with!"

The masons immediately went to examine the new structure. And to say the
truth, it was well worth looking at, so neatly, and with such admirable
skill, had it been planned and finished. The stones were put together so
securely, that there was no danger of their being loosened by the tide,
however swiftly it might sweep along. There was a broad and safe platform
to stand upon, whence the little fishermen might cast their lines into
deep water, and draw up fish in abundance. Indeed, it almost seemed as if
Ben and his comrades might be forgiven for taking the stones, because they
had done their job in such a workmanlike manner.

"The chaps, that built this wharf, understood their business pretty well,"
said one of the masons. "I should not be ashamed of such a piece of work
myself."

But the master-mason did not seem to enjoy the joke. He was one of those
unreasonable people, who care a great deal more for their own rights and
privileges, than for the convenience of all the rest of the world.

"Sam," said he, more gruffly than usual, "go call a constable."

So Sam called a constable, and inquiries were set on foot to discover the
perpetrators of the theft. In the course of the day, warrants were issued,
with the signature of a Justice of the Peace, to take the bodies of
Benjamin Franklin and other evil-disposed persons, who had stolen a heap
of stones. If the owner of the stolen property had not been more merciful
than the master-mason, it might have gone hard with our friend Benjamin
and his fellow-laborers. But, luckily for them, the gentleman had a
respect for Ben’s father, and moreover, was amused with the spirit of the
whole affair. He therefore let the culprits off pretty easily.

But, when the constables were dismissed, the poor boys had to go through
another trial, and receive sentence, and suffer execution too, from their
own fathers. Many a rod I grieve to say, was worn to the stump, on that
unlucky night.

As for Ben, he was less afraid of a whipping than of his father’s
disapprobation. Mr. Franklin, as I have mentioned before, was a sagacious
man, and also an inflexibly upright one. He had read much, for a person in
his rank of life, and had pondered upon the ways of the world, until he
had gained more wisdom than a whole library of books could have taught
him. Ben had a greater reverence for his father, than for any other person
in the world, as well on account of his spotless integrity, as of his
practical sense and deep views of things.

Consequently, after being released from the clutches of the law, Ben came
into his father’s presence, with no small perturbation of mind.

"Benjamin, come hither," began Mr. Franklin, in his customary solemn and
weighty tone.

The boy approached, and stood before his father’s chair, waiting
reverently to hear what judgment this good man would pass upon his late
offence. He felt that now the right and wrong of the whole matter would be
made to appear.

"Benjamin," said his father, "what could induce you to take property which
did not belong to you?"

"Why, father," replied Ben, hanging his head, at first, but then lifting
his eyes to Mr. Franklin’s face, "if it had been merely for my own
benefit, I never should have dreamed of it. But I knew that the wharf
would be a public convenience. If the owner of the stones should build a
house with them, nobody will enjoy any advantage except himself. Now, I
made use of them in a way that was for the advantage of many persons. I
thought it right to aim at doing good to the greatest number."

"My son," said Mr. Franklin, solemnly, "so far as it was in your power,
you have done a greater harm to the public, than to the owner of the
stones."

"How can that be, father?" asked Ben.

"Because," answered his father, "in building your wharf with stolen
materials, you have committed a moral wrong. There is no more terrible
mistake, than to violate what is eternally right, for the sake of a
seeming expediency. Those who act upon such a principle, do the utmost in
their power to destroy all that is good in the world."

"Heaven forbid!" said Benjamin.

"No act," continued Mr. Franklin, "can possibly be for the benefit of the
public generally, which involves injustice to any individual. It would be
easy to prove this by examples. But, indeed, can we suppose that our
all-wise and just Creator would have so ordered the affairs of the world,
that a wrong act should be the true method of attaining a right end? It is
impious to think so! And I do verily believe, Benjamin, that almost all
the public and private misery of mankind arises from a neglect of this
great truth—that evil can produce only evil—that good ends must be wrought
out by good means."

"I will never forget it again," said Benjamin, bowing his head.

"Remember," concluded his father, "that, whenever we vary from the highest
rule of right, just so far we do an injury to the world. It may seem
otherwise for the moment; but, both in Time and in Eternity, it will be
found so."

To the close of his life, Ben Franklin never forgot this conversation with
his father; and we have reason to suppose, that in most of his public and
private career, he endeavored to act upon the principles which that good
and wise man had then taught him.

After the great event of building the wharf, Ben continued to cut
wick-yarn and fill candle-moulds for about two years. But, as he had no
love for that occupation, his father often took him to see various
artisans at their work, in order to discover what trade he would prefer.
Thus Ben learned the use of a great many tools, the knowledge of which
afterwards proved very useful to him. But he seemed much inclined to go to
sea. In order to keep him at home, and likewise to gratify his taste for
letters, the lad was bound apprentice to his elder brother, who had lately
set up a printing-office in Boston.

Here he had many opportunities of reading new books, and of hearing
instructive conversation. He exercised himself so successfully in writing
composition, that, when no more than thirteen or fourteen years old, he
became a contributor to his brother’s newspaper. Ben was also a versifier,
if not a poet. He made two doleful ballads; one about the shipwreck of
Captain Worthilake, and the other about the pirate Black Beard, who not
long before, infested the American seas.

When Ben’s verses were printed, his brother sent him to sell them to the
town’s-people, wet from the press. "Buy my ballads!" shouted Benjamin, as
he trudged through the streets, with a basketful on his arm. "Who’ll buy a
ballad about Black Beard? A penny a piece! a penny a piece! who’ll buy my
ballads?"

If one of those roughly composed and rudely printed ballads could be
discovered now, it would be worth more than its weight in gold.

In this way our friend Benjamin spent his boyhood and youth, until, on
account of some disagreement with his brother, he left his native town and
went to Philadelphia. He landed in the latter city, a homeless and hungry
young man, and bought three-pence worth of bread to satisfy his appetite.
Not knowing where else to go, he entered a Quaker meeting-house, sat down,
and fell fast asleep. He has not told us whether his slumbers were visited
by any dreams. But it would have been a strange dream, indeed, and an
incredible one, that should have foretold how great a man he was destined
to become, and how much he would be honored in that very city, where he
was now friendless, and unknown.

So here we finish our story of the childhood of Benjamin Franklin. One of
these days, if you would know what he was in his manhood, you must read
his own works, and the history of American Independence.



"Do let us hear a little more of him!" said Edward; "not that I admire him
so much as many other characters; but he interests me, because he was a
Yankee boy."

"My dear son," replied Mr. Temple, "it would require a whole volume of
talk, to tell you all that is worth knowing about Benjamin Franklin. There
is a very pretty anecdote of his flying a kite in the midst of a
thunder-storm, and thus drawing down the lightning from the clouds, and
proving that it was the same thing as electricity. His whole life would be
an interesting story, if we had time to tell it."

"But, pray, dear father, tell us what made him so famous," said George. "I
have seen his portrait a great many times. There is a wooden bust of him
in one of our streets, and marble ones, I suppose, in some other places.
And towns, and ships of war, and steamboats, and banks, and academies, and
children, are often named after Franklin. Why should he have grown so very
famous?"

"Your question is a reasonable one, George," answered his father. "I doubt
whether Franklin’s philosophical discoveries, important as they were, or
even his vast political services, would have given him all the fame which
he acquired. It appears to me that Poor Richard’s Almanac did more than
any thing else towards making him familiarly known to the public. As the
writer of those proverbs, which Poor Richard was supposed to utter,
Franklin became the counsellor and household friend of almost every family
in America. Thus, it was the humblest of all his labors that has done the
most for his fame."

"I have read some of those proverbs," remarked Edward; "but I do not like
them. They are all about getting money, or saving it."

"Well," said his father, "they were suited to the condition of the
country; and their effect, upon the whole, has doubtless been
good,—although they teach men but a very small portion of their duties."




Chapter IX


Hitherto, Mr. Temple’s narratives had all been about boys and men. But,
the next evening, he bethought himself that the quiet little Emily would
perhaps be glad to hear the story of a child of her own sex. He therefore
resolved to narrate the youthful adventures of Christina of Sweden, who
began to be a Queen at the age of no more than six years. If we have any
little girls among our readers, they must not suppose that Christina is
set before them as a pattern of what they ought to be. On the contrary,
the tale of her life is chiefly profitable as showing the evil effects of
a wrong education, which caused this daughter of a king to be both useless
and unhappy.

Here follows the story.



QUEEN CHRISTINA


BORN 1626. DIED 1689.

In the royal palace at Stockholm, the capital city of Sweden, there was
born, in 1626, a little princess. The king, her father, gave her the name
of Christina, in memory of a Swedish girl with whom he had been in love.
His own name was Gustavus Adolphus; and he was also called the Lion of the
North, because he had gained greater fame in war than any other prince or
general then alive. With this valiant king for their commander, the Swedes
had made themselves terrible to the Emperor of Germany and to the King of
France, and were looked upon as the chief defence of the Protestant
religion.

The little Christina was by no means a beautiful child. To confess the
truth, she was remarkably plain. The queen, her mother, did not love her
so much as she ought; partly, perhaps, on account of Christina’s want of
beauty, and also, because both the king and queen had wished for a son,
who might have gained as great renown in battle as his father had.

The king, however, soon became exceedingly fond of the infant princess.
When Christina was very young, she was taken violently sick. Gustavus
Adolphus, who was several hundred miles from Stockholm, travelled night
and day, and never rested until he held the poor child in his arms. On her
recovery, he made a solemn festival, in order to show his joy to the
people of Sweden and express his gratitude to Heaven. After this event, he
took his daughter with him in all the journeys which he made through his
kingdom.

Christina soon proved herself a bold and sturdy little girl. When she was
two years old, the king and herself, in the course of a journey, came to
the strong fortress of Colmar. On the battlements were soldiers clad in
steel armor, which glittered in the sunshine. There were likewise great
cannons, pointing their black mouths at Gustavus and little Christina, and
ready to belch out their smoke and thunder; for whenever a king enters a
fortress it is customary to receive him with a royal salute of artillery.

But the captain of the fortress met Gustavus and his daughter, as they
were about to enter the gateway.

"May it please your Majesty," said he, taking off his steel cap and bowing
profoundly, "I fear that if we receive you with a salute of cannon, the
little princess will be frightened almost to death."

Gustavus looked earnestly at his daughter, and was indeed apprehensive
that the thunder of so many cannon might perhaps throw her into
convulsions. He had almost a mind to tell the captain to let them enter
the fortress quietly, as common people might have done, without all this
head-splitting racket. But no; this would not do.

"Let them fire," said he, waving his hand. "Christina is a soldier’s
daughter, and must learn to bear the noise of cannon."

So the captain uttered the word of command, and immediately there was a
terrible peal of thunder from the cannon, and such a gush of smoke that it
enveloped the whole fortress in its volumes. But, amid all the din and
confusion, Christina was seen clapping her little hands, and laughing in
an ecstasy of delight. Probably nothing ever pleased her father so much as
to see that his daughter promised to be fearless as himself. He determined
to educate her exactly as if she had been a boy, and to teach her all the
knowledge needful to the ruler of a kingdom and the commander of an army.

But Gustavus should have remembered that Providence had created her to be
a woman, and that it was not for him to make a man of her.

However, the king derived great happiness from his beloved Christina. It
must have been a pleasant sight to see the powerful monarch of Sweden
playing in some magnificent hall of the palace with this merry little
girl. Then he forgot that the weight of a kingdom rested upon his
shoulders. He forgot that the wise Chancellor Oxenstiern was waiting to
consult with him how to render Sweden the greatest nation of Europe. He
forgot that the Emperor of Germany and the King of France were plotting
together how they might pull him down from his throne.

Yes; Gustavus forgot all the perils and cares and pompous irksomeness of a
royal life, and was as happy, while playing with his child, as the
humblest peasant in the realm of Sweden. How gayly did they dance along
the marble floor of the palace, this valiant king, with his upright,
martial figure, his warworn visage, and commanding aspect, and the small,
round form of Christina, with her rosy face of childish merriment! Her
little fingers were clasped in her father’s hand, which had held the
leading-staff in many famous victories. His crown and sceptre were her
playthings. She could disarm Gustavus of his sword, which was so terrible
to the princes of Europe.

But alas! the king was not long permitted to enjoy Christina’s society.
When she was four years old, Gustavus was summoned to take command of the
allied armies of Germany, which were fighting against the Emperor. His
greatest affliction was the necessity of parting with his child; but
people in such high stations have but little opportunity for domestic
happiness. He called an assembly of the Senators of Sweden, and confided
Christina to their care, saying that each one of them must be a father to
her, if he himself should fall in battle.

At the moment of his departure Christina ran towards him, and began to
address him with a speech which somebody had taught her for the occasion.
Gustavus was busied with thoughts about the affairs of the kingdom, so
that he did not immediately attend to the childish voice of his little
girl. Christina, who did not love to be unnoticed, immediately stopped
short, and pulled him by the coat.

"Father," said she, "why do not you listen to my speech?"

In a moment, the king forgot every thing, except that he was parting with
what he loved best in all the world. He caught the child in his arms,
pressed her to his bosom, and burst into tears. Yes; though he was a brave
man, and though he wore a steel corselet on his breast, and though armies
were waiting for him to lead them to battle,—still, his heart melted
within him, and he wept. Christina, too, was so afflicted that her
attendants began to fear that she would actually die of grief. But
probably she was soon comforted; for children seldom remember their
parents quite so faithfully as their parents remember them.

For two years more, Christina remained in the palace at Stockholm. The
queen, her mother, had accompanied Gustavus to the wars. The child,
therefore, was left to the guardianship of five of the wisest men in the
kingdom. But these wise men knew better how to manage the affairs of
state, than how to govern and educate a little girl so as to render her a
good and happy woman.

When two years had passed away, tidings were brought to Stockholm which
filled everybody with triumph and sorrow at the same time. The Swedes had
won a glorious victory at Lutzen. But alas! the warlike king of Sweden,
the Lion of the North, the father of our little Christina,—had been slain
at the foot of a great stone, which still marks the spot of that hero’s
death.

Soon after this sad event, a General Assembly, or Congress, consisting of
deputations from the nobles, the clergy, the burghers, and the peasants of
Sweden was summoned to meet at Stockholm. It was for the purpose of
declaring little Christina to be Queen of Sweden, and giving her the crown
and sceptre of her deceased father. Silence being proclaimed, the
Chancellor Oxenstiern arose.

"We desire to know," said he, "whether the people of Sweden will take the
daughter of our dead king, Gustavus Adolphus, to be their Queen."

When the Chancellor had spoken, an old man with white hair, and in coarse
apparel, stood up in the midst of the assembly. He was a peasant, Lars
Larrson by name, and had spent most of his life in laboring on a farm.

"Who is this daughter of Gustavus?" asked the old man. "We do not know
her. Let her be shown to us."

Then Christina was brought into the hall, and placed before the old
peasant. It was strange, no doubt, to see a child—a little girl of six
years old—offered to the Swedes as their ruler, instead of the brave king,
her father, who had led them to victory so many times. Could her baby
fingers wield a sword in war? Could her childish mind govern the nation
wisely in peace?

But the Swedes do not appear to have asked themselves these questions. Old
Lars Larrson took Christina up in his arms, and gazed earnestly into her
face. He had known the great Gustavus well; and his heart was touched,
when he saw the likeness which the little girl bore to that heroic
monarch.

"Yes," cried he, with the tears gushing down his furrowed cheeks, "this is
truly the daughter of our Gustavus! Here is her father’s brow!—here is his
piercing eye! She is his very picture. This child shall be our queen!"

                                [Image #4]

Then all the proud nobles of Sweden, and the reverend clergy, and the
burghers, and the peasants, knelt down at the child’s feet, and kissed her
hand.

"Long live Christina, queen of Sweden!" shouted they.

Even after she was a woman grown, Christina remembered the pleasure which
she felt in seeing all these men at her feet, and hearing them acknowledge
her as their supreme ruler. Poor child! she was yet to learn that power
does not insure happiness. As yet, however, she had not any real power.
All the public business, it is true, was transacted in her name; but the
kingdom was governed by a number of the most experienced statesmen, who
were called a Regency.

But it was considered necessary that the little queen should be present at
the public ceremonies, and should behave just as if she were in reality
the ruler of the nation. When she was seven years of age, some ambassadors
from the Czar of Muscovy came to the Swedish court. They wore long beards,
and were clad in a strange fashion, with furs, and other outlandish
ornaments; and as they were inhabitants of a half-civilized country, they
did not behave like other people. The Chancellor Oxenstiern was afraid
that the young queen would burst out a-laughing, at the first sight of
these queer ambassadors; or else that she would be frightened by their
unusual aspect.

"Why should I be frightened?" said the little queen;—"and do you suppose
that I have no better manners than to laugh? Only tell me how I must
behave; and I will do it."

Accordingly, the Muscovite ambassadors were introduced; and Christina
received them, and answered their speeches, with as much dignity and
propriety as if she had been a grown woman.

All this time, though Christina was now a queen, you must not suppose that
she was left to act as she pleased. She had a preceptor, named John
Mathias, who was a very learned man, and capable of instructing her in all
the branches of science. But there was nobody to teach her the delicate
graces and gentle virtues of a woman. She was surrounded almost entirely
by men; and had learned to despise the society of her own sex. At the age
of nine years, she was separated from her mother, whom the Swedes did not
consider a proper person to be entrusted with the charge of her. No little
girl, who sits by a New England fireside, has cause to envy Christina, in
the royal palace at Stockholm.

Yet she made great progress in her studies. She learned to read the
classical authors of Greece and Rome, and became a great admirer of the
heroes and poets of old times. Then, as for active exercises, she could
ride on horseback as well as any man in her kingdom. She was fond of
hunting, and could shoot at a mark with wonderful skill. But dancing was
the only feminine accomplishment with which she had any acquaintance.

She was so restless in her disposition, that none of her attendants were
sure of a moment’s quiet, neither day nor night. She grew up, I am sorry
to say, a very unamiable person, ill-tempered, proud, stubborn, and, in
short, unfit to make those around her happy, or to be happy herself. Let
every little girl, who has been taught self-control, and a due regard for
the rights of others, thank heaven that she has had better instruction
than this poor little queen of Sweden.

At the age of eighteen, Christina was declared free to govern the kingdom
by herself, without the aid of a regency. At this period of her life, she
was a young woman of striking aspect, a good figure and intelligent face,
but very strangely dressed. She wore a short habit of gray cloth, with a
man’s vest over it, and a black scarf around her neck, but no jewels, nor
ornaments of any kind.

Yet, though Christina was so negligent of her appearance, there was
something in her air and manner that proclaimed her as the ruler of a
kingdom. Her eyes, it is said, had a very fierce and haughty look. Old
General Wrangel, who had often caused the enemies of Sweden to tremble in
battle, actually trembled himself, when he encountered the eyes of the
queen. But it would have been better for Christina if she could have made
people love her, by means of soft and gentle looks, instead of affrighting
them by such terrible glances.

And now I have told you almost all that is amusing or instructive, in the
childhood of Christina. Only a few more words need be said about her; for
it is neither pleasant nor profitable to think of many things that she
did, after she grew to be a woman.

When she had worn the crown a few years, she began to consider it beneath
her dignity to be called a queen, because the name implied that she
belonged to the weaker sex. She therefore caused herself to be proclaimed
KING, thus declaring to the world that she despised her own sex, and was
desirous of being ranked among men. But in the twenty-eighth year of her
age, Christina grew tired of royalty, and resolved to be neither a king
nor a queen any longer. She took the crown from her head, with her own
hands, and ceased to be the ruler of Sweden. The people did not greatly
regret her abdication; for she had governed them ill, and had taken much
of their property to supply her extravagance.

Having thus given up her hereditary crown, Christina left Sweden and
travelled over many of the countries of Europe. Everywhere, she was
received with great ceremony, because she was the daughter of the renowned
Gustavus, and had herself been a powerful queen. Perhaps you would like to
know something about her personal appearance, in the latter part of her
life. She is described as wearing a man’s vest, a short gray petticoat,
embroidered with gold and silver, and a black wig, which was thrust awry
upon her head. She wore no gloves, and so seldom washed her hands that
nobody could tell what had been their original color. In this strange
dress, and, I suppose, without washing her hands or face, she visited the
magnificent court of Louis the Fourteenth.

She died in 1689. None loved her while she lived, nor regretted her death,
nor planted a single flower upon her grave. Happy are the little girls of
America, who are brought up quietly and tenderly, at the domestic hearth,
and thus become gentle and delicate women! May none of them ever lose the
loveliness of their sex, by receiving such an education as that of Queen
Christina!



Emily, timid, quiet, and sensitive, was the very reverse of little
Christina. She seemed shocked at the idea of such a bold and masculine
character as has been described in the foregoing story.

"I never could have loved her," whispered she to Mrs. Temple; and then she
added, with that love of personal neatness, which generally accompanies
purity of heart:—"It troubles me to think of her unclean hands!"

"Christina was a sad specimen of womankind, indeed," said Mrs. Temple.
"But it is very possible for a woman to have a strong mind, and to be
fitted for the active business of life, without losing any of her natural
delicacy. Perhaps, some time or other, Mr. Temple will tell you a story of
such a woman."

It was now time for Edward to be left to repose. His brother George shook
him heartily by the hand, and hoped, as he had hoped twenty times before,
that to-morrow or the next day, Ned’s eyes would be strong enough to look
the sun right in the face.

"Thank you, George," replied Edward, smiling; "but I am not half so
impatient as at first. If my bodily eyesight were as good as yours,
perhaps I could not see things so distinctly with my mind’s eye. But now
there is a light within which shows me the little Quaker artist, Ben West,
and Isaac Newton with his windmill, and stubborn Sam Johnson, and stout
Noll Cromwell, and shrewd Ben Franklin, and little Queen Christina with
the Swedes kneeling at her feet. It seems as if I really saw these
personages face to face. So I can bear the darkness outside of me pretty
well."

When Edward ceased speaking, Emily put up her mouth and kissed him as her
farewell for the night.

"Ah, I forgot!" said Edward, with a sigh. "I cannot see any of your faces.
What would it signify to see all the famous people in the world, if I must
be blind to the faces that I love?"

"You must try to see us with your heart, my dear child," said his mother.

Edward went to bed, somewhat dispirited, but quickly falling asleep, was
visited with such a pleasant dream of the sunshine and of his dearest
friends that he felt the happier for it all the next day. And we hope to
find him still happy when we meet again.

THE END.






JUVENILE BOOKS


PUBLISHED BY

TICKNOR, REED, AND FIELDS.

JUST OUT,

_History of my Pets_.
By Grace Greenwood. A beautiful little volume, with fine plates. 50 cents.

_Barbauld’s (Mrs.) Lessons for Children_.
With a large number of engravings. 16mo. 40 cents.

_Jonas’s Stories. Related to Rollo and Lucy_.
By Jacob Abbott. With engravings. 18mo. 38 cents.

_Jonas a Judge; or Law among the Boys_.
By Jacob Abbott. With engravings. 18mo. 38 cents.

_Jonas on a Farm in Summer_.
By Jacob Abbott. With engravings. 18mo. 38 cents.

_Jonas on a Farm in Winter_.
By Jacob Abbott. With engravings. 18mo. 38 cents.

_Jack Halliard. Voyages and adventures in the Arctic Ocean_.
With engravings. 18mo. 38 cents.

_Lambert Lilly’s History of the New England States_.
With numerous engravings. 18mo. 38 cents.

_Lambert Lilly’s History of the Middle States_. With numerous engravings.
18mo. 38 cents.

_Lambert Lilly’s History of the Southern States_, _Virginia_, _North and
South Carolina_, _and Georgia_.
With numerous engravings. 18mo. 38 cents.

_Lambert Lilly’s History of the Western States_.
With numerous engravings. 18mo. 38 cents.

_Lambert Lilly’s Story of the American Revolution._
With numerous engravings. 18mo. 38 cents.

_Little Stories for Little Folks_.
Translated from the German. With twelve fine steel engravings. 16mo. 60
cents.

_Mary Howitt’s Birds and Flowers, and other_ _Country Things_.
With engravings. 12mo. 50 cents.

_Mother’s Lessons, for Little Girls and Boys_.
By a Lady of Boston. With eight beautiful steel engravings. 16mo. 50
cents.

_Olympic Games. A Gift for the Holidays_.
By the Author of "Poetry for Home and School," &c. 16mo. 50 cents.

_Parley’s Short Stories for Long Nights_.
With eight colored engravings, 16mo. 50 cents; uncolored engravings, 40
cents.

_Lights and Shadows of Domestic Life, and other Stories_.
By the authors of "Rose and her Lamb."

TICKNOR, REED, AND FIELDS

HAVE PUBLISHED

_Greenwood Leaves_.
A Collection of Stories and Letters, by Grace Greenwood. Second edition. 1
vol. 12mo. $1.25; gilt $1.75.


    We suppose most of our readers are familiar with the name of Grace
    Greenwood. For some half dozen of years she has been one of the
    most acceptable contributors to our American monthlies, and she
    possesses such liveliness and vivacity that it does one good to
    read her productions. There is an ease and _grace_ about her, too,
    that makes us feel acquainted with her, although we have never
    seen her. The volume before us is filled with tales, sketches,
    letters, and poems. We predict that every lady’s library will
    contain this volume.—BOSTON ATLAS.


    The name of Grace Greenwood has now become a household word in the
    popular literature of our country and our day. Of the intellectual
    woman we are not called to say much, as her writings speak for
    themselves, and they have spoken widely. They are eminently
    characteristic; they are strictly national; they are likewise
    decisively individual. All true individuality is honestly social;
    and also, in Miss Clarke’s writings, nothing is sectional, and
    nothing sectarian. There is much in them that is subjective, much
    that is drawn from personal experience, but nothing that is merely
    vain or selfish. A genuine human being, she is at the same time a
    genuine American girl. And the spirit of her country finds in her
    utterance a voice that must stir an earnest life in the brothers
    and sisters of her nation. She is one of the spiritual products of
    the soil, which has of late given evidence of spiritual fertility;
    and she promises not to be the least healthy, as she is not the
    least choice among them; she is only putting out her spring buds;
    if no untimely frost shall nip them, when the summer suns are warm
    they will be splendid blossoms, and long before autumn begins to
    dim the sky with its mellow shootings they will be luxuriant
    fruit.—HENRY GILES.


_Alderbrook_.
_A Collection of Fanny Forester’s Village Sketches, Poems, &c_. With a
fine Mezzotinto Portrait of the Author, engraved by Sartain. Ninth
edition, enlarged.

2 vols. 12mo, $1.75; gilt $2.50; gilt extra $3.00. The same in 1 vol.
$1.62; gilt $2.25; gilt extra $2.75.


    Who has not heard of Fanny Forester,—’charming Fanny Forester,’ as
    she is deservedly called? Her sketches have been more generally
    read and admired than those of almost any other periodical writer
    of our day. There is a freshness, grace, sprightliness, purity,
    and actualness about them, which charms and invigorates; and we
    are glad to find them collected and published in a form both
    elegant and convenient. Miss Chubbuck, it will be remembered, was
    married a few months ago to the Rev. Dr. Judson, and is now on her
    way, with that devoted missionary, to the scene of his former
    labors. The dedicatory preface of these volumes, to her husband,
    is one of the most graceful and touching we have ever seen. A
    beautifully engraved portrait of the lady, by Sartain, is prefixed
    to the first volume. This collection will make a very acceptable
    and suitable present in the approaching Holidays.—SALEM REGISTER.


    This is one of those charming books which well deserves a place in
    every family library, and which has already won a place in
    thousands of hearts. The Sketches comprised in these beautiful
    volumes are so full of grace and tenderness, so pure in their
    style and so elevated in their tone, that none can read them
    without delight and profit. We hazard little in saying that the
    touching story of "Grace Linden," which properly leads the
    collection, is scarcely surpassed in beauty by any thing in the
    works of Maria Edgeworth, or Mary Russell Mitford. There are a
    great many other Sketches, in the volumes, that deserve special
    praise; but we will not deal in particulars when all are so
    admirable.

    The authoress of "Alderbrook" is now a self-denying, zealous
    missionary of the Cross, in Asia, and, as Mrs. Judson, has written
    many very charming things. She is best known, however, under her
    _nomme de plume_; and however honored may be the revered name she
    now bears, that of Fanny Forester will be cherished with pride and
    pleasure by her friends and readers.—So. LIT. GAZETTE.



