
THE SHAME OF MOTLEY

Being the Memoir of Certain Transactions in the Life of Lazzaro
Biancomonte, of Biancomonte, sometime Fool of the Court of Pesaro.


By Rafael Sabatini


CONTENTS

     PART I

     FLOWER OF THE QUINCE


     CHAPTER

         I.  THE CARDINAL OF VALENCIA

        II.  THE LIVERIES OF SANTAFIOR

       III.  MADONNA PAOLA

        IV.  THE COZENING OF RAMIRO

         V.  MADONNA'S INGRATITUDE

        VI.  FOOL'S LUCK

       VII.  THE SUMMONS FROM ROME

      VIII.  "MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN"

        IX.  THE FOOL-AT-ARMS

         X.  THE FALL OF PESARO



     PART II

     THE OGRE OF CESENA


        XI.  MADONNA'S SUMMONS

       XII.  THE GOVERNOR OF CESENA

      XIII.  POISON

       XIV.  REQUIESCAT!

        XV.  AN ILL ENCOUNTER

       XVI.  IN THE CITADEL OF CESENA

      XVII.  THE SENESCHAL

     XVIII.  THE LETTER

       XIX.  DOOMED

        XX.  THE SUNSET

       XXI.  AVE CAESAR!




PART I. FLOWER OF THE QUINCE



CHAPTER I. THE CARDINAL OF VALENCIA


For three days I had been cooling my heels about the Vatican, vexed by
suspense. It fretted me that I should have been so lightly dealt with
after I had discharged the mission that had brought me all the way from
Pesaro, and I wondered how long it might be ere his Most Illustrious
Excellency the Cardinal of Valencia might see fit to offer me the
honourable employment with which Madonna Lucrezia had promised me that
he would reward the service I had rendered the House of Borgia by my
journey.

Three days were sped, yet nought had happened to signify that things
would shape the course by me so ardently desired; that the means would
be afforded me of mending my miserable ways, and repairing the wreck
my life had suffered on the shoals of Fate. True, I had been housed and
fed, and the comforts of indolence had been mine; but, for the rest, I
was still clothed in the livery of folly which I had worn on my arrival,
and, wherever I might roam, there followed ever at my heels a crowd of
underlings, seeking to have their tedium lightened by jests and capers,
and voting me--when their hopes proved barren--the sorriest Fool that
had ever worn the motley.

On that third day I speak of, my patience tried to its last strand, I
had beaten a lacquey with my hands, and fled from the cursed gibes his
fellows aimed at me, out into the misty gardens and the chill January
air, whose sting I could, perhaps, the better disregard by virtue of
the heat of indignation that consumed me. Was it ever to be so with me?
Could nothing lift the curse of folly from me, that I must ever be a
Fool, and worse, the sport of other fools?

It was there on one of the terraces crowning the splendid heights above
immortal Rome that Messer Gianluca found me. He greeted me courteously;
I answered with a snarl, deeming him come to pursue the plaguing from
which I had fled.

"His Most Illustrious Excellency the Cardinal of Valencia is asking for
you, Messer Boccadoro," he announced. And so despairing had been my mood
of ever hearing such a summons that, for a moment, I accounted it some
fresh jest of theirs. But the gravity of his fat countenance reassured
me.

"Let us go, then," I answered with alacrity, and so confident was I that
the interview to which he bade me was the first step along the road to
better fortune, that I permitted myself a momentary return to the Fool's
estate from which I thought myself on the point of being for ever freed.

"I shall use the interview to induce his Excellency to submit a tenth
beatitude to the approval of our Holy Father: Blessed are the bearers of
good tidings. Come on, Messer the seneschal."

I led the way, in my impatience forgetful of his great paunch and little
legs, so that he was sorely tried to keep pace with me. Yet who would
not have been in haste, urged by such a spur as had I? Here, then, was
the end of my shameful travesty. To-morrow a soldier's harness should
replace the motley of a jester; the name by which I should be known
again to men would be that of Lazzaro Biancomonte, and no longer
Boccadoro--the Fool of the golden mouth.

Thus much had Madonna Lucrezia's promises led me to expect, and it was
with a soul full of joyous expectation that I entered the great man's
closet.

He received me in a manner calculated to set me at my ease, and yet
there was about him a something that overawed me. Cesare Borgia,
Cardinal of Valencia, was then in his twenty-third year, for all
that there hung about him the semblance of a greater age, just as his
cardinalitial robes lent him the appearance of a height far above the
middle stature that was his own. His face was pale and framed in a silky
auburn beard; his nose was aquiline and strong; his eyes the keenest
that I have ever seen; his forehead lofty and intelligent. He seemed
pervaded by an air of feverish restlessness, something surpassing the
vivida vis animi, something that marked him to discerning eyes for a man
of incessant action of body and of mind.

"My sister tells me," he said in greeting, "that you are willing to take
service under me, Messer Biancomonte."

"Such was the hope that guided me to Rome, Most Excellent," I answered
him.

Surprise flashed into his eyes, and was gone as quickly as it had come.
His thin lips parted in a smile, whose meaning was inscrutable.

"As some reward for the safe delivery of the letter you brought me from
her?" he questioned mildly.

"Precisely, Illustrious," I answered in all frankness.

His open hand smote the table of wood-mosaics at which he sat.

"Praised be Heaven!" he cried. "You seem to promise that I shall have in
you a follower who deals in truth."

"Could your Excellency, to whom my real name is known, expect ought else
of one who bears it--however unworthily?"

There was amusement in his glance.

"Can you still swagger it, after having worn that livery for three
years?" he asked, and his lean forefinger pointed at my hideous motley
of red and black and yellow.

I flushed and hung my head, and--as if to mock that very expression
of my shame--the bells on my cap gave forth a silvery tinkle at the
movement.

"Excellency, spare me," I murmured. "Did you know all my miserable story
you would be merciful. Did you know with what joy I turned my back on
the Court of Pesaro--"

"Aye," he broke in mockingly, "when Giovanni Sforza threatened to have
you hanged for the overboldness of your tongue. Not until then did it
occur to you to turn from the shameful life in which the best years
of your manhood were being wasted. There! Just now I commended your
truthfulness; but the truth that dwells in you is no more, it seems,
than the truth we may look for in the mouth of Folly. At heart, I fear,
you are a hypocrite, Messer Biancomonte; the worst form of hypocrite--a
hypocrite to your own self."

"Did your Excellency know all!" I cried.

"I know enough," he answered, with stern sorrow; "enough to make me
marvel that the son of Ettore Biancomonte of Biancomonte should play the
Fool to Costanzo Sforza, Lord of Pesaro. Oh you will tell me that you
went there for revenge, to seek to right the wrong his father did your
father."

"It was, it was!" I cried, with heated vehemence. "Be flames everlasting
the dwelling of my soul if any other motive drove me to this shameful
trade."

There was a pause. His beautiful eyes flamed with a sudden light as they
rested on me. Then the lids drooped demurely, and he drew a deep breath.
But when he spoke there was scorn in his voice.

"And, no doubt, it was that same motive kept you there, at peace for
three whole years, in slothful ease, the motleyed Fool, jesting and
capering for his enemy's delectation--you, a man with the knightly
memory of your foully-wronged parent to cry hourly shame upon you. No
doubt you lacked the opportunity to bring the tyrant to account. Or was
it that you were content to let him make a mock of you so long as he
housed and fed you and clothed you in your garish livery of shame?

"Spare me, Excellency," I cried again. "Of your charity let my past be
done with. When he drove me forth with threats of hanging, from which
your gracious sister saved me, I turned my steps to Rome at her bidding
to--"

"To find honourable employment at my hands," he interrupted quietly.
Then suddenly rising, and speaking in a voice of thunder--"And what,
then, of your revenge?" he cried.

"It has been frustrated," I answered lamely. "Sufficient do I account
the ruin that already I have wrought in my life by the pursuit of that
phantom. I was trained to arms, my lord. Let me discard for good these
tawdry rags, and strap a soldier's harness to my back."

"How came you to journey hither thus?" he asked, suddenly turning the
subject.

"It was Madonna Lucrezia's wish. She held that my errand would be safer
so, for a Fool may travel unmolested."

He nodded that he understood, and paced the chamber with bowed head. For
a spell there was silence, broken only by the soft fall of his slippered
feet and the swish of his silken purple. At last he paused before me and
looked up into my face--for I was a good head taller than he was. His
fingers combed his auburn beard, and his beautiful eyes were full on
mine.

"That was a wise precaution of my sister's," he approved. "I will take
a lesson from her in the matter. I have employment for you, Messer
Biancomonte."

I bowed my head in token of my gratitude.

"You shall find me diligent and faithful, my lord," I promised him.

"I know it," he sniffed, "else should I not employ you."

He turned from me, and stepped back to his table. He took up a package,
fingered it a moment, then dropped it again, and shot me one of his
quiet glances.

"That is my answer to Madonna Lucrezia's letter," he said slowly, his
voice as smooth as silk, "and I desire that you shall carry it to Pesaro
for me, and deliver it safely and secretly into her hands."

I could do no more than stare at him. It seemed as if my mind were
stricken numb.

"Well?" he asked at last; and in his voice there was now a suggestion of
steel beneath the silk. "Do you hesitate?"

"And if I do," I answered, suddenly finding my voice, "I do no more than
might a bolder man. How can I, who am banned by punishment of death,
contrive to penetrate again into the Court of Pesaro and reach the Lady
Lucrezia?"

"That is a matter that I shall leave to the shrewd wit which all Italy
says is the heritage of Boccadoro, the Prince of Fools. Does the task
daunt you?" His glance and voice were alike harsh.

In very truth it did, and I told him so, but in the terms which the
shrewd wit he said was mine dictated.

"I hesitate, my lord, indeed; but more because I fear the frustration
of your own ends--whatever they may be--than because I dread to earn
a broken neck by again adventuring into Pesaro. Would not some other
messenger--unknown at the Court of Giovanni Sforza--be in better case to
acquit himself of such a task?

"Yes, if I had one I could trust," he answered frankly.

"I will be open with you, Biancomonte. There are such grave matters at
issue, there are such secrets confided to that paper, that I would not
for a kingdom, not for our Holy Father's triple crown, that they should
fall into alien hands."

He approached me again, and his slender hand, upon which the sacred
amethyst was glowing, fell lightly on my shoulder. He lowered his voice
"You are the man, the one man in Italy, whose interests are bound up
with mine in this; therefore are you the one man to whom I can entrust
that package."

"I?" I gasped in amazement--as well I might, for what interests had
Boccadoro, the Fool, in common with Cesare Borgia, Cardinal of Valencia?

"You," he answered vehemently, "you, Lazzaro Biancomonte of Biancomonte,
whose father Costanzo of Pesaro stripped of his domains. The matters in
those papers mean the ruin of the Lord of Pesaro. We are all but ripe to
strike at him from Rome and when we strike he shall be so disfigured
by the blow that all Italy shall hold its sides to laugh at the sorry
figure he will cut. I would not say so much to any other living man but
you and if I tell it you it is because I need your aid."

"The lion and mouse," I murmured.

"Why yes, if you will."

"And this man is the husband of your sister!" I exclaimed, almost
involuntarily.

"Does that imply a doubt of what I have said?" he flashed, his head
thrown back, his brows drawn suddenly together.

"No, no," I hastened to assure him. He smiled softly.

"Maddonna Lucrezia knows all--or nearly all. Of what else she may need
to learn, that letter will inform her. It is the last thread, the last
knot needed, before we can complete the net in which we are to hold that
tyrant? Now, will you bear the letter?"

Would I bear it? Dear God! To achieve the end in view I would have
spent my remaining days in motley, making sport for grooms and
kitchen wenches. Some such answer did I make him, and he smiled his
satisfaction.

"You shall journey as you are," he bade me. "I am guided by my sister,
assured that the coat of a Fool is stouter protection than the best
hauberk ever tempered. When you have done your errand come you back to
me, and you shall have employment better suited to one who bears the
name of Biancomonte."

"You may depend upon me in this, my lord," I promised gravely. "I shall
not fail you."

"It is well" said he; and those wondrous eyes of his rested again upon
my face. "How soon can you set out?"

"At once, my lord. Does not the by-word say that a fool makes little
preparation for a journey?"

He nodded, and moved to a coffer, a beautiful piece of Venetian work in
ultramarine and gold. From this he took a heavy bag.

"There," said he, "you will find the best of all travelling companions."
I thanked him, and set the bag on the crook of my left arm, and by its
weight I knew how true he was to the notorious splendour of his race.
"And this," said he, "is a talisman that may serve to help you out of
any evil plight, and open many a door that you may find locked." And he
handed me a signet ring on which was graven the steer that is the emblem
of the House of Borgia.

He raised aloft the hand on which was glistening the sacred
amethyst--two fingers crooked and two erect. Wondering what this should
mean, I stared inquiry.

"Kneel," he bade me. And realising what he would be about, I sank on
to my knees whilst he murmured the Apostolic benediction over my bowed
head. The rushes of the floor were the only witnesses of the smile that
crept to my lips at this sudden assumption of his churchly office by
that most worldly prince.




CHAPTER II. THE LIVERIES OF SANTAFIOR


Such preparations as I had to make were soon complete.

Although it was agreed that I was to travel in the motley, yet, in my
lately-born shame of that apparel, I decided that I would conceal it as
best might be, revealing it only should the need arise. Moreover, it
was incumbent that I should afford myself more protection against the
inclement January night than that of my foliated cape, my crested cap
and silken hose. So, a black cloak, heavy and ample, a broad-brimmed
hat, and a pair of riding boots of untanned leather were my further
equipment. In the lining of one of those boots I concealed the Lord
Cesare's package; his money--some twenty ducats--I carried in a belt
about my waist, and his ring I set boldly on my finger.

Few moments did it need me to make ready, yet fewer, it seems, would
the Borgia impatience have had me employ; for scarce was I booted when
someone knocked at my door. I opened, and there entered a very mountain
of a man, whose corselet flashed back the yellow light of my tapers, as
might have done a mirror, and whose harsh voice barked out to ask if I
was ready.

I had had some former acquaintance with this fellow, having first met
him during the previous year, on the occasion of the Court of Pesaro's
sojourn at Rome. His name was Ramiro del' Orca, and throughout the Papal
army it stood synonymous for masterfulness and grim brutality. He was,
as I have said, an enormous man, of prodigious bodily strength, heavy,
yet of good proportions. Of his face one gathered the impression of a
blazing furnace. His cheeks and nose were of a vivid red, and still more
fiery was the hair, now hidden 'neath his morion, and the beard that
tapered to a dagger's point. His very eyes kept tune with the red
harmony of his ferocious countenance, for the whites were ever bloodshot
as a drunkard's--which, with no want of truth, men said he was.

"Come," grunted that fiery, self-sufficient vassal, "be stirring, sir
Fool. I have orders to see you to the gates. There is a horse ready
saddled for you. It is the Lord Cardinal's parting gift. Resolve me now,
which will be the greater ass--the one that rides, or the one that is
ridden?"

"O monstrous riddle!" I exclaimed, as I took up my cloak and hat. "Who
am I that I should solve it?"

"It baffles you, sir Fool?" quoth he.

"In very truth it does." I ruefully wagged my head so that my bells set
up a jangle. "For the rider is a man and the ridden a horse. But," I
pursued, in that back-biting strain, which is the very essence of the
jester's wit, "were you to make a trio of us, including Messer Ramiro
del' Orca, Captain in the army of his Holiness, no doubt would then
afflict me. I should never hesitate which of the three to pronounce the
ass."

"What shall that mean?" he asked, with darkening brows.

"That its meaning proves obscure to you confirms the verdict I
was hinting at," I taunted him. "For asses are notoriously of dull
perceptions." Then stepping forward briskly: "Come, sir," I sharply
urged him, "whilst we engage upon this pretty play of wit, his
Excellency's business waits, which is an ill thing. Where is this horse
you spoke of?"

He showed me his strong, white teeth in a very evil smile.

"Were it not for that same business--" he began.

"You would do fine things, I am assured," I interrupted him.

"Would I not?" he snarled. "By the Host! I should be wringing your pert
neck, or laying bare your bones with a thong of bullock-hide, you ill
conditioned Fool!"

I looked at him with pleasant, smiling eyes.

"You confirm the opinion that is popularly held of you," said I.

"What may that be?" quoth he, his eyes very evil. "In Rome, I'm told,
they call you hangman."

He growled in his throat like an angered cur, and his hands were jerked
to the level of his breast, the fingers bending talon-wise.

"Body of God!" he muttered fiercely, "I'll teach one fool, at least--"

"Let us cease these pleasantries, I entreat you," I laughed. "Saints
defend me! If your mood incline to raillery you'll find your match in
some lad of the stables. As for me, I have not the time, had I the will,
to engage you further. Let me remind you that I would be gone."

The reminder was well-timed. He bethought him of the journey I must go,
on which he was charged to see me safely started.

"Come on, then," he growled, in a white heat of passion that was only
curbed by the consideration of that slender, pale young cardinal, his
master.

Still, some of his rage he vented in roughly taking me by the collar
of my doublet, and dragging the almost headlong from the room, and so
a-down a flight of steps out into the courtyard. Meet treatment for a
Fool--a treatment to which time might have inured me; for had I not
for three years already been exposed to rough usage of this kind at the
hands of every man above the rank of groom? And had I once rebelled in
act as I did in soul, and used the strength wherewith God endowed me
to punish my ill-users, a whip would have reminded me into what sorry
slavery had I sold myself when I put on the motley.

It had been snowing for the past hour, and the ground was white in the
courtyard when we descended.

At our appearance there was a movement of serving-men and a fall of
hoofs, muffled by the snow. Some held torches that cast a ruddy glare
upon the all-encompassing whiteness, and a groom was leading forward the
horse that was destined to bear me. I donned my broad-brimmed hat, and
wrapped my cloak about me. Some murmurs of farewell caught my ears,
from those minions with whom I had herded during my three days at the
Vatican. Then Messer del' Orca thrust me forward.

"Mount, Fool, and be off," he rasped.

I mounted, and turned to him. He was a surly dog; if ever surly dog
wore human shape, and the shape was the only human thing about Captain
Ramiro.

"Brother, farewell," I simpered.

"No brother of yours, Fool," snarled he.

"True--my cousin only. The fool of art is no brother to the fool of
nature."

"A whip!" he roared to his grooms. "Fetch me a whip."

I left him calling for it, as I urged my nag across the snow and
over the narrow drawbridge. Beyond, I stayed a moment to look over my
shoulder. They stood gazing after me, a group of some half-dozen men,
looking black against the whiteness of the ground. Behind them rose the
brown walls of the rocca illumined by the flare of torches, from which
the smell of rosin reached my nostrils as I paused. I waved my hat to
them in token of farewell, and digging my spurless heels into the flanks
of my horse, I ambled down through the biting wind and drifting snow,
into the town.

The streets were deserted and dark, save for the ray that here fell from
a window, and there stole through the chink of a door to glow upon the
snow in earnest of the snug warmth within. Silence reigned, broken only
by the moan of the wind under the eaves, for although it was no more
than approaching the second hour of night, yet who but the wight whom
necessity compelled would be abroad in such weather?

All night I rode despite that weather's foulness--a foulness that might
have given pause to one whose haste to bear a letter was less attuned to
his own supreme desires.

Betimes next morning I paused at a small locanda on the road to
Magliano, and there I broke my fast and took some rest. My horse had
suffered by the journey more than had I, and I would have taken a fresh
one at Magliano, but there was none to be had--so they told me--this
side of Narni, wherefore I was forced to set out once more upon that
poor jaded beast that had carried me all night.

It was high noon when I came, at last, to Narni, the last league of the
journey accomplished at a walk, for my nag could go no faster. Here I
paused to dine, but here, again, they told me that no horses might be
had. And so, leading by the bridle the animal I dared no longer ride,
lest I should kill it outright, I entered the territory of Urbino on
foot, and trudged wearily amain through the snow that was some inches
deep by now. In this miserable fashion I covered the seven leagues, or
so, to Spoleto, where I arrived exhausted as night was falling.

There, at the Osteria del Sole, I supped and lay. I found a company of
gentlemen in the common-room, who upon espying my motley--when I had
thrown off my sodden cloak and hat--pressed me, willy-nilly, into
amusing them. And so I spent the night at my Fool's trade, giving them
drolleries from the works of Boccacci and Sacchetti--the horn-books of
all jesters.

I obtained a fresh horse next morning, and I set out betimes, intending
to travel with a better speed. The snow was thick and soft at first, but
as I approached the hills it grew more crisp. Overhead the sky was of
an unbroken blue, and for all that the air was sharp there was warmth
in the sunshine. All day I rode hard, and never rested until towards
nightfall I found myself on the spurs of the Apennines in the
neighborhood of Gualdo, the better half of my journey well-accomplished.
The weather had changed again at sunset. It was snowing anew, and the
north wind was howling like a choir of the damned.

Before me gleamed the lights of a little wayside tavern, and since it
might suit me better to lie there than to journey on to Gualdo, I
drew rein before that humble door, and got down from my wearied horse.
Despite the early hour the door was already barred, for the bedding of
travellers formed no part of the traffic of so lowly a house as this
nameless, wayside wine-shop. Theirs was a trade that ended with the
daylight. Nevertheless I was assured they could be made to find me a rag
of straw to lie on, and so I knocked boldly with my whip.

The taverner who opened for me, and stood a moment surveying me by the
light of the torch he held aloft, was a slim, mild-mannered man, not
over-clean. Behind him surged the figure of his wife; just such a woman
as you might look to find the mate of such a man: broad and tall of
frame and most scurvily cross-grained of face. It may well be that had
he bidden me welcome, she had driven me back into the night; but since
he made some demur when I asked for lodging, and protested that in his
house was but accommodation too rude to offer my magnificence, the woman
thrust him aside, and loudly bade me enter.

I obeyed her readily, hat on head and cloak about me, lest my interests
should suffer were my trade disclosed. I bade the man see to my horse,
and then escorted by the woman, I made my way to the single room
above, which, in obedience to my demand, she made haste to set at my
convenience.

It was an evil-smelling, squalid hole; a bed of wattles in a corner, and
in the centre a greasy table with a three-legged stool and a crazy chair
beside it. The floor was black with age and filth, and broken everywhere
by rat-holes. She set her noisome, smoking oil lamp on the table, and
with some apology for the rudeness of the chamber she asked in tones
almost defiant if my excellency would be content.

"Perforce," said I ungraciously, perceiving surliness to be the key to
the respect of such a creature; "a king might thank Heaven for a kennel
on such a night as this."

She bent her back in a clumsy bow, and with a growing humility wondered
had I supped. I had not, but sooner would I have starved than have
been poisoned by such foulnesses as they might have set before me. So I
answered her that all I needed was a cup of wine.

When she had brought me that, and, at last, I was alone, I closed the
door. It had no lock, nor any sort of fastening, so I set the three
legged stool against it that it might give me warning of intrusion. Next
I threw off my cloak and hat and boots, and all dressed as I was I flung
myself upon my miserable couch. But jaded though I might be, it was
not yet my intent to sleep. Now that the half of my journey was
accomplished, I found myself beset by doubts which had not before
assailed me, touching the manner in which this mission of mine was to be
accomplished. It would prove no easy thing for me to penetrate unnoticed
into the town of Pesaro, much less into the Sforza Court, where for
three years I had pursued my Fool's trade. There was scarce a man,
a woman or a child in the entire domains of Giovanni Sforza to whom
Boccadoro, the Fool, was not known; and many a villano, who had never
noticed the features of the Lord of Pesaro, could have told you the
very colour of his jester's eyes; which, after all, is no strange thing,
for--sad reflection!--in a world in which Wisdom may be overlooked,
Folly goes never disregarded.

The garments I wore might be well enough to journey in; but if I would
gain the presence of Lucrezia Borgia I must see that I arrived in
others. And then my thoughts wandered into speculation. What might
be this momentous letter that I carried? What was this secret traffic
'twixt Cesare Borgia and his sister? Since Cesare had said that it
meant the ruin of Giovanni Sforza--a ruin so utter, so complete and
humiliating that it must provoke the scornful mirth of all Italy--the
knowledge of it must soon be mine. Meanwhile I was an agent of that
ruin. Dear God! how that reflection warmed me! What joy I took in
the thought that, though he knew it not, nor could come to know it,
I Lazzaro Biancomonte, whom he had abused and whose spirit he had
broken--was become a tool to expedite the work of abasement and
destruction that was ripening for him. And realizing all this, that
letter I vowed to Heaven I would carry, suffering no obstacle to daunt
me, suffering nothing to turn me from my path.

And then another voice seemed to arise within me, to cry out
impatiently: "Yes, yes; but how?"

I rose, and approaching the table, I took up the jug of wine and poured
myself a draught. I drank it off, and cast the dregs at an inquisitive
rat that had thrust its head above the boards. Then I quenched the
light, and flung myself once more upon my bed, in the hope that darkness
would prove a stimulant to thought and bring me to the solution I was
seeking. It brought me sleep instead. Unconsciously I sank to it, my
riddle all unsolved.

I did not wake until the pale sun of that January morning was drawing
the pattern of my lattice on the ceiling. The stormy night had been
succeeded by a calm and sunlit day. And by its light the place wore a
more loathsome look than it had done last night, so that at the very
sight of it I leapt from my couch and grew eager to be gone. I set
a ducat on the table, and going to the door I called my hostess. The
stairs creaked presently 'neath her portentous weight, and, panting
slightly, she stood before me.

At sight of me, for I was without my cloak, and my motley was revealed
in the cold, morning light, she cried out in amazement first, and then
in rage--deeming me one of those parasites who tramp the world in the
garb of folly, seeking here a dinner, there a bed, in exchange for some
scurvy tumbling or some witless jests.

"Ossa di Cristo!" was her cry. "Have I housed a Fool?"

"If I am the first you have housed, your tumbling ruin of a tavern has
been a singularly choice resort. Woman--"

"Would you 'woman' me?" she stormed.

"Why, no," said I politely. "I was at fault. I'll keep the title for
your husband--God help him!"

She smiled grimly.

"And are these," she asked, with a ferocious sarcasm, "the jests with
which you pay the score?"

"Jests?" quoth I. "Score? Pish! More eyes, less tongue would more befit
a hostess who has never housed a fool." And with a splendid gesture I
pointed to the ducat gleaming on the table. At sight of the gold her
eyes grew big with greed.

"My master--" she began, and coming forward took the piece in her hand,
to assure herself that she was not the dupe of magic. "A fool with
gold!" she marvelled.

"Is a shame to his calling," I acknowledged. Then--"Get me a needle and
a length of thread," said I. She scuttled off to do my bidding, like
nothing so much as one of the rats that tenanted her unclean sty. She
was back in a moment, all servility, and wondering whether there was a
rent about me she might make bold to stitch. What a key to courtesy is
gold, my masters! I drove her out, and eager to conciliate me, she went
at once.

With my own hands I effected in my doublet the slight repair of which it
stood in need. Then I donned my hat, and, cloak on shoulder, made my way
below, calling for my horse as I descended.

I scorned the wine they proffered me ere I departed. That last night's
draught had quenched my thirst for ever of such grape-juice as it was
theirs to tender. I urged the taverner to hasten with my horse, and
stood waiting in the squalid common-room, my mind divided 'twixt
impatience to resume the road to Pesaro and fresh speculations upon the
means I was to adopt to enter it and yet save my neck--for this was now
become an obsessing problem.

As I stood waiting, there broke upon my ears the sound of an approaching
cavalcade: the noise of voices and the soft fall of hoofs upon the thick
snow carpet. The company halted at the door, and a loud, gruff voice was
raised to cry:

"Locandiere! Afoot, sluggard!"

I stepped to the door, with very natural curiosity, a company of four
mounted men escorting a mule-litter, the curtains of which were drawn so
that nothing might be seen of him or her that rode within. Grooms were
those four, as all the world might see at the first glance, and the
livery they wore was that of the noble House of Santafior--the holy
white flower of the quince being embroidered on the breast of their
gabardines.

They bore upon them such signs of hard and hasty travelling that it was
soon guessed they had spent the night in the saddle. Their horses were
in a foam of sweat; and the men themselves were splashed with mud from
foot to cap.

Even as I was going forward to regard them the taverner appeared,
leading my horse by the bridle. Now at an inn the traveller that arrives
is ever of more importance than he that departs. At sight of those
horsemen, the taverner forgot my impatience, for he paused to bow in
welcome to the one that seemed the leader.

"Most Magnificent," said he to that liveried hind, "command me."

"We need a guide," the fellow answered with an ill grace.

"A guide, Illustrious?" quoth the host. "A guide?"

"I said a guide, fool," answered him the groom. "Heard you never of such
animals? We need a man who knows the hills, to lead us by the shortest
road to Cagli."

The taverner shook his grey head stupidly. He bowed again until I
fancied I could hear the creak of his old joints.

"Here be no guides, Magnificent," he deplored. "Perhaps at Gualdo--"

"Animal," was the retort--for true courtesy commend me to a
lacquey!--"it is not our wish to pursue the road as far as Gualdo, else
had we not stopped at this kennel of yours."

I scarce know what it can have been that moved me to act as I then
did, for, in the truth, the manner of that rascal of a groom was little
prepossessing, and his master, I doubted, could be little better that he
left the fellow to hector it thus over that wretched tavern oaf. But I
stepped forward.

"Did you say that you were journeying to Cagli?" questioned I.

He eyed me sourly, suspicion writ athwart his round, ill-favoured face,
But my motley was hidden from his sight. My cloak, my hat and boots
allowed naught of my true condition to appear, and might as well have
covered a lordling as a jester. Yet his inveterate surliness the rascal
could not wholly conquer.

"What may be the purpose of your question?" he growled.

"To serve your master, whoever he may be," I answered him serenely,
"although it is a service I do not press upon him. I, too, am journeying
to Cagli, and like yourselves, I am in haste and go the shorter way
across the hills, with which I am well acquainted. If it so please you
to follow me your need of a guide may thus be satisfied."

It was the tone to take if I would be respected. Had I proposed that we
should journey in company I should not have earned me the half of the
deference which was accorded to my haughtily granted leave that they
might follow me if they so chose.

With marked submission did he give me thanks in his master's name.

I mounted and set out, and at my heels came now the litter and its
escort. Thus did we quit the plain and breast the slopes, where the snow
grew deeper and firmer underfoot as we advanced. And as I went, still
plaguing my mind to devise a means by which I might penetrate to the
Court of Pesaro, little did I dream that the matter was being solved for
me--the solution having begun with my offer to guide that company across
the hills.




CHAPTER III. MADONNA PAOLA


We gained the heights in the forenoon, and there we dismounted and
paused awhile to breathe our horses ere we took the path that was to
lead us down to Cagli. The air was sharp and cold, for all that overhead
was spread a cloudless, cobalt dome of sky, and the sun poured down
its light upon the wide expanse of snow-clad earth, of a whiteness so
dazzling as to be hurtful to the sight.

Hitherto I had ridden stolidly ahead, as unheeding of that following
company as if I had been unconscious of its existence. But now that
we paused, their fat, white-faced leader, whose name was Giacopo,
approached me and sought to draw me into conversation. I yielded readily
enough, for I scented a mystery about that closely-curtained litter,
and mysteries are ever provoking to such a mind as mine. For all that
it might profit me naught to learn who rode there, and why with all
this haste, yet these were matters, I confess, on which my curiosity was
aroused.

"Are you journeying beyond Cagli?" I asked him presently, in an idle
tone.

He cocked his head, and eyed me aslant, the suspicion in his eyes
confirming the existence of the mystery I scented.

"Yes," he answered, after a pause. "We hope to reach Urbino before
night. And you? Are you journeying far?"

"That far, at least," I answered him, emulating the caution he had
shown.

And then, ere more might pass between us, the leather curtains of the
litter were sharply drawn aside. At the sound I turned my head, and so
far was the vision different from that which--for no reason that I can
give--I had expected, that I was stricken with surprise and wonder. A
lady--a very child, indeed--had leapt nimbly to the ground ere any of
those grooms could offer her assistance.

She was, I thought, the most beautiful woman that I had ever seen, and
to one who had read the famous work of Messer Firenzuola on feminine
beauty it might seem, at first, that here stood the incarnation of that
writer's catalogue of womanly perfections. She was of a good shape
and stature, despite her tender years; her face was oval, delicately
featured and of an ivory pallor. Her eyes--blue as the heavens
overhead--were not of the colour most approved by Firenzuola, nor was
her hair of the golden brown which that arbiter commends. Had Firenzuola
seen her, it may well be that he had altered or modified his views. She
was sumptuously arrayed in a loose-sleeved camorra of grey velvet that
was heavy with costly furs; above the lenza of fine linen on her head
gleamed the gold thread of a jewelled net, and at her waist a girdle of
surpassing richness, all set with gems, glowed like a thing of fire in
the bright sunshine.

She took a deep breath of the sharp, invigorating air, then looked
about her, and espying me in conversation with Giacopo she approached us
across the gleaming snow.

"Is this," she inquired, and her sweet, melodious voice was a perfect
match to the graceful charm of her whole presence, "the traveller who so
kindly consented to fill for us the office of a guide?"

Giacopo answered briefly that I was that man.

"I am in your debt, sir," she protested, with an odd earnestness. "You
do not know how great a service you have rendered me. But if at any time
Paola Sforza di Santafior may be able to discharge this obligation, you
shall find me very willing."

White-faced, black-browed Giacopo scowled at this proclamation of her
identity.

I made her a low bow, and answered coldly, brusquely almost, for I hated
the very name of Sforza, and every living thing that bore it.

"Madonna, you overrate my service. It so chanced that I was travelling
this way."

She looked more closely at me, as if she would have sought the reason
of my churlish tone, and I was strangely thankful that she could not see
the motley worn by the muffled stranger who confronted her. No doubt
she accounted me a clown, whose nature inclined to surliness, and so she
turned away, telling Giacopo that as soon as the horses were breathed
they might push on.

"We must rest them yet awhile, Madonna," answered he, "if they are to
carry us as far as Cagli. Heaven send that we may obtain fresh cattle
there, else is all lost."

Her frown proclaimed how much his words displeased her.

"You forget that if there are no horses for us, neither are there any
for those others." And she waved her hand towards the valley below
and the road by which we had come. From this and from what was said
I gathered that they were a party of fugitives with pursuers at their
heels.

"They have a warrant which we have not," was Giacopo's answer, gloomily
delivered, "and they will seize cattle where they can find it."

With a little gesture of impatience, more at his fears than at the peril
that aroused them, she moved away towards her litter.

"Your horse would be better for the loan of your cloak, sir stranger,"
said Giacopo to me.

I knew him to be right, but shrugged my shoulders.

"Better the horse should die of cold than I," I answered gruffly, and
turning from him I set myself to pace the snow and stir the blood that
was chilling in my veins.

There was a beauty in the white, sunlit landscape spread before me that
compelled my glance. To some it might compare but ill with the luxuriant
splendour that is of the vernal season; but to me there was a wondrously
impressive charm about that solemn, silent, virginal expanse of snow,
expressionless as the Sphinx, and imposing and majestic by virtue of
that very lack of expression. From Fabriano, at our feet, was spread to
the east, the broad plain that lies twixt the Esino and the Masone, as
far as Mount Comero, which, in the distance, lifted its round shoulder
from the haze of sea. To the west the country lay under the same
winding-sheet of snow as far as eye might range, to the towers of
distant Perugia, to the Lake Trasimeno--a silver sheen that broke
the white monotony--to Etruscan Cortona, perched like an eyrie on its
mountain top, and to the line of Tuscan hills, like heavy, low-lying
clouds upon the blue horizon.

Lost was I in the contemplation of that scene when a cry, succeeded by
a volley of horrid blasphemy, drew my attention of a sudden to my
companions. They stood grouped together, and their eyes were on the road
by which we had scaled those heights. Their first expression of loud
astonishment had been succeeded by an utter silence. I stepped forward
to command a better view of what they contemplated, and in the plain
below, midway between Narni and the slopes, a mile or so behind us, I
caught a glitter as of a hundred mirrors in the sunshine. A company of
some dozen men-at-arms it was, riding briskly along the tracks we had
left behind us in the snow. Could these be the pursuers?

Even as I formed the question in my mind, the lady's silvery voice,
behind me, put it into words. She had drawn aside the curtains of her
litter and she was leaning out, her eyes upon those dancing points of
brilliance.

"Madonna," cried one of her grooms, in a quaver of alarm, "they are
Borgia soldiers."

"Your fear is father to that opinion," she answered scornfully. "How can
you descry it at this distance?"

Now, either God had given that knave an eagle's sight, or else, as she
suggested, fear spurred his imagination and begot his certainty of what
he thought he saw.

"The leader's bannerol bears the device of a red bull," he answered
promptly.

I thought she paled a little, and her brows contracted.

"In God's name, let us get forward, then!" cried Giacopo. "Orsu! To
horse, knaves!"

No second bidding did they need. In the twinkling of an eye they were in
the saddle, and one of them had caught the bridle of the leading mule of
the litter. Giacopo called to me to lead the way with him, with no more
ceremony than if I had been one of themselves. But I made no ado. A
chase is an interesting business, whatever your point of view, and if a
greater safety lies with the hunter, there is a keener excitement with
the hunted.

Down that steep and slippery hillside we blundered, making for Cagli at
a pace in which there lay a myriad-fold more danger than could menace
us from any party of pursuers. But fear was spur and whip to the
unreasoning minds of those poltroons, and so from the danger behind us
we fled, and courted a more deadly and certain peril in the fleeing.
At first I sought to remonstrate with Giacopo; but he was deaf to the
wisdom that I spoke. He turned upon me a face which terror had rendered
whiter than its natural habit, white as the egg of a duck, with a hint
of blue or green behind it. I had, besides, an ugly impression of teeth
and eyeballs.

"Death is behind us, sir," he snarled. "Let us get on."

"Death is more assuredly before you," I answered grimly. "If you will
court it, go your way. As for me, I am over-young to break my neck
and be left on the mountain-side to fatten crows. I shall follow at my
leisure."

"Gesu!" he cried, through chattering teeth. "Are you a coward, then?"

The taunt would have angered me had his condition been other than it
was; but coming from one so possessed of the devil of terror, it did no
more than provoke my mirth.

"Come on, then, valiant runagate," I laughed at him.

And on we went, our horses now plunging, now sliding down yard upon yard
of moving snow, snorting and trembling, more reasoning far than these
rational animals that bestrode them. Twice did it chance that a man was
flung from his saddle, yet I know not what prayers Madonna may have been
uttering in her litter, to obtain for us the miracle of reaching the
plain with never so much as a broken bone.

Thus far had we come, but no farther, it seemed, was it possible to go.
The horses, which by dint of slipping and sliding had encompassed the
descent at a good pace, were so winded that we could get no more than an
amble out of them, saving mine, which was tolerably fresh.

At this a new terror assailed the timorous Giacopo. His head was ever
turned to look behind--unfailing index of a frightened spirit; his eyes
were ever on the crest of the hills, expecting at every moment to behold
the flash of the pursuers' steel. The end soon followed. He drew rein
and called a halt, sullenly sitting his horse like a man deprived of
wit--which is to pay him the compliment of supposing that he ever had
wit to be deprived of.

Instantly the curtain-rings rasped, and Madonna Paola's head appeared,
her voice inquiring the reason of this fresh delay.

Sullenly Giacopo moved his horse nearer, and sullenly he answered her.

"Madonna, our horses are done. It is useless to go farther."

"Useless?" she cried, and I had an instance of how sharply could ring
the voice that I had heard so gentle. "Of what do you talk, you knave?
Ride on at once."

"It is vain to ride on," he answered obdurately, insolence rising in his
voice. "Another half-league--another league at most, and we are taken."

"Cagli is less than a league distant," she reminded him. "Once there, we
can obtain fresh horses. You will not fail me now, Giacopo!"

"There will be delays, perforce, at Cagli," he reminded her, "and,
meanwhile, there are these to guide the Borgia sbirri." And he pointed
to the tracks we were leaving in the snow.

She turned from him, and addressed herself to the other three.

"You will stand by me, my friends," she cried. "Giacopo, here, is a
coward; but you are better men." They stirred, and one of them was
momentarily moved into a faint semblance of valour.

"We will go with you, Madonna," he exclaimed. "Let Giacopo remain
behind, if so he will."

But Giacopo was a very ill-conditioned rogue; neither true himself, nor
tolerant, it seemed, of truth in others.

"You will be hanged for your pains when you are caught!" he exclaimed,
"as caught you will be, and within the hour. If you would save your
necks, stay here and make surrender."

His speech was not without effect upon them, beholding which, Madonna
leapt from the litter, the better to confront them. The corners of
her sensitive little mouth were quivering now with the emotion that
possessed her, and on her eyes there was a film of tears.

"You cowards!" she blazed at them, "you hinds, that lack the spirit even
to run! Were I asking you to stand and fight in defence of me, you could
not show yourselves more palsied. I was a fool," she sobbed, stamping
her foot so that the snow squelched under it. "I was a fool to entrust
myself to you."

"Madonna," answered one of them, "if flight could still avail us, you
should not find us stubborn. But it were useless. I tell you again,
Madonna, that when I espied them from the hill-top yonder, they were but
a half-league behind. Soon we shall have them over the mountain, and we
shall be seen."

"Fool!" she cried, "a half-league behind, you say; and you forget that
we were on the summit, and they had yet to scale it. If you but press
on we shall treble that distance, at least, ere they begin the descent.
Besides, Giacopo," she added, turning again to the leader, "you may be
at fault; you may be scared by a shadow; you may be wrong in accounting
them our pursuers."

The man shrugged his shoulders, shook his head, and grunted.

"Arnaldo, there, made no mistake. He told us what he saw."

"Now Heaven help a poor, deserted maid, who set her trust in curs!" she
exclaimed, between grief and anger.

I had been no better than those hinds of hers had I remained unmoved. I
have said that I hated the very name of Sforza; but what had this tender
child to do with my wrongs that she should be brought within the compass
of that hatred? I had inferred that her pursuers were of the House of
Borgia, and in a flash it came to me that were I so inclined I might
prove, by virtue of the ring I carried, the one man in Italy to serve
her in this extremity. And to be of service to her, her winsome beauty
had already inflamed me. For there was I know not what about this child
that seemed to take me in its toils, and so wrought upon me that there
and then I would have risked my life in her good service. Oh, you may
laugh who read. Indeed, deep down in my heart I laughed myself, I
think, at the heroics to which I was yielding--I, the Fool, most base of
lacqueys--over a damsel of the noble House of Santafior. It was shame of
my motley, maybe, that caused me to draw my cloak more tightly about me
as I urged forward my horse, until I had come into their midst.

"Lady," said I bluntly and without preamble, "can I assist you? I have
inferred your case from what I have overheard."

All eyes were on me, gaping with surprise--hers no less than her
grooms'.

"What can you do alone, sir?" she asked, her gentle glance upraised to
mine.

"If, as I gather, your pursuers are servants of the House of Borgia, I
may do something."

"They are," she answered, without hesitation, some eagerness, even,
investing her tones.

It may seem an odd thing that this lady should so readily have taken a
stranger into her confidence. Yet reflect upon the parlous condition in
which she found herself. Deserted by her dispirited grooms, her enemies
hot upon her heels, she was in no case to trifle with assistance, or
to despise an offer of services, however frail it might seem. With both
hands she clutched at the slender hope I brought her in the hour of her
despair.

"Sir," she cried, "if indeed it lies in your power to help me, you could
not find it in your heart to be sparing of that power did you but know
the details of my sorry circumstance."

"That power, Madonna, it may be that I have," said I, and at those words
of mine her servants seemed to honour me with a greater interest. They
leaned forward on their horses and eyed me with eyes grown of a sudden
hopeful. "And," I continued, "if you will have utter faith in me, I see
a way to render doubly certain your escape."

She looked up into my face, and what she saw there may have reassured
her that I promised no more than I could accomplish. For the rest she
had to choose between trusting me and suffering capture.

"Sir," said she, "I do not know you, nor why you should interest
yourself in the concerns of a desolated woman. But, Heaven knows, I am
in no case to stand pondering the aid you offer, nor, indeed, do I doubt
the good faith that moves you. Let me hear, sir, how you would propose
to serve me."

"Whence are you?" I inquired.

"From Rome," she informed me without hesitation, "to seek at my cousin's
Court of Pesaro shelter from a persecution to which the Borgia family is
submitting me."

At her cousin's Court of Pesaro! An odd coincidence, this--and while I
was pondering it, it flashed into my mind that by helping her I might
assist myself. Had aught been needed o strengthen my purpose to serve
her, I had it now.

"Yet," said I, surprise investing my voice, "at Pesaro there is Madonna
Lucrezia of that same House of Borgia."

She smiled away the doubt my words implied.

"Madonna Lucrezia is my friend," said she; "as sweet and gentle a
friend as ever woman had, and she will stand by me even against her own
family."

Since she was satisfied of that, I waived the point, and returned to
what was of more immediate interest.

"And you fled," said I, "with these?" And I indicated her attendants.
"Not content to leave the clearest of tracks behind you in the snow, you
have had yourself attended by four grooms in the livery of Santafior.
So that by asking a few questions any that were so inclined might follow
you with ease."

She opened wide her eyes at that. Oftentimes have I observed that it
needs a fool to teach some elementary wisdom to the wise ones of this
world. I leapt from my saddle and stood in the road beside her, the
bridle on my arm.

"Listen now, Madonna. If you would make good your escape it first
imports that you should rid yourself of this valiant escort. Separate
from it for a little while. Take you my horse--it is a very gentle
beast, and it wilt carry you with safety--and ride on, alone, to Cagli."

"Alone?" quoth she, in some surprise.

"Why, yes," I answered gruffly. "What of that? At the Inn of 'The Full
Moon' ask for the hostess, and tell her that you are to await an escort
there, begging her, meanwhile, to place you under her protection. She
is a worthy soul, or else I do not know one, and she will befriend you
readily. But see to it that you tell her nothing of your affairs."

"And then?" she inquired eagerly.

"Then, wait you there until to-night, or even until to-morrow morning,
for these knaves to rejoin you to the end that you may resume your
journey."

"But we--" began Giacopo. Scenting his protest, I cut him short.

"You four," said I, "shall escort me--for I shall replace Madonna in
the litter--you shall escort me towards Fabriano. Thus shall we draw the
pursuit upon ourselves, and assure your lady a clear road of escape."

They swore most roundly and with great circumstance of oaths that they
would lend themselves to no such madness, and it took me some moments to
persuade them that I was possessed of a talisman that should keep us all
from harm.

"Were it otherwise, dolts, do you think I should be eager to go with
you? Would any chance wayfarer so wantonly imperil his neck for the sake
of a lady with whom he can scarce be called acquainted?"

It was an argument that had weight with them, as indeed, it must have
had with the dullest. I flashed my ring before their eyes.

"This escutcheon," said I, "is the shield that shall stand between us
and danger from any of the house that bears these arms."

Thus I convinced and wrought upon them until they were ready to obey
me--the more ready since any alternative was really to be preferred to
their present situation. In danger they already stood from those that
followed as they well knew; and now it seemed to them that by obeying
one who was armed with such credentials, it might be theirs to escape
that danger. But even as I was convincing them, by the same arguments
was I sowing doubts in the lady's subtler mind.

"You are attached to that house?" quoth she, in accents of mistrust.
She wanted to say more. I saw it in her eyes that she was wondering was
there treachery underlying an action so singularly disinterested as to
justify suspicion.

"Madonna," said I, "if you would save yourself I implore that you will
trust me. Very soon your pursuers will be appearing on those heights,
and then your chance of flight will be lost to you. I will ask you but
this: Did I propose to betray you into their hands, could I have done
better than to have left you with your grooms?"

Her face lighted. A sunny smile broke on me from her heavenly eyes.

"I should have thought of that," said she. And what more she would have
added I put off by urging her to mount.

Sitting the man's saddle as best she might--well enough, indeed, to
fill us all with surprise and admiration--she took her leave of me with
pretty words of thanks, which again I interrupted.

"You have but to follow the road," said I, "and it will bring you
straight to Cagli. The distance is a short league, and you should come
there safely. Farewell, Madonna!"

"May I not know," she asked at parting, "the name of him that has so
generously befriended me?"

I hesitated a second. Then--"They call me Boccadoro," answered I.

"If your mouth be as truly golden as your heart, then are you
well-named," said she. Then, gathering her mantle about her, and waving
me farewell, she rode off without so much as a glance at the cowardly
hinds who had failed her in the hour of her need.

A moment I stood watching her as she cantered away in the sunshine; then
stepping to the litter, I vaulted in.

"Now, rogues," said I to the escort, "strike me that road to Fabriano."

"I know you not, sir," protested Giacopo. "But this I know--that if
you intend us treachery you shall have my knife in your gullet for your
pains."

"Fool!" I scorned him, "since when has it been worth the while of any
man to betray such creatures as are you? Plague me no more! Be moving,
else I leave you to your coward's fate."

It was the tone best understood by hinds of their lily-livered quality.
It quelled their faint spark of mutiny, and a moment later one of those
knaves had caught the bridle of the leading mule and the litter moved
forward, whilst Giacopo and the others came on behind at as brisk a pace
as their weary horses would yield. In this guise we took the road south,
in the direction opposite to that travelled by the lady. As we rode, I
summoned Giacopo to my side.

"Take your daggers," I bade him, "and rip me that blazon from your
coats. See that you leave no sign about you to proclaim you of the House
of Santafior, or all is lost. It is a precaution you would have taken
earlier if God had given you the wit of a grasshopper."

He nodded that he understood my order, and scowled his disapproval of my
comment on his wit. For the rest, they did my bidding there and then.

Having satisfied myself that no betraying sign remained about them, I
drew the curtains of my litter, and reclining there I gave myself up to
pondering the manner in which I should greet the Borgia sbirri when they
overtook me. From that I passed on to the contemplation of the position
in which I found myself, and the thing that I had done. And the
proportions of the jest that I was perpetrating afforded me no little
amusement. It was a burla not unworthy the peerless gifts of Boccadoro,
and a fitting one on which to close his wild career of folly. For had I
not vowed that Boccadoro I would be no more once the errand on which I
travelled was accomplished? By Cesare Borgia's grace I looked to--

A sudden jolt brought me back to the immediate present, and the
realisation that in the last few moments we had increased our pace. I
put out my head.

"Giacopo!" I shouted. He was at my side in an instant. "Why are we
galloping?"

"They are behind," he answered, and fear was again overspreading his fat
face. "We caught a glimpse of them as we mounted the last hill."

"You caught a glimpse of whom?" quoth I.

"Why, of the Borgia soldiers."

"Animal," I answered him, "what have we to do with them? They may have
mistaken us for some party of which they are in pursuit. But since we
are not that party, let your jaded beasts travel at a more reasonable
speed. We do not wish to have the air of fugitives."

He understood me, and I was obeyed. For a half-hour we rode at a more
gentle pace. That was about the time they took to come up with us, still
a league or so from Fabriano. We heard their cantering hoofs crushing
the snow, and then a loud imperious voice shouting to us a command
to stay. Instantly we brought up in unconcerned obedience, and they
thundered alongside with cries of triumph at having run their prey to
earth.

I cast aside my hat, and thrust my motleyed head through the curtains
with a jangle of bells, to inquire into the reason of this halt. Whom my
appearance astounded the more--whether the lacqueys of Santafior, or
the Borgia men-at-arms that now encircled us--I cannot guess. But in the
crowd of faces that confronted me there was not one but wore a look of
deep amazement.




CHAPTER IV. THE COZENING OF RAMIRO


The cavalcade that had overtaken us proved to number some twenty
men-at-arms, whose leader was no less a person than Ramiro del'
Orca--that same mountain of a man who had attended my departure from
the Vatican three nights ago. From the circumstance that so important
a personage should have been charged with the pursuit of the Lady of
Santafior, I inferred that great issues were at stake.

He was clad in mail and leather, and from his lance fluttered the
bannerol bearing the Borgia arms, which had announced his quality to
Madonna's servants.

At sight of me his bloodshot eyes grew round with wonder, and for a
little season a deathly calm preceded the thunder of his voice.

"Sainted Host!" he roared at last. "What trickery may this be?" And
sidling his horse nearer he tore aside the curtains of my litter.

Out of faces pale as death the craven grooms looked on, to behold me
reclining there, my cloak flung down across my legs to hide my boots,
and my motley garb of red and black and yellow all revealed. I believe
their astonishment by far surpassed the Captain's own.

"You are choicely met, Ser Ramiro," I greeted him. Then, seeing that
he only stared, and made no shift to speak: "Maybe," quoth I, "you'll
explain why you detain me. I am in haste."

"Explain?" he thundered. "Sangue di Cristo! The burden of explaining
lies with you. What make you here?"

"Why," answered I, in tones of deep astonishment, "I am about the
business of the Lord Cardinal of Valencia, our master."

"Davvero?" he jeered. He stretched out a mighty paw, and took me by the
collar of my doublet. "Now, bethink you how you answer me, or there will
be a fool the less in the world."

"Indeed, the world might spare more."

He scowled at my pleasantry. To him, apparently, the situation afforded
no scope for philosophical reflections.

"Where is the girl?" he asked abruptly.

"Girl?" quoth I. "What girl? Am I a mother-abbess, that you should set
me such a question?"

Two dark lines showed between his brows. His voice quivered with
passion.

"I ask you again--where is the girl?"

I laughed like one who is a little wearied by the entertainment provided
for him.

"Here be no girls, Messer del' Orca," I answered him in the same tone.
"Nor can I think what this babble of girls portends."

My seeming innocence, and the assurance with which I maintained the
expression of it, whispered a doubt into his mind. He released me, and
turned upon his men, a baffled look in his eyes.

"Was not this the party?" he inquired ferociously. "Have you misled me,
beasts?

"It seemed the party, Illustrious," answered one of them.

"Do you dare tell me that 'it seemed'?" he roared, seeking to father
upon them the blunder he was beginning to fear that he had made.
"But--What is the livery of these knaves?

"They wear none," someone answered him, and at that answer he seemed to
turn limp and lose his fierce assurance.

Then he bridled afresh.

"Yet the party, I'll swear, is this!" he insisted; and turning once more
to me: "Explain, animal!" he bade me in terrifying tones. "Explain, or,
by the Host! be you ignorant or not, I'll have you hanged."

I accounted it high time to take another tone with him. Hanging was a
discomfort I was never less minded to suffer.

"Draw nearer, fool," said I contemptuously, and at the epithet, so
greatly did my audacity amaze him, he mildly did my bidding.

"I know not what doubts are battling in your thick head, sir captain,"
I pursued. "But this I know--that if you persist in hindering me, or
commit the egregious folly of offering me violence, you will answer for
it, hereafter, to the Lord Cardinal of Valencia.

"I am going upon a secret mission"--and here I sank my voice to a
whisper for his ears alone--"in the service of the house that hires you,
as for yourself you might easily have inferred. Behold." And I revealed
my ring. "Detain me longer at your peril."

He must have had some notion of the fact that I was journeying in Cesare
Borgia's service, and this coupled with the sight of that talisman
effected in his manner a swift and wholesome change. Had I, arrayed in
the panoply of Mother Church, defied the devil, my victory could not
have been more complete.

He looked about him like a man whose wits have been scattered suddenly
to the four winds of Heaven.

"But this litter," he mumbled, riveting his dazed eyes upon me, "and
these four knaves--?"

"Tell me," I questioned, with sudden earnestness, "are you in quest of
just such a party?"

"Aye that I am," he answered sharply, intelligence returning to his
glance, inquiry burning in it.

"And would the men, peradventure, be wearing the livery of the House of
Santafior?"

His quick assent came almost choked in a company of oaths.

"Why then, if that be your quarry, you are but wasting time. Such a
party passed us at the gallop about an hour ago. It would be an hour,
would it not, Giacopo?"

"I should say an hour," answered the lacquey dully.

"In what direction?" came Ramiro's frenzied question. He doubted me no
longer.

"In the direction of Fabriano I should say," I answered. "Although it
may well be that they were making for Sinigaglia. The road branches
farther on."

He waited for no more. Without word of thanks for the priceless
information I had given him, he wheeled his horse, and shouted a hoarse
command to his followers. A moment later and they were cantering past
us, the snow flying beneath their hoofs; within five minutes the last of
them had vanished round an angle of the road, and the only indication
of the halt they had made was the broad path of dirty brown where their
horses had crushed the snow.

I have been an actor in few more entertaining comedies than the cozening
of Ser Ramiro, and a witness of nothing that afforded me at once so much
relief and relish as his abrupt departure. I sank back on the cushions
of my litter, and gave myself over to a burst of full-souled laughter
which was interrupted ere it was half done by Giacopo, who had
dismounted and approached me.

"You have fooled us finely," said he, with venom.

I quenched my laughter to regard him. Of what did he babble? Was he, and
were his fellows, too, so ungrateful as to bear a grudge against the man
who had saved them?

"You have fooled us finely," he insisted in a louder voice.

"That, knave, is my trade," said I. "But it rather seems to me that it
was Messer Ramiro del' Orca whom I fooled."

"Aye," he answered querulously. "But what when he discerns how you have
played upon him? What when he discovers the trick by which you have
thrown him off the scent? What when he returns?"

"Spare me," I begged, "I am but indifferently skilful at conjecture."

"Nay, but you shall answer me," he cried, livid with a passion that my
bantering tone had quickened.

"Can it be that you are indeed curious to know what will befall when he
returns?" I questioned meekly.

"I am," he snorted, with an angry twist of the lips.

"It should be easy to gratify the morbid spirit of curiosity that
actuates you. Remain here, and await his return. Thus shall you learn."

"That will not I," he vowed.

"Nor I, nor I, nor I!" chorused his followers.

"Then, why plague me with unprofitable questions? What concern is it of
ours how Messer del' Orca shall vent his wrath when he is disillusioned.
Your duty now is to rejoin your mistress. Ride hard for Cagli. Seek her
at the sign of 'The Full Moon,' and then away for Pesaro. If you are
brisk you will gain the shelter of the Lord Giovanni Sforza's fortress
long before Messer del' Orca again picks up the scent, if, indeed, he
ever does so."

Giacopo laughed derisively till his fat body shook with the scornful
mirth of him.

"By my faith, I'm done with the business," he cried, and the other three
expressed a very hearty agreement with that attitude.

"How done with it?" I asked.

"I shall make my way back across the hills and so retrace my steps to
Rome. I'll risk my head no more for any lady or any Fool."

"If you should ever chance to risk it for yourself," said I, with
unmeasured scorn, "you'll risk it for the greatest fool and the
cowardliest rogue that ever shamed the name of man. And your mistress?
Is she to wait at Cagli until doomsday? If anywhere within the bulk of
that elephant's body there lurks the heart of a rabbit, you'll get you
to horse and ride to the help of that poor lady."

They resented my tone, and showed their resentment plainly. Messer
Giacopo went the length of raising his hand to me. But I am a man of
amazing strength--amazing inasmuch as being slender of shape I do not
have the air of it. Leaping suddenly from the litter, I caught that
miserable vassal by the breast of his doublet, shook him once or twice,
then tossed him headlong into a drift of snow by the roadside.

At that they bared their knives and made shift to attack me. But I flung
myself on to one of the mules of the litter, and showing them the stout
Pistoja dagger that I carried, I presented with it a bold and truculent
front, no whit intimidated by their numbers. Four to one though they
were, they thought better of it. A moment they stood off, consulting
among themselves; then Giacopo mounted, and with some mocking counsel as
to how I should dispose of the litter and the mules, they made off, no
doubt, to find their way back to Rome. Giacopo, as I was afterwards to
discover, was Madonna Paola's purse-bearer, so that they would not lack
for means.

Awhile I stayed there, cursing them for the white-livered cravens that
they were, and thinking of that poor child who had ridden on to Cagli,
and who would await them in vain. There, on the mule, I sat in the
noontide sunlight, and pondered this, so absorbed in her affairs as to
have grown forgetful of my own. At last I resolved to ride on to Cagli
alone, and inform her that her men were fled.

There was no time to lose, for as that rogue Giacopo had said, Ramiro
del' Orca might discover at any moment how he had been tricked, and
return hot-foot to find me and extort the truth from me by such means as
I had no stomach for enduring.

First, then, it was of moment thoroughly to efface our tracks, leaving
no sign that might guide Meser Ramiro to repair the error into which I
had tricked him. Slowly, says the proverb, one journeys far and safely.
Slowly, then, did I consider! The escort was, no doubt, on its way back
to Rome, and if I could but rid myself of that cumbrous litter, Ser
Ramiro would find himself mightily hard put to it to again pick up the
trail. I remembered a ravine a little way behind, and I rode my mule
back to that as fast as it would travel with the litter and the other
mule attached to it. Arrived there, I unharnessed the beasts on the
very edge of that shallow precipice. Then exerting all my strength, I
contrived to roll the litter over. Down that steep incline it went, over
and over, gathering more snow to itself at every revolution, and sinking
at last into the drift at the bottom. There were signs enough to show
its presence, but those signs would hardly be read by any but the
sharpest eyes, or by such as might be looking for it in precisely such
a position. I must trust to luck that it escaped the notice of Messer
Ramiro. But even if he did discover it, I did not think that it would
tell him overmuch.

That done I resumed my hat and cloak--which I had retained--mounted once
more, and urging the other mule along, I proceeded thus as fast as might
be for a half-league or so in the direction of Cagli. That distance
covered, again I halted. There was not a soul in sight. I stripped one
of the mules of all its harness, which I buried in the snow, behind a
hedge, then I drove the beast loose into a field. The peasant-owner of
that land might conclude upon the morrow that it had rained asses in the
night.

And now I was able to travel at a brisker pace, and in an hour or so I
had passed the point where the road diverged, and I caught a glimpse of
the four grooms, already high up in the hills which they were crossing.
Whether they saw me or not I do not know, but with a last curse at
their cowardice I put them from my mind, and cantered briskly on towards
Cagli. It was a short league farther, and in little more than half an
hour, my mule half-dead, I halted at the door of "The Full Moon."

Flinging my reins to the ostler, I strode into the inn, swaddled in my
cloak, and called for the hostess. The place was empty, as indeed all
Cagli had seemed when I rode up. She came forward--a woman with a brown,
full face, and large kindly eyes--and I asked her whether a lady had
arrived there in safety that morning. At first she seemed mistrustful,
but when I had assured her that I was in that lady's service, she
frankly owned that Madonna was safe in her own room. Thither I allowed
her to lead me, at once eager and reluctant. Eager with my own eyes to
assure myself of her perfect safety; reluctant that, since a man may not
penetrate to a lady's chamber hat on head, by uncovering I must disclose
my shameful trade. Yet there was nothing for it but a bold face, and
as I mounted the stairs in the woman's wake, I told myself that I was
doubly a fool to be tormented by qualms of such a nature.

Hat in hand I followed the hostess into Madonna's room. The lady rose
from the window-seat to greet me, her face pale and her gentle eyes
wearing an anxious look. At sight of my head crowned with the crested,
horned hood of folly, a frown of bewilderment drew her brows together,
and she looked more closely to see whether I was indeed the man who had
befriended her that morning in her extremity. In the eyes of the hostess
I caught a gleam of recognition. She knew me for the merry loon who had
entertained her guests one night a fortnight since, when on my way from
Pesaro to Rome. But before she could give expression to this discovery
of hers, the lady spoke.

"Leave us awhile, my woman," she commanded. But I stayed the hostess as
she was withdrawing.

"This lady," said I, "will need an escort of three or four stout knaves
upon a journey that she is going. She will be setting out as soon as may
be."

"But what of my grooms?" cried the lady.

"Madonna," I informed her, "they have deserted you. That is the
reason of my presence here. You shall hear the story of it presently.
Meanwhile, we must arrange to replace them." And I turned again to the
hostess.

She was standing in thought, a doubtful expression on her face. But as I
looked at her she shook her head.

"There is no such escort to be found to-day in Cagli," she made answer.
"The town is all but empty, and every lusty man is either gone on the
pilgrimage to the Holy House of Loretto, or else is at Pesaro for the
Feast of the Epiphany."

It was in vain that I protested that a couple of knaves might surely
be found. She answered me that such as were in Cagli were there because
they would not be elsewhere.

The lady's face grew clouded as she listened, for from my insistence she
shrewdly inferred that it imported to be gone.

"There is your ostler," quoth I at last. "He will do for one."

"He is the only man I have. My husband and my sons are gone to Pesaro."

"Yet spare us this one, and you shall be well paid his services."

But no bribe could tempt her to give way, and no doubt she was
well-advised, for she contended that there was work to be done such as
was beyond her years and strength, and that if she sent her ostler off,
as well might she close her inn--a thing that was impossible.

Here, then, was an obstacle with which I had not reckoned. It was
impossible to send the lady off alone, to travel a distance of some
ten leagues, and the most of it by night--for if she would make sure of
escaping, she must journey now without pause until she came to Pesaro.

And then, in a flash, it occurred to me that here lay the means, ready
to my hand, by avail of which I might boldly re-enter Pesaro despite
my banishment, and discharge my errand to Lucrezia Borgia. For, surely,
considering the mission on which ostensibly I should be returning--as
the saviour and protector of his kinswoman--Giovanni Sforza could not
enforce that ban against me. Next I bethought me of the other aspect
that the business wore. In fooling Ramiro I had thwarted the Borgia
ends; in rescuing Madonna Paola I had perhaps set at naught the Cardinal
of Valencia's aims. If so, what then? It would seem that because the
lady's eyes were mild and sweet, and because her beauty had so deeply
wrought upon me, I had indeed fooled away my chance of salvation from
the life and trade that were grown hateful to me. For back to Rome and
Cesare Borgia I should dare go no more. Clearly I had burned my boats,
and I had done it almost unthinkingly, acting upon the good impulse to
befriend this lady, and never reckoning the cost down to its total. For
all that the thing I had done, and what I might yet do, should offer me
the means I needed to enter Pesaro without danger to my neck, I did not
see that I was to derive great profit in the end--unless my profit lay
in knowing that I had advanced the ruin of Giovanni Sforza by delivering
my letter to Lucrezia. That at any rate was enough incentive clearly to
define for me the line that I should take through this tangle into which
the ever-jesting Fates had thrust me.

I was still at my thoughts, still pondering this most perplexing
situation, the hostess standing silent by the door, when suddenly
Madonna Paola spoke.

"Sir," said she, in faltering accents, "I--I have not the right to ask
you, and I stand already so deeply in your debt. Not a doubt of it, but
it will have inconvenienced you to have journeyed thus far to inform
me of the flight of my grooms. Yet if you could--" She paused, timid of
proceeding, and her glance fell.

The hostess was all ears, struck by the respectful manner in which this
very evidently noble lady addressed a Fool. I opened the door for her.

"You may leave us now," said I. "I will come to you presently."

When she was gone I turned once more to the lady, my course resolved
upon. My hate had conquered my last doubt. What first imported was that
I should get to Pesaro and to Madonna Lucrezia.

"You were about to ask me," said I, "that I should accompany you to
Pesaro."

"I hesitated, sir," she murmured. I bowed respectfully.

"There was not the need, Madonna," I assured her. "I am at your
service."

"But, Messer Boccadoro, I have no claim upon you."

"Surely," said I, "the claim that every distressed lady has upon a man
of heart. Let us say no more. It were best not to delay in setting out,
although I can scarcely think that there is any imminent danger from
Ramiro del' Orca now."

"Who is he?" she inquired.

"I told her, whereupon--"

"Did they come up with you?" she asked. "What passed between you?"

Succinctly I related what had chanced, and how I had sent Ramiro on a
fool's errand, adding the particulars of the flight of her grooms, and
of how I had rid myself of the litter and the second mule. She heard me,
her eyes sparkling, and at times she clapped her hands with a glee that
was almost childish, vowing that this was splendid, that was brave. I
allayed what little fears remained her by pointing out how effectively
we had effaced our tracks, and how vainly now Messer del' Orca might
beat the country in quest of a lady in a litter, escorted by four
grooms.

And now she beset me with fresh thanks and fresh expressions of wonder
at my generous readiness to befriend her--a wonder all devoid of
suspicion touching the single-mindedness of my purpose. But I reminded
her that we had little leisure to stand talking, and left her to make
her preparations for the journey, whilst I went below to see that my
mule and her horse were saddled. I made bold to pay the reckoning, and
when presently she spoke of it, with flaming cheeks, and would have
pledged me a jewel, I bade her look upon it as a loan which anon she
might repay me when I had brought her safely to her kinsman's Court at
Pesaro.

Thus, at last, we left Cagli, and took the road north, riding side by
side and talking pleasantly the while, ever concerning the matter of her
flight and of her hopes of shelter at Pesaro, which, being nearest to
her heart, found readiest expression. I went wrapped in my cloak once
more, my head-dress hidden 'neath my broad-brimmed hat, so that the few
wayfarers we chanced on need not marvel to see a lady in such friendly
intercourse with a Fool. And so dull was I that day as not to marvel,
myself, at such a state of things.

The sun was declining, a red ball of fire, towards the mountains on our
left, casting a blood-red glow upon the snow that everywhere encompassed
us, as we cantered briskly on towards Fossombrone.

In that hour I fell to pondering, and I even caught myself hoping that
Messer Ramiro del' Orca might not chance upon the discovery of how
egregiously I had fooled him. He was dull-witted and slow at inference,
and upon that I built the hope that he might fail to associate me with
Madonna Paola's elusion of his pursuit. Thus the chance might yet be
mine of returning to Rome and the honourable employment Cesare Borgia
had promised me. If only that were so to fall out, I might yet contrive
to mend the wreckage of my life. I was returned, it seems, to the
ways of early youth, when we build our hopes of future greatness upon
untenable foundations!

Great hopes and great ambitions rose within my breast that January
evening, fired by the gentle child that rode beside me. Fate had sent
me to her aid that day, and I seemed to have acquired, by virtue of that
circumstance, a certain right in her. Had Fate no other favours for me
in her lap! I bethought me of the very House of Sforza, to which I had
been so shamefully attached, and of its humble source in that peasant,
Giacomuzzo Attendolo, surnamed Sforza for his abnormal strength of body,
who rose to great and princely heights.

Assuredly I had the advantage of such an one, and were the chance but
given me--

I went no further. Down in my heart I laughed to scorn my own wild
musings. Cesare Borgia would come to know--he must, whether Ramiro told
him, or whether he inferred it for himself from the account Ramiro must
give him of our meeting--how I had thwarted him in one thing, whilst I
had served him in another. Fate was against me. I had fallen too low to
ever rise again, and no dreams indulged in a sunset hour, and inspired,
perhaps, by a child who was beautiful as one of the saints of God, would
ever come to be realised by poor Boccadoro.

Night was falling as we clattered through the slippery streets of
Fossombrone.




CHAPTER V. MADONNA'S INGRATITUDE


We stayed in Fossombrone little more than a half-hour, and having made a
hasty supper we resumed our way, giving out that we wished to reach Fano
ere we slept. And so by the first hour of night Fossombrone was a league
or so behind us, and we were advancing briskly towards the sea. Overhead
a moon rode at the full in a clear sky, and its light was reflected by
the snow, so that we were not discomforted by any darkness. We fell,
presently, into a gentler pace, for, after all, there could be no
advantage in reaching Pesaro before morning, and as we rode we talked,
and I made bold to ask her the cause of her flight from Rome.

She told me then that she was Madonna Paola Sforza di Santafior, and
that Pope Alexander, in his nepotism and his desire to make rich and
powerful alliances for his family, had settled upon her as the wife for
his nephew, Ignacio Borgia. He had been emboldened to this step by the
fact that her only protector was her brother, Filippo di Santafior, whom
they had sought to coerce. It was her brother, who, seeing himself in a
dangerous and unenviable position, had secretly suggested flight to
her, urging her to repair to her kinsman Giovanni Sforza at Pesaro. Her
flight, however, must have been speedily discovered and the Borgias, who
saw in that act a defiance of their supreme authority, had ordered her
pursuit.

But for me, she concluded, that pursuits must have resulted in her
capture, and once they had her back in Rome, willing or unwilling, they
would have driven her into the alliance by means of which they sought
to bring her fortune into their own house. This drew her into fresh
protestations of the undying gratitude she entertained towards me,
protestations which I would have stemmed, but that she persisted in
them.

"It is a good and noble thing that you have done," said she, "and I
think that Heaven must have directed you to my aid, for it is scarce
likely that in all Italy I should have found another man who would have
done so much."

"Why, what, after all, is this much that I have done?" I cried. "It is
no less than my manhood bade me do; no less than any other would have
done seeing you so beset."

"Nay, that is more than I can ever think," she answered. "Who for the
sake of an unknown would have suffered such inconveniences as have
you? Who would have returned as you have returned to advise me of the
defection of my grooms? Who, when other escort failed, would have gone
the length of journeying all this way to render a service that is beyond
repayment? And, above all, who for the sake of an unknown maid would
have submitted to this travesty of yours?"

"Travesty?" quoth I, so struck by that as to interrupt her at last.
"What travesty, Madonna?"

"Why, this garb of motley that you donned the better to fool my pursuers
and that you still wear in my poor service."

I turned in the saddle to stare at her, and in the moonlight I clearly
saw her eyes meet mine. So! that was the reason of her kindness and
of the easy familiarity of her speech with me! She deemed me some
knight-errant who caracoled through Italy in quest of imperilled maidens
needing aid. Of a certainty she had gathered her knowledge of the world
from the works of Messer Bojardo, or perhaps from the "Amadis of Gaul"
of Messer Bernardo Tasso. And, no doubt, she thought that suits of
motley grew on bushes by the roadside, whence those who had a fancy for
disguise might cull them.

Well, well, it were better she should know the truth at once, and choose
such a demeanour as she considered fitting towards a Fool. I had no
stomach for the courtesies that were meant for such a man as I was not.

"Madonna, you are in error," I informed her, speaking slowly. "This garb
is no travesty. It is my usual raiment."

There was a pause and I saw the slackening of her reins. No doubt, had
we been afoot she would have halted, the better to confront me.

"How?" she asked, and a new note, imperious and chill, was sounding
already in her voice. "You would not have me understand that you are by
trade a Fool?

"Allowing that I am not a fool by birth, under what other circumstances,
think you, I should be likely to wear the garments of a Fool?"

"But this morning," she protested, after a brief pause, "when first I
met you, you were not so arrayed."

"I was arrayed even as I am now, in a cloak and hat and boots that
hid my motley from such undiscerning eyes as were yours and your
grooms'--all taken up with your own fears as you then were."

There was in the tail of that a sting, as I meant there should be,
for the sudden haughtiness of her tone was cutting into me. Was I less
worthy of thanks because I was a Fool? Had I on that account done less
to serve and save her? Or was it that the action which, in a spurred and
armoured knight, had been accounted noble was deemed unworthy of
thanks in a crested, motleyed jester? It seemed, indeed, that some such
reasoning she followed, for after that we spoke no more until we were
approaching Fano.

A many times before had I felt the shame of my ignoble trade, but never
so acutely as at that moment. It had seared my soul when Giovanni Sforza
had told my story to his Court, ere he had driven me from Pesaro with
threats of hanging, and it had burned even deeper when later, Madonna
Lucrezia, upon entrusting me with her letter to her brother, had
upbraided me with the supineness that so long had held me in that vile
bondage. But deepest of all went now the burning iron of that disgrace.
For my companion's silence seemed to argue that had she known my quality
she would have scorned the aid of which she had availed herself to such
good purpose. If any doubt of this had mercifully remained me, her next
words would have served to have resolved it. It was when the lights of
Fano gleamed ahead; we were coming to a cross-roads, and I urged the
turning to the left.

"But Fano is in front," she remonstrated coldly.

"This way we can avoid the town and gain the Pesaro road beyond it,"
answered I, my tone as cool as hers.

"Yet may it not be that at Fano I might find an escort?"

I could have cried out at her cruelty, for in her words I could but read
my dismissal from her service. There had been no more talk of an escort
other than that which I afforded, and with which at first she had been
well content.

I sat my mule in silence for a moment. She had been very justly served
had I been the vassal that she deemed me, and had I borne myself in that
character without consideration of her sex, her station or her years.
She had been very justly served had I wheeled about and left her there
to make her way to Fano, and thence to Pesaro, as best she might. She
was without money, as I knew, and she would have found in Fano such a
reception as would have brought the bitter tears of late repentance to
her pretty eyes.

But I was soft-hearted, and, so, I reasoned with her; yet in a manner
that was to leave her no doubt of the true nature of her situation, and
the need to use me with a little courtesy for the sake of what I might
yet do, if she lacked the grace to treat me with gratitude for the sake
of that which I had done already.

"Madonna," said I. "It were wiser to choose the by-road and forego the
escort, since we have dispensed with it so far. There are many reasons
why a lady should not seek to enter Fano at this hour of night."

"I know of none," she interrupted me.

"That may well be. Nevertheless they exist."

"This night-riding in so lonely a fashion is little to my taste," she
told me sullenly. "I am for Fano."

She had the mercy to spare me the actual words, yet her tone told me as
plainly as if she had uttered them that I could go with her or not, as
I should choose. In silence, very sore at heart, I turned my mule's head
once more towards the lights of the town.

"Since you are resolved, so be it," was all my answer; and we proceeded.

No word did we exchange until we had entered the main street, when she
curtly asked me which was the best inn.

"'The Golden Fish,'" said I, as curtly, and to "The Golden Fish" we
went.

Arrived there, Madonna Paola took affairs into her own hands. She
dismounted, leaving the reins with a groom, and entering the common-room
she proclaimed her needs to those that occupied it by loudly calling
upon the landlord to find her an escort of three or four knaves to
accompany her at once to Pesaro, where they should be well rewarded by
the Lord Giovanni, her cousin.

I had followed her in, and I ground my teeth at such an egregious piece
of folly. Her hood was thrown back, displaying the lenza of fine linen
on her sable hair, and over this a net of purest gold all set with
jewels. Her camorra, too, was open, and in her girdle there were gems
for all to see. There were but a half-dozen men in the room. Two of
these had a venerable air--they may have been traders journeying to
Milan--whilst a third, who sat apart, was a slender, effeminate-looking
youth. The remaining three were fellows of rough aspect, and when one of
them--a black-browed ruffian--raised his eyes and fastened them upon the
riches that Madonna Paola with such indifference displayed, I knew what
was to follow.

He rose upon the instant, and stepping forward, he made her a low bow.

"Illustrious lady," said he, "if these two friends of mine and I find
favour with you, here is an escort ready found. We are stout fellows,
and very faithful."

Faithful to their cut-throat trade, I made no doubt he meant.

His fellows now rose also, and she looked them over, giving herself the
airs of having spent her virgin life in judging men by their appearance.
It was in vain I tugged her cloak, in vain I murmured the word "wait"
under cover of my hand. She there and then engaged them, and bade them
make ready to set out at once. One more attempt I made to induce her to
alter her resolve.

"Madonna," said I, "it is an unwise thing to go a-journeying by night
with three unknown men, and of such villainous appearance. To me they
seem no better than bandits."

We were standing apart from the others, and she was sipping a cup of
spiced wine that the host had mulled for her. She looked at me with a
tolerant smile.

"They are poor men," said she. "Would you have them robed in velvet?"

"My quarrel is with their looks, Madonna, not their garments," I
answered patiently. She laughed lightly, carelessly; even, I thought, a
trifle scornfully.

"You are very fanciful," said she, then added--"but if so be that you
are afraid to trust yourself in their company, why then, sir, I need
bring you no farther out of the road that you were following when first
we met."

Did the child think that some jealousy actuated me, and prompted me to
inspire her with mistrust of my supplanters? She angered me. Yet now,
more than ever was I resolved to journey with her. Leave her at the
mercy of those ruffians, whom in her ignorance she was mad enough to
trust, I could not--not even had she whipped me. She was so young, so
frail and slight, that none but a craven could have found it in his
heart to have deserted her just then.

"If it please you Madonna," I answered smoothly, "I will make bold to
travel on with you."

It may be that my even accents stung her; perhaps she read in them some
measure of reproof of the ingratitude that lay in her altered bearing
towards me. Her eyes met mine across the table, and seemed to harden as
she looked. Her answer came in a vastly altered tone.

"Why, if you are bent that way, I shall be glad to have you avail
yourself of my escort, Boccadoro."

I had suffered the scorn now of her speech, now of her silence, for
some hours, but never was I so near to turning on her as at that moment;
never so near to consigning her to the fate to which her headstrong
folly was compelling her. That she should take that tone with me!

The violence of the sudden choler I suppressed turned me pale under her
steady glance. So that, seeing it, her own cheeks flamed crimson, and
her eyes fell, as if in token that she realised the meanness of her
bearing. To some natures there can be nothing more odious than such a
realisation, and of those, I think, was she; for she stamped her foot
in a sudden pet, and curtly asked the host why there was such delay with
the horses.

"They are at the door, Madonna," he protested, bowing as he spoke. "And
your escort is already waiting in the saddle."

She turned and strode abruptly towards the threshold. Over her shoulder
she called to me:

"If you come with us, Boccadoro, you had best be brisk."

"I follow, Madonna," said I, with a grim relish, "so soon as I have paid
the reckoning."

She halted and half turned, and I thought I saw a slight droop at the
corners of her mouth.

"You are keeping count of what I owe you?" she muttered.

"Aye, Madonna," I answered, more grimly still, "I am keeping count." And
I thought that my wits were vastly at fault if that account were not to
be greatly swelled ere Pesaro was reached. Haply, indeed, my own life
might go to swell it. I almost took a relish in that thought. Perhaps
then, when I was stiff and cold--done to death in her service--this
handsome, ungrateful child would come to see how much discomfort I had
suffered for her sake.

My thoughts still ran in that channel as we rode out of Pesaro, for I
misliked the way in which those knaves disposed themselves about us.
In front went Madonna Paola; and immediately behind her, so that their
horses' heads were on a level with her saddle-bow, one on each side,
went two of those ruffians. The third, whom I had heard them call
Stefano, and who was the one who had made her the offer of their
services, ambled at my side, a few paces in the rear, and sought to draw
me into conversation, haply by way of throwing me off my guard.

Mistrust is a fine thing at times. "Forewarned is forearmed," says the
proverb, and of all forewarnings there is none we are more likely
to heed than our own mistrust; for whereas we may leave unheeded the
warnings of a friend, we seldom leave unheeded the warnings of our
spirit.

And so, while my amiable and garrulous Ser Stefano engaged me in
pleasant conversation--addressing me ever as Messer the Fool, since he
knew me not by name--I wrapped my cloak about me, and under cover of it
kept my fingers on the hilt of my stout Pistoja dagger, ready to draw
and use it at the first sign of mischief. For that sign I was all
eyes, and had I been Argus himself I could have kept no better watch.
Meanwhile I plied my tongue and maintained as merry a conversation with
Ser Stefano as you could wish to hear, for he seemed a ready-witted
knave of a most humorous turn of fancy--God rest his rascally soul! And
so it came to pass that I did by him the very thing he sought to do by
me; I lulled him into a careless confidence.

At last the sign I had been waiting for was given. I saw it as plainly
as if it had been meant for me; I believe I saw it before the man for
whom it was intended, and but for my fears concerning Madonna Paola, I
could have laughed outright at their clumsy assurance. The man who rode
on Madonna's right turned in his saddle and put up his hand as if to
beckon Stefano. I was regaling him with one of the choicest of Messer
Sacchetti's paradoxes, gurgling, myself, at the humour of the thing I
told. I paid no heed to the sign. I continued to expound my quip, as
though we had the night before us in which to make its elusive humour
clear. But out of the tail of my eye I watched my good friend Stefano,
and I saw his right hand steal round to the region of his back where
I knew his dagger to be slung. Yet was I patient. There should be no
blundering through an excessive precipitancy. I talked on until I saw
that my suspicions were amply realised. I caught the cold gleam of steel
in the hand that he brought back as stealthily as he had carried it to
his poniard. Sant' Iddio! What a coward he was for all his bulk, to go
so slyly about the business of stabbing a poor, helpless, defenceless
Fool.

"But Sacchetti makes his point clear," I babbled on, most blandly;
"almost as clear, as comprehensive and as penetrating as should be to
you the point of this." And with a swift movement I swung half-round in
my saddle, and sank my dagger to the hilt in his side even as he was in
the act of raising his.

He made no sound beyond the faintest gurgle--the first vowel of a
suddenly choked word of wonder and surprise. He rocked a second in his
saddle, then crashed over, and lay with arms flung wide, like a huge
black crucifix, upon the white ground. At the same moment a piercing
scream broke from Madonna Paola.

I tremble still to think what might have been her fate had not those
ruffians who had laid hands on her fallen into the sorry error of
holding their single adversary too lightly. They heard the thud of the
gallant Stefano's fall, and they never doubted that mine was the body
that had gone down. They heard the rapid hoof-beats of my approach, yet,
they never turned their heads to ascertain whether they might not be
mistaken in their firm conviction that it was Messer Stefano who was
joining them.

I kissed my blade for luck, and drove it straight and full into the back
of the fellow on Madonna Paola's right. He cried out, essayed to turn
in his saddle that he might deal with this unlooked-for assailant, then,
overcome, he lurched forward on to the withers of his horse and thence
rolled over, and was dragged away at the gallop, his foot caught in a
stirrup, by the suddenly startled brute he rode.

So far things had gone with an amazing and delightful ease. If only the
last of them had had the amiability to be intimidated by my prowess and
to have taken to his heels, I might have issued from that contest with
the unscathed glory of a very Mars. But from his throat there came, in
answer to his comrade's cry, a roar of rage. He fell back from Madonna,
and wheeled his horse to come at me, drawing his sword as he advanced.

"Ride on, Madonna," I shouted. "I will rejoin you presently."

The fellow laughed, a mighty ugly and discomposing laugh, which may or
may not have shaken her faith in my promise to rejoin her. It certainly
went near to shaking mine. However, she displayed a presence of mind
full worthy of the haughtiness and ingratitude of which she had showed
herself capable. She urged her mule forward, and, so, left him a clear
road to attack me. I made a mistake then that went mighty near to
costing me my life. I paused to twist my cloak about my left arm
intending to use it as a buckler. Had I but risked the arm itself, all
unprotected, in that task, it may well be that it had served me better.
As it was, my preparations were far from complete when already he was
upon me, with the result that the waving slack of my cloak was in my way
to hamper and retard the movements of my arm.

His sword leapt at me, a murderous blue-white flash of moonlit steel.
I put up my half-swaddled arm to divert the thrust, holding my dagger
ready in my right, and gripping my mule with all the strength of my
two knees. I caught the blade, it is true, and turned aside the stroke
intended for my heart. But the slack of the cloak clung to the neck of
my mule, so that I could not carry my arm far enough to send his point
clear of my body. It took me in the shoulder, stinging me, first icy
cold then burning hot, as it went tearing its way through. For just a
second was I daunted, more at knowing myself touched than by the actual
pain. Then I flung my whole body forward to reach him at the close
quarters to which he had come, and I buried my dagger in his breast,
high up at the base of his dirty throat.

The force of the blow carried me forward, even as it bore him backward;
and so, with his sword-blade in my shoulder, and my dagger where I had
planted it, we hurtled over together and lay a second amidst what seemed
a forest of equine legs. Then something smote me across the head, and I
was knocked senseless.

Conceive me, if you can, a sorrier, or more useless thing. A senseless
Fool!




CHAPTER VI. FOOL'S LUCK


My return to consciousness seemed to afford me such sensations as a
diver may experience as he rises up and up through the depth of water
he has plumbed--or as a disembodied soul may know in its gentle ascent
towards Heaven. Indeed the latter parallel may be more apt. For through
the mist that suffused my senses there penetrated from overhead a voice
that seemed to invoke every saint in the calendar on the behalf of some
poor mortal. A very litany of intercession was it, not quite, it would
appear, devoid of self-seeking.

"Sainted Virgin, restore him! Good St. Paul, who wert done to death with
a sword, let him not perish, else am I lost indeed!" came the voice.

I took a deep breath, and opened my eyes, whereat the voice cried out
gladly that its intercessions had been heard, and I knew that it was on
my behalf that the saints of Heaven had been disturbed in their beatific
peace. My head was pillowed in a woman's lap, and it took me a moment or
two to realise that that lap was Madonna Paula's, as was hers the voice
that had reached my awakening senses, the voice that now welcomed me
back to life in terms that were very different from the last that I
could remember her having used towards me.

"Thank God, Messer Boccadoro!" she exclaimed, as she bent over me.

Her face was black with shadow, but in her voice I caught a hint of
tears, and I wondered whether they were shed on my behalf or on her own.

"I do!" I answered fervently. "Have you any notion of what hour it is?"

"None," she sighed. "You have been so long unconscious that I was losing
hope of ever hearing your voice again."

I became aware of a dull ache on the right side of my head. I put up my
hand, and withdrew it moist. She saw the action.

"One of the horses must have struck you with its hoof after you fell,"
she explained. "But I was more concerned for your other wound. I
withdrew the sword with my own hands."

That other wound she spoke of was now making itself felt as well. It was
a gnawing, stinging pain in the region of my left shoulder, which
seemed to turn me numb to the waist on that side of my body, and render
powerless my arm. I questioned her touching my three adversaries, and
she silently pointed to three black masses that lay some little distance
from us in the snow.

"Not all dead?" I cried.

"I do not know," she answered, with a sob. "I have not dared go near
them. They frighten me. Mother of Heaven, what a night of horror it
has been! Oh, that I had taken your advice, Messer Boccacloro!" she
exclaimed in a passion of self-reproach.

I laughed, seeking to soften her distress.

"To me it seems, that whether you would or not, you have been compelled
to take it, after all. Those fellows lie there harmless enough, and I am
still--as I urged that I should be--your only escort."

"A nobler protector never woman had," she assured me, and I felt a hot
pearl of moisture fail upon my brow.

"You were wise, at least, to journey with a Fool," I answered her. "For
fools are proverbially lucky folk, and to-night has proven me of all
fools the luckiest. But, Madonna," I suggested, in a different tone,
"should we not be better advised to attempt to resume, this interesting
journey of ours? We do not seem to lack horses?"

A couple of nags were standing by the road-side, together with our
mules, and I was afterwards to learn that she, herself, it was had
tethered them.

"It must be yet some three leagues to Pesaro," I added, "and if we
journey slowly, as I fear me that we must, we should arrive there soon
after daybreak."

"Do you think that you can stand?" she asked, a hopeful ring in her
voice.

"I might essay it," answered I, and I would have done so, there and
then, but that she detained me.

"First let me see to this hurt in your head," said she. "I have been
bathing it with snow while you were unconscious."

She gathered a fresh handful as she spoke, and, very tenderly she wiped
away the blood. Then from her own head she took the fine linen lanza
that she wore, and made a bandage--a bandage sweet with the faint
fragrance of marsh-mallow--and bound it about my battered skull. When
that was done she turned her attention to my shoulder. This was a more
difficult matter, and all that we could do was to attempt to stanch the
blood, which already had drenched my doublet on that side. To this end
she passed a long scarf under my arm, and wound it several times about
my shoulder.

At last her gentle ministrations ended, I sought to rise. A dizziness
assailed me scarce was I on my feet, and it is odds I had fallen back,
but that she caught and steadied me.

"Mother in Heaven! You are too weak to ride," she exclaimed. "You must
not attempt it."

"Nay, but I will," I answered, with more stoutness of tone than I felt
of body, and notwithstanding that my knees were loosening under my
weight. "It is a faintness that will pass."

If ever man willed himself to conquer weakness, that did I then, and
with some measure of success--or else it was that my faintness passed
of itself. I drew away from her support, and straightening myself, I
crossed to where the animals were tethered, staggering at first, but
presently with a surer foot. She followed me, watching my steps with
as much apprehension as a mother may feel when her first-born makes his
earliest attempts at walking, and as ready to spring to my aid did I
show signs of stumbling. But I kept up, and presently my senses seemed
to clear, and I stepped out more surely.

Awhile we stood discussing which of the animals we should take. It was
my suggestion that we should ride the horses but she wisely contended
that the mules would prove the more convenient if the slower. I agreed
with her, and then, ere we set out, I went to see to my late opponents.
One of them--Ser Stefano--was cold and stiff; the other two still lived,
and from the nature of their wounds seemed likely to survive, if only
they were not frozen to death before some good Samaritan came upon them.

I knelt a moment to offer up a prayer for the repose of the soul of him
that was dead, and I bound up the wounds of the living as best I could,
to save them greater loss of blood. Indeed, had it lain in my power, I
would have done more for them. But in what case was I to render further
aid? After all, they had brought their fate upon themselves, and I doubt
not they were paying a score that they had heaped up heavily in the
past.

I went back to the mules, and, despite my remonstrances, Madonna Paola
insisted upon aiding me to mount, urging me to have a care of my wound,
and to make no violent movement that should set it bleeding again. Then
she mounted too, nimble as any boy that ever robbed an orchard, and we
set out once more. And now it was a very contrite and humbled lady that
rode with me, and one that was at no pains to dissemble her contrition,
but, rather, could speak of nothing else.

It moved me strangely to have her suing pardon from me, as though I had
been her equal instead of the sometime jester of the Court of Pesaro,
dismissed for an excessive pertness towards one with whom his master
curried favour.

And presently, as was perhaps but natural after all that she had
witnessed, she fell to questioning me as to how it came to pass that
one of such wit, resource and courage should follow the mean calling
to which I had owned. In answer I told her without reservation the full
story of my shame. It was a thing that I had ever most zealously kept
hidden, as already I have shown.

To be a Fool was evil enough in all truth; but to let men know that
under my motley was buried the identity of a man patrician-born was
something infinitely worse. For, however vile the trade of a Fool may
be, it is not half so vile for a low-born clod who is too indolent or
too sickly to do honest work as for one who has accepted it out of a
half-cowardice and persevered in it through very sloth.

Yet on that night and after all that had chanced, no matter how my
cheeks might burn in the gloom as I rode beside her, I was glad for once
to tell that ignominious story, glad that she should know what weight of
circumstance had driven me to wear my hideous livery.

But since my story dealt oddly with that Lord of Pesaro, the kinsman
whose shelter she was now upon her way to seek, I must first assure
myself that the candour to which I was disposed would not offend.

"Does it happen, Madonna," I inquired, "that you are well acquainted
with the Lord of Pesaro?"

"Nay; I have never seen him," answered she. "When he was at Rome, a year
ago in the service of the Pope, I was at my studies in the convent. His
father was my father's cousin, so that my kinship is none so near. Why
do you ask?"

"Because my story deals with him, Madonna, and it is no pretty tale. Not
such a narrative as I should choose wherewith to entertain you. Still,
since you have asked for it, you shall hear it.

"It was in the year that Giovanni Sforza, Lord of Pesaro, celebrated his
nuptials with the Lady Lucrezia Borgia--three years ago, therefore--that
one morning there rode into the courtyard of his castle of Pesazo a
tall and lean young man on a tall and lean old horse. He was garbed and
harnessed after a fashion that proclaimed him half-knight, half-peasant,
and caused the castle lacqueys to eye him with amusement and greet him
with derision. Lacqueys are great arbiters of fashion.

"In a loud, imperious voice this cockerel called for Giovanni, Lord
of Pesaro, whereupon, resenting the insolence of his manner, the
men-at-arms would have driven him out without more ado. But it chanced
that from one of the windows of his stronghold the tyrant espied his
odd visitor. He was in a mood that craved amusement, and marvelling what
madman might be this, he made his way below and bade them stand back and
let me speak--for I, Madonna, was that lean young man.

"'Are you,' quoth I, 'the Lord of Pesaro?'

"He answered me courteously that he was, whereupon I did my errand to
him. I flung my gauntlet of buffalo-hide at his feet in gage of battle.

"'Your father,' said I, 'Costanzo of Pesaro, was a foul brigand, who
robbed my father of his castle and lands of Biancomonte, leaving him
to a needy and poverty-stricken old age. I am here to avenge upon your
father's son my father's wrongs; I am here to redeem my castle and
my lands. If so be that you are a true knight, you will take up the
challenge that I fling you, and you will do battle with me, on horse or
foot, and with whatsoever arms you shall decree, God defending him that
has justice on his side.'

"Knowing the world as I know it now, Madonna," I interpolated, "I
realise the folly of that act of mine. But in those days my views
belonged to a long departed age of chivalry, of which I had learnt from
such books as came my way at Biancomonte, and which I believed was the
life of to-day in the world of men. It was a thing which some tyrants
would have had me broken on the wheel. But Giovanni Sforza never so much
as manifested anger. There was a complacent smile on his white face and
his fingers toyed carelessly with his beard.

"I waited patiently, very haughty of mien and very fierce at heart, and
when the amusement began to fade from his eyes, I begged that he would
deliver me his answer.

"'My answer,' quoth he, 'is that you get you back to the place from
whence you came, and render thanks to God on your knees every morning of
the life I am sparing you that Giovanni Sforza is more entertained than
affronted by your frenzy.'

"At his words I went crimson from chin to brow.

"'Do you disdain me?' I questioned, choking with rage. He turned, with
a shrug and a laugh, and bade one of his men to give this cavalier his
glove, and conduct him from the castle. Several that had stood at hand
made shift to obey him, whereat I fell into such a blind, unreasoning
fury that incontinently I drew my sword, and laid about me. They were
many, I was but one; and they were not long in overpowering me and
dragging me from my horse.

"They bound me fast, and Giovanni bade them let me have a priest, then
get me hanged without delay. Had he done that, the world being as it is,
perhaps none could blame him. But he elected to spare my life, yet
on such terms as I could never have accepted had it not been for the
consideration of my poor widowed mother, whom I had left in the hills of
Biancomonte whilst I went forth to seek my fortune--such was the tale
I had told her. I was her sole support, her only hope in life; and my
death must have been her own, if not from grief, why, then from very
want. The thought of that poor old woman crushed my spirit as I sat in
durance waiting for my end, and when the priest came, whom they had sent
to shrive me, he found me weeping, which he took to argue a contrite
heart. He bore the tale of it to Giovanni, and the Lord of Pesaro came
to visit me in consequence, and found me sorely changed from my furious
mood of some hours earlier.

"I was a very coward, I own; but it was for my mother's sake. If I
feared death, it was because I bethought me of what it must mean to
her."

"At sight of Giovanni I cast myself at his feet, and with tears in my
eyes and in heartrending tones, bespeaking a humility as great as had
been my erstwhile arrogance, I begged my life of him. I told him the
truth--that for myself I was not afraid to die, but that I had a mother
in the hills who was dependent on me, and who must starve if I were thus
cut off.

"He watched me with his moody eyes, a saturnine smile about his lips.
Then of a sudden he shook with a silent mirth, whose evil, malicious
depth I was far indeed from suspecting. He asked me would I take solemn
oath that if he spared my life I would never again raise my hand against
him. That oath I took with a greediness born of my fear of the death
that was impending.

"'You have been wise,' said he,' and you shall have your life on one
condition--that you devote it to my service.'

"'Even that will I do,' I answered readily. He turned to an attendant,
and ordered him to go fetch a suit of motley. No word passed between us
until that man returned with those garish garments. Then Giovanni smiled
on me in his mocking, infernal way.

"'Not that,' I cried, guessing his purpose.

"'Aye, that,' he answered me; 'that or the hangman's noose. A man who
could devise so monstrous a jest as was your challenge to the Tyrant of
Pesaro should be a merry fellow if he would. I need such a one. There
are two Fools at my Court, but they are mere tumblers, deformed vermin
that excite as much disgust as mirth. I need a sprightlier man, a man of
some learning and more drollery; such a man, in short, as you would seem
to be.'

"I recoiled in horror and disgust. Was this his clemency--this sparing
of my life that he might submit it to an eternal shame? For a moment my
mother was forgotten. I thought only of myself, and I grew resolved to
hang.

"'When you spoke of service,' said I 'I thought of service of an
honourable sort.'

"'The service that I offer you is honourable,' he said, with cold
amusement. 'Indeed, remembering that your life was forfeit, you should
account yourself most fortunate. You shall be well housed and well fed,
you shall wear silk and lie in fine linen, on condition that you are
merry. If you prove dull our castellan shall have you whipped--for such
a one as you could not be dull save out of sullenness, of which we shall
seek to cure you if you show signs of it.'

"'I will not do it,' I cried, 'it were too base.'

"'My friend,' he answered me, 'the choice is yours. You shall have an
hour in which to resolve what you will do. When they open this door for
you at sunset, come forth clad as you are, and you shall hang. If
you prefer to live, then don me that robe and cap of motley, and, on
condition that you are merry, life is yours.'"

I paused a moment. Our horses were moving slowly, for the tale engrossed
us both, me in the telling, her in the hearing. Presently--

"I need not harass you with the reflections that were mine during that
hour, Madonna. Rather let me ask you: how should a man so placed make
choice to be full worthy of the office proffered him?"

There was a moment's silence while she pondered.

"Why," she answered me, at last, "a fool I take it would have chosen
death: the wise man life, since it must hold the hope of better days."

"And since it asked a man of wit to play the fool to such a tune as the
Lord Giovanni piped, that wise young man chose life and folly. But was
that choice indeed so wise? The story ends not there. That young men
whose early life had been one of hardships found himself, indeed,
well-housed and fed as the Lord Giovanni had promised him, and so he
fell into a slothful spirit, and was content to play the Fool for bed
and board.

"There were times when conscience knocked loudly at my heart, and I was
tortured with shame to see myself in the garb of Fools, the sport of
all, from prince to scullion. But in the three years that I had dwelt at
Pesaro my identity had been forgotten by the few who had ever been aware
of it. Moreover, a court is a place of changes, and in three years there
had been such comings and goings at the Court of Giovanni Sforza, that
not more than one or two remained of those that had inhabited it when
first I entered on my existence there. Thus had my position grown
steadily more bearable. I was just a jester and no more, and so, in
a measure--though I blush to say it--I grew content. I gathered
consolation from the fact that there were not any who now remembered the
story of my coming to Pesaro, or who knew of the cowardliness I had been
guilty of when I consented to mask myself in the motley and assume the
name of Boccadoro. I counted on the Lord Giovanni's generosity to let
things continue thus, and, meanwhile, I provided for my mother out of
the vails that were earned me by my shame. But there came a day when
Giovanni in evil wantonness of spirit chose to make merry at the Fool's
expense.

"To be held up to scorn and ridicule is a part of the trade of such
as I, and had it been just Boccadoro whom Giovanni had exposed to the
derision of his Court, haply I had been his jester still. But such sport
as that would have satisfied but ill the deep-seated malice of his soul.
The man whom his cruel mockery crucified for their entertainment was
Lazzaro Biancomonte, whom he revealed to them, relating in his own
fashion the tale I have told you.

"At that I rebelled, and I said such things to him in that hour, before
all his Court, as a man may not say to a prince and live. Passion surged
up in him, and he ordered his castellan to flog me to the bone--in
short, to slay me with a whip.

"From that punishment I was saved by the intercessions of Madonna
Lucrezia. But I was driven out of Pesaro that very night, and so it
happens that I am a wanderer now."

At that I left it. I had no mind to tell her what motives had impelled
Lucrezia Borgia to rescue me, nor on what errand I had gone to Rome and
was from Rome returning.

She had heard me in silence, and now that I had done, she heaved a sigh,
for which gentle expression of pity out of my heart I thanked her. We
were silent, thereafter, for a little while. At length she turned her
head to regard me in the light of the now declining moon.

"Messer Biancomonte," said she, and the sound of the old name, falling
from her lips, thrilled me with a joy unspeakable, and seemed already to
reinvest me in my old estate, "Messer Biancomonte, you have done me in
these four-and-twenty hours such service as never did knight of old for
any lady--and you did it, too, out of the most disinterested and noble
of motives, proving thereby how truly knightly is that heart of yours,
which, for my sake, has all but beat its last to-night. You must journey
on to Pesaro with me despite this banishment of which you have told me.
I will be surety that no harm shall come to you. I could not do less,
and I shall hope to do far more. Such influence as I may prove to have
with my cousin of Pesaro shall be exerted all on your behalf, my
friend; and if in the nature of Giovanni Sforza there be a tithe of the
gratitude with which you have inspired me, you shall, at least, have
justice, and Biancomonte shall be yours again."

I was silent for a spell, so touched was I by the kindness she
manifested me--so touched, indeed, and so unused to it that I forgot how
amply I had earned it, and how rudely she had used me ere that was done.

"Alas!" I sighed. "God knows I am no longer fit to sit in the house of
the Biancomonte. I am come too low, Madonna."

"That Lazzaro, after whom you are named," she answered, "had come yet
lower. But he lived again, and resumed his former station. Take your
courage from that."

"He lived not at the mercy of Giovanni of Pesaro," said I.

There was a fresh pause at that. Then--"At least," she urged me, "you'll
come to Pesaro with me?"

"Why yes," said I. "I could not let you go alone." And in my heart I
felt a pang of shame, and called myself a cur for making use of her as I
was doing to reach the Court of Giovanni Sforza.

"You need fear no consequences," she promised me. "I can be surety for
that at least."

In the east a brighter, yellower light than the moon's began to show.
It was the dawn, from which I gathered that it must be approaching
the thirteenth hour. Pesaro could not be more than a couple of leagues
farther, and, presently, when we had gained the summit of the slight
hill we were ascending, we beheld in the distance a blurred mass looming
on the edge of the glittering sea. A silver ribbon that uncoiled itself
from the western hills disappeared behind it. That silvery streak was
the River Foglia; that heap of buildings against the landscape's virgin
white, the town of Pesaro.

Madonna pointed to it with a sudden cry of gladness. "See Messer
Biancomonte, how near we are. Courage, my friend; a little farther, and
yonder we have rest and comfort for you."

She had need, in truth, to cry me "Courage!" for I was weakening fast
once more. It may have been the much that I had talked, or the infernal
jolting of my mule, but I was losing blood again, and as we were on the
point of riding forward my senses swam, so that I cried out; and but for
her prompt assistance I might have rolled headlong from my saddle.

As it was, she caught me about the waist as any mother might have
done her son. "What ails you?" she inquired, her newly-aroused anxiety
contrasting sharply with her joyous cry of a moment earlier. "Are you
faint, my friend?" It needed no confession on my part. My condition was
all too plain as I leaned against her frail body for support.

"It is my wound," I gasped. Then I set my teeth in anguish. So near the
haven, and to fail now! It could not be; it must not be. I summoned all
my resolution, all my fortitude; but in vain. Nature demanded payment
for the abuses she had suffered.

"If we proceed thus," she ventured fearfully, "you leaning against me,
and going at a slow pace--no faster than a walk--think you, you can bear
it? Try, good Messer 'Biancomonte."

"I will try, Madonna," I replied. "Perhaps thus, and if I am silent, we
may yet reach Pesaro together. If not--if my strength gives out--the
town is yonder and the day is coming. You will find your way without
me."

"I will not leave you, sir," she vowed; and it was good to hear her.

"Indeed, I hope you may not know the need," I answered wearily. And thus
we started on once more.

Sant' Iddio! What agonies I suffered ere the sun rose up out of the sea
to flood us with his winter glory! What agonies were mine during those
two hours or so of that last stage of our eventful journey! "I must bear
up until we are at the gates of Pesaro," I kept murmuring to myself,
and, as if my spirit were inclined to become the servant of my will and
hold my battered flesh alive until we got that far, Pesaro's gates I had
the joy of entering ere I was constrained to give way.

Dimly I remember--for very dim were my perceptions growing--that as we
crossed the bridge and passed beneath the archway of the Porta Romana,
the officer turned out to see who came. At sight of me be gaped a moment
in astonishment.

"Boccadoro?" he exclaimed, at last. "So soon returned?"

"Like Perseus from the rescue of Andromeda," answered I, in a feeble
voice, "saving that Perseus was less bloody than am I. Behold the
Madonna Paola Sforza di Santafior, the noble cousin of our High and
Mighty Lord."

And then as if my task being done, I were free to set my weary brain
to rest, my senses grew confused, the officer's voice became a hum that
gradually waxed fainter as I sank into what seemed the most luxurious
and delicious sleep that ever mortal knew.

Two days later, when I was conscious once more, I learned what
excitement those words of mine had sown, with what honours Madonna Paola
was escorted to the Castle, and how the citizens of Pesaro turned out
upon hearing the news which ran like fire before us. And Madonna, it
seems, had loudly proclaimed how gallantly I had served her, for as they
bore me along in a cloak carried by four men-at-arms, the cry that was
heard in the streets of Pesaro that morning was "Boccadoro!" They
had loved me, had those good citizens of Pesaro, and the news of my
departure had cast a gloom upon the town. To have their hero return in
a manner so truly heroic provoked that brave display of their affection,
and I deeply doubt if ever in the days of greatest loyalty the name of
Sforza was as loudly cried in Pesaro as, they tell me, was the name of
Sforza's Fool that day.




CHAPTER VII. THE SUMMONS FROM ROME


If Madonna Paola did not achieve quite all that she had promised me so
readily, yet she achieved more than from my acquaintance with the nature
of Giovanni Sforza--and my knowledge of the deep malice he entertained
for me--I should have dared to hope.

The Tyrant of Pesaro, as I was soon to learn, was greatly taken with
this fair cousin of his, whom that morning he had beheld for the first
time. And being taken with her, it may be that Giovanni listened the
more readily to her intercessions on my poor behalf. Since it was she
who begged this thing, he could not wholly refuse. But since he was
Giovanni Sforza, he could not wholly grant. He promised her that my
life, at least, should be secure, and that not only would he pardon me,
but that he would have his own physician see to it that I was made sound
again. For the time, that was enough, he thought. First let them bring
me back to life. When that was achieved, it would be early enough to
consider what course this life should take thereafter.

And she, knowing him not and finding him so kind and gracious, trusted
that he would perform that which he tricked her into believing that he
promised.

For some ten days I lay abed, feverish at first and later very weak from
the great loss of blood I had sustained. But after the second day, when
my fever had abated, I had some visitors, among whom was Madonna Paola,
who bore me the news that her intercessions for me with the Lord
of Pesaro were likely to bear fruit, and that I might look for my
reinstatement. Yet, if I permitted myself to hope as she bade me; I did
so none too fully.

My situation, bearing in mind how at once I had served and thwarted the
ends of Cesare Borgia, was perplexing.

Another visitor I had was Messer Magistri--the pompous seneschal of
Pesaro--who, after his own fashion, seemed to have a liking for me, and
a certain pity. Here was my chance of discharging the true errand on
which I was returned.

"I owe thanks," said I, "to many circumstances for the sparing of
my life; but above all people and all things do I owe thanks to our
gracious Lady Lucrezia. Do you think, Messer Magistri, that she would
consent to see me and permit me again to express the gratitude that
fills my heart?"

Mosser Magistri thought that he could promise this, and consented
to bear my message to her. Within the hour she was at my bedside and
divining that, haply, I had news to give her of the letter I had born
her brother, she dismissed Magistri who was in attendance.

Once we were alone her first words were of kindly concern for my
condition, delivered in that sweet, musical voice that was by no means
the least charm of a princess to whom Nature had been prodigal of gifts.
For without going to that length of exaggerated praise which some have
bestowed--for her own ear, and with an eye to profit--upon Madonna
Lucrezia, yet were I less than truthful if I sought to belittle her
ample claims to beauty. Some six years later than the time of which I
write she was met on the occasion of her entry into Ferrara by a certain
clown dressed in the scanty guise of the shepherd Paris, who proffered
her the apple of beauty with the mean-souled flattery that since
beholding her he had been forced to alter his old-time judgment in
favour of Venus.

He lied, like the brazen, self-seeking adulator that he was, and for
which he should have been soundly whipped. Her nose was a shade too
long, her chin a shade too short to admit, even remotely, of such
comparisons. Still, that she had a certain gracious beauty, as I have
said, it is not mine to deny. There was an almost childish freshness in
her face, an almost childish innocence in her fine gray eyes, and, above
all, a golden and resplendent hair as brought to mind the tresses of
God's angels.

That fair child--for no more than a child was she--drew a chair to my
bedside.

There she sate herself, whilst I thanked her for her concern on my
behalf, and answered that I was doing well enough, and should be abroad
again in a day or two.

"Brave lad," she murmured, patting my hand, which lay upon the coverlet,
as though she had been my sister and I anything but a Fool, "count me
ever your friend hereafter, for what you have done for Madonna Paola.
For although it was my own family you thwarted, yet you did so to serve
one who is more to me than any family, more than any sister could be."

"What I did, Madonna," I answered, "I did with the better heart since it
opened out a way that was barred me, solved me a riddle which my Lord,
your Illustrious brother, set me--one that otherwise might well have
overtaxed my wits."

"Ah?" Her gray eyes fell on me in a swift and searching glance, a glance
that revealed to the full their matchless beauty. Care seemed of
a sudden to have aged her face. The question of her eyes needed no
translation into words.

"The Lord Cardinal of Valencia entrusted me with a letter for you, in
answer to your own," I informed her, and from underneath my pillow I
drew the package, which during Magistri's absence I had abstracted from
my boot that I might have it in readiness when she came.

She sighed as she took it, and a wistful smile invested the corners of
her mouth.

"I had hoped he would have found better employment for you," she said.

"His Excellency promised that he would more fitly employ me in the
future did I discharge this errand with secrecy and despatch. But by
aiding Madonna Paola I have burned my boats against returning to claim
the redemption of that promise; though had it not been for Madonna Paola
and what I did, I scarce know how I should have penetrated here to you."

She broke the seal, and rising crossed to the window, where she stood
reading the letter, her back toward me. Presently I heard a stifled
sob. The letter was crushed in her hand. Then moments passed ere she
confronted me once more. But her manner as all changed; she was agitated
and preoccupied, and for all that she forced herself to talk of me and
my affairs, her mind was clearly elsewhere. At last she left me, nor did
I see her again during the time I was confined to my bed.

On the eleventh day I rose, and the weather being mild and spring-like,
I was permitted by my grave-faced doctor to take the air a little on the
terrace that overlooks the sea. I found no garments but some suits of
motley, and so, in despite of my repugnance now to reassume that garb, I
had no choice but to array myself in one of these. I selected the least
garish one--a suit of black and yellow stripes, with hose that was half
black, half yellow, too; and so, leaning upon the crutch they had left
me, I crept forth into the sunlight, the very ghost of the man that I
had been a fortnight ago.

I found a stone seat in a sheltered corner looking southward towards
Ancona, and there I rested me and breathed the strong invigorating air
of the Adriatic. The snows were gone, and between me and the wall some
twenty paces off--there was a stretch of soft, green turf.

I had brought with me a book that Madonna Lucrezia had sent me while I
was yet abed. It was a manuscript collection of Spanish odes, with
the proverbs of one Domenico Lopez--all very proper nourishment for
a jester's mind. The odes seemed to possess a certain quaintness, and
among the proverbs there were many that were new to me in framing and
in substance. Moreover, I was glad of this means of improving my
acquaintance with the tongue of Spain, and I was soon absorbed. So
absorbed, indeed, as never to hear the footsteps of the Lord Giovanni,
when presently he approached me unattended, nor to guess at his presence
until his shadow fell athwart my page. I raised my eyes, and seeing who
it was I made shift to get on my feet; but he commanded me to remain
seated, commenting sympathetically upon my weak condition.

He asked me what I read, and when I had told him, a thin smile fluttered
across his white face.

"You choose your reading with rare judgment," said he. "Read on, and
prime your mind with fresh humour, prepare yourself with new conceits
for our amusement against the time when health shall be more fully
restored you."

It was in such words as these that he intimated to me that I was
pardoned, and reinstated--as the Fool of the Court of Pesaro. That was
to be the sum of his clemency. We were precisely where we had been. Once
before had he granted me my life on condition that I should amuse him;
he did no more than repeat that mercy now. I stared at him in wonder,
open-mouthed, whereit he laughed.

"You are agreeably surprised, my Boccadoro?" said he, his fingers
straying to his beard as was his custom. "My clemency is no more than
you deserve in return for the service you have rendered to the House of
Sforza." And he patted my head as though I had been one of his dogs that
had borne itself bravely in the chase.

I answered nothing. I sat there as if I had been a part of the stone
from which my seat was hewn, for I lacked the strength to rise and
strangle him as he deserved--moreover, I was bound by an oath, which it
would have damned my soul to break, never to raise my hand against him.

And then, before he could say more, two ladies issued from the doorway
on my right. They were Madonna Lucrezia and Madonna Paola. Upon espying
me they hastened forward with expressions of pleased surprise at seeing
me risen and out, and when I would have got to my feet they stayed me
as Giovanni had done. Madonna Paola's words seemed addressed to heaven
rather than to me, for they were words of thanksgiving for this recovery
of my strength.

"I have no thanks," she ended warmly, "that can match the deeds by which
you earned them, Messer Biancomonte."

My eyes drifting to Giovanni's face surprised its sudden darkening.

"Madonna Paola," said he, in an icy voice, "you have uttered a name that
must not be heard within my walls of Pesaro, if you would prove yourself
the friend of Boccadoro. To remind me of his true identity is to remind
me of that which counts not in his favour."

She turned to regard him, a mild surprise in her blue eyes.

"But, my lord, you promised--" she began.

"I promised," he interposed, with an easy smile and manner never so
deprecatory, "that I would pardon him, grant him his life and restore
him to my favour."

"But did you not say that if he survived and was restored to strength
you would then determine the course his life should take?"

Still smiling, he produced his comfit-box, and raised the lid.

"That is a thing he seems to have determined for himself," he answered
smoothly--he could be smooth as a cat upon occasion, could this bastard
of Costanzo Sforza. "I came upon him here, arrayed as you behold
him, and reading a book of Spanish quips. Is it not clear that he has
chosen?"

Between thumb and forefinger he balanced a sugar-crusted comfit of
coriander seed steeped in marjoram vinegar, and having put his question
he bore the sweet-meat to his mouth. The ladies looked at him, and from
him to me. Then Madonna Paola spoke, and there seemed a reproachful
wonder in her voice.

"Is this indeed your choice?" she asked me.

"It is the choice that was forced on me," said I, in heat. "They left me
no garment save these of folly. That I was reading this book it pleases
my lord to interpret into a further sign of my intentions."

She turned to him again, and to the appeal she made was joined that of
Madonna Lucrezia. He grew serious and put up his hand in a gesture of
rare loftiness.

"I am more clement than you think," said he, "in having done so much.
For the rest, the restoration that you ask for him is one involving
political issues you little dream of. What is this?"

He had turned abruptly. A servant was approaching, leading a
mud-splashed courier, whom he announced as having just arrived.

"Whence are you?" Giovanni questioned him.

"From the Holy See," answered the courier, bowing, "with letters for the
High and Mighty Lord Giovanni Sforza, Tyrant of Pesaro, and his noble
spouse, Madonna Lucrezia Borgia."

He proffered his letters as he spoke, and Giovanni, whose brow had grown
overcast, took them with a hand that seemed reluctant. Then bidding the
servant see to the courier's refreshment, he dismissed them both.

A moment he stood, balancing the parchments a if from their weight he
would infer the gravity of their contents; and the affairs of Boccadoro
were, there and then, forgotten by us all. For the thought that rose
uppermost in our minds--saving always that of Madonna Lucrezia--was that
these communications concerned the sheltering of Madonna Paola, and were
a command for her immediate return to Rome. At last Giovanni handed his
wife the letter intended for her, and, in silence, broke the seal of his
own.

He unfolded it with a grim smile, but scarce had he begun to read when
his expression softened into one of terror, and his face grew ashen.
Next it flared crimson, the veins on his brow stood out like ropes, and
his eyes flashed furiously upon Madonna Lucrezia. She was reading, her
bosom rising and falling in token of the excitement that possessed her.

"Madonna," he cried in an awful voice, "I have here a command from the
Holy See to repair at once to Rome, to answer certain charges that are
preferred against me relating to my marriage. Madonna, know you aught of
this?"

"I know, sir," she answered steadily, "that I, too, have here a letter
calling me to Rome. But there is no reason given for the summons."

Intuitively it flashed across my mind that whatever the matter might
be, Madonna Lucrezia had full knowledge of it through the letter I had
brought her from her brother.

"Can you conjecture, Madonna, what are these charges to which my letter
vaguely alludes?" Giovanni was inquiring.

"Your pardon, but the subject is scarcely of a nature to permit
discussion in the castle courtyard. Its character is intimate."

He looked at her very searchingly, but for all that he was a man of
almost twice her years, her wits were more than a match for his, and
his scrutiny can have told him nothing. She preserved a calm, unruffled
front.

"In five minutes, Madonna," said he, very sternly, "I shall be honoured
if you will receive me in your closet."

She inclined her head, murmuring an unhesitating assent. Satisfied, he
bowed to her and to Madonna Paola--who had been looking on with eyes
that wonder had set wide open--and turning on his heel he strode briskly
away. As he passed into the castle, Madonna Lucrezia heaved a sigh and
rose.

"My poor Boccadoro," she cried, "I fear me your affairs must wait a
while. But think of me always as your friend, and believe that if I can
prevail upon my brother to overlook the ill-turn you did him when you
entered the service of this child"--and she pointed to Madonna Paola--"I
shall send for you from Rome, for in Pesaro I fear you have little to
hope for. But let this be a secret between us."

From those words of hers I inferred, as perhaps she meant I should, that
once she left Pesaro to obey her father's summons, our little northern
state was to know her no more. Once again, only, did I see her, on the
occasion of her departure, some four days later, and then but for a
moment. Back to Pesaro she came no more, as you shall learn anon; but
behind her she left a sweet and fragrant memory, which still endures
though many years are sped and much calumny has been heaped upon her
name.

I might pause here to make some attempt at refuting the base falsehoods
that had been bruited by that time-serving vassal Guicciardini,
and others of his kidney, whom the upstart Cardinal Giuliano della
Rovere--sometime pedlar--in his jealous fury at seeing the coveted
pontificate pass into the family of Borgia, bought and hired to do his
loathsome work of calumny and besmirch the fame of as sweet a lady as
Italy has known. But this poor chronicle of mine is rather concerned
with the history of Madonna Paola di Santafior, and it were a divergence
well-nigh unpardonable to set my pen at present to that other task.
Moreover, there is scarce the need. If any there be who doubt me, or if
future generations should fall into the error of lending credence to the
lies of that villain Guicciardini, of that arch-villain Giuliano della
Rovere, or of other smaller fry who have lent their helot's pens to
weave mendacious records of her life, dubbing her murderess, adulteress,
and Heaven knows what besides--I will but refer them to the archives
of Ferrara, whose Duchess she became at the age of one-and-twenty, and
where she reigned for eighteen years. There shall it be found recorded
that she was an exemplary, God-fearing woman; a faithful and honoured
wife; a wise, devoted mother; and a princess, beloved and esteemed by
her people for her piety, her charity and her wisdom. If such records as
are there to be read by earnest seekers after truth be not sufficient to
convince, and to reveal those others whom I have named in the light of
their true baseness, then were it idle for me to set up in these pages a
passing refutation of the falsehoods which it has grieved me so often to
hear repeated.

It was two days later that the Lord Giovanni set out for Rome, obedient
to the command he had received. But before his departure--on the eve of
it, to be precise--there arrived at Pesaro a very wonderful and handsome
gentleman. This was the brother of Madonna Paola, the High and Mighty
Lord Filippo di Santafior. He had had a hint in Rome that his connivance
at his sister's defiant escape was suspected at the Vatican, and he
had wisely determined that his health would thrive better in a northern
climate for a while.

A very splendid creature was this Lord Filippo, all shimmering
velvet, gleaming jewels, costly furs and glittering gold. His face
was effeminate, though finely featured, and resembled, in much, his
sister's. He rode a cream-coloured horse, which seemed to have been
steeped in musk, so strongly was it scented. But of all his affectations
the one with which I as taken most was to see one of his grooms approach
him when he dismounted, to dust his wondrous clothes down to his shoes,
which he wore in the splayed fashion set by the late King of France who
was blessed with twelve toes on each of his deformed feet.

The Lord Giovanni, himself not lacking in effeminacy, was greatly taken
by the wondrous raiment, the studied lisp and the hundred affectations
of this peerless gallant. Had he not been overburdened at the time by
the Papal business that impended, he might there and then have cemented
the intimacy which was later to spring up between them. As it was, he
made him very welcome, and placed at his and his sister's disposal
the beautiful palace that his father had begun, and he, himself, had
completed, which was known as the Palazza Sforza. On the morrow Giovanni
left Pesaro with but a small retinue, in which I was thankful not to be
included.

Two days later Madonna Lucrezia followed her husband, the fact that they
journeyed not together, seeming to wear an ominous significance. Her
eyes had a swollen look, such as attends much weeping, which afterwards
I took as proof that she knew for what purpose she was going, and was
moved to bitter grief at the act to which her ambitious family was
constraining her.

After their departure things moved sluggishly at Pesaro. The nobles
of the Lord Giovanni's Court repaired to their several houses in the
neighboring country, and save for the officers of the household the
place became deserted.

Madonna Paola remained at the Sforza Palace, and I saw her only once
during the two mouths that followed, and then it was about the streets,
and she had little more than a greeting for me as she passed. At her
side rode her brother, a splendid blaze of finery, falcon on wrist.

My days were spent in reading and reflection, for there was naught else
to do. I might have gone my ways, had I so wished it, but something kept
me there at Pesaro, curious to see the events with which the time was
growing big.

We grew sadly stagnant during Lent, and what with the uneventful course
of things, and the lean fare proscribed by Mother Church, it was a very
dispirited Boccadoro that wandered aimlessly whither his dulling fancy
took him. But in Holy Week, at last, we received an abrupt stir which
set a whirlpool of excitement in the Dead Sea of our lives. It was the
sudden reappearance of the Lord Giovanni.

He came alone, dust-stained and haggard, on a horse that dropped dead
from exhaustion the moment Pesaro was reached, and in his pallid cheek
and hollow eye we read the tale of some great fear and some disaster.

That night we heard the story of how he had performed the feat of riding
all the way from Rome in four-and-twenty hours, fleeing for his life
from the peril of assassination, of which Madonna Lucrezia had warned
him.

He went off to his Castle of Gradara, where he shut himself up with the
trouble we could but guess at, and so in Pesaro, that brief excitement
spent, we stagnated once again.

I seemed an anomaly in so gloomy a place, and more than once did I think
of departing and seeking out my poor old mother in her mountain home,
contenting myself hereafter with labouring like any honest villano born
to the soil. But there ever seemed to be a voice that bade me stay
and wait, and the voice bore a suggestion of Madonna Paola. But why
dissemble here? Why cast out hints of voices heard, supernatural in
their flavour? The voice, I doubt not, was just my own inclination,
which bade me hope that once again it might be mine to serve that lady.

An eventful year in the history of the families of Sforza and Borgia was
that year of grace 1497.

Spring came, and ere it had quite grown to summer we had news of the
assassination of the Duke of Gandia, and the tale that he was done to
death by his elder brother, Cesare Borgia; a tale which seemed to lack
for reasonable substantiation, and which, despite the many voices that
make bold to noise it broadcast, may or may not be true.

In that same month of June messages passed between Rome and Pesaro, and
gradually the burden of the messages leaked out in rumours that Pope
Alexander and his family were pressing the Lord Giovanni to consent to a
divorce. At last he left Pesaro again; this time to journey to Milan and
seek counsel with his powerful cousin, Lodovico, whom they called "The
Moor." When he returned he was more sulky and downcast than ever, and at
Gradara he lived in an isolation that had been worthy of a hermit.

And thus that miserable year wore itself out, and, at last, in December,
we heard that the divorce was announced, and that Lucrezia Borgia was
the Tyrant of Pesaro's wife no more. The news of it and the reasons
that were put forward as having led to it were roared across Italy in
a great, derisive burst of laughter, of which the Lord Giovanni was the
unfortunate and contemptible butt.




CHAPTER VIII. "MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN"


And now, lest I grow tedious and weary you with this narrative of mine,
it may be well that I but touch with a fugitive pen upon the events of
the next three years of the history of Pesaro.

Early in 1498 the Lord Giovanni showed himself once more abroad, and he
seemed again the same weak, cruel, pleasure-loving tyrant he had been
before shame overtook him and drove him for a season into hiding.
Madonna Paola and her brother, Filippo di Santafior, remained in Pesaro,
where they now appeared to have taken up their permanent abode. Madonna
Paola--following her inclinations--withdrew to the Convent of Santa
Caterina, there to pursue in peace the studies for which she had a
taste, whilst her splendid, profligate brother became the ornament--the
arbiter elegantiarum--of our court.

Thus were they left undisturbed; for in the cauldron of Borgia politics
a stew was simmering that demanded all that family's attention, and of
whose import we guessed something when we heard that Cesare Borgia had
flung aside his cardinalitial robes to put on armour and give freer rein
to the boundless ambition that consumed him.

With me life moved as if that winter excursion and adventure had never
been. Even the memory of it must have faded into a haze that scarce left
discernible any semblance of reality, for I was once again Boccadoro,
the golden-mouthed Fool, whose sayings were echoed by every jester
throughout Italy. My shame that for a brief season had risen up in arms
seemed to be laid to rest once more, and I was content with the burden
that was mine. Money I had in plenty, for when I pleased him the Lord
Giovanni's vails were often handsome, and much of my earnings went to
my poor mother, who would sooner have died starving than have bought
herself bread with those ducats could she have guessed at what manner of
trade Lazzaro Biancomonte had earned them.

The Lord Giovanni was a frequent visitor at the Convent of Santa
Caterina, whither he went, ever attended by Filippo di Santafior, to pay
his duty to his fair cousin. In the summer of 1500, she being then come
to the age of eighteen, and as divinely beautiful a lady as you could
find in Italy, she allowed herself to be persuaded by her brother--who,
I make no doubt had been, in his turn, persuaded by the Lord of
Pesaro--to leave her convent and her studies, and to take up her life
at the Sforza Palace, where Filippo held by now a sort of petty court of
his own.

And now it fell out that the Lord Giovanni was oftener at the Palace
than at the Castle, and during that summer Pesaro was given over to
such merrymaking as it had never known before. There was endless
lute-thrumming and recitation of verses by a score of parasite poets
whom the Lord Giovanni encouraged, posing now as a patron of letters;
there were balls and masques and comedies beyond number, and we were as
gay as though Italy held no Cesare Borgia, Duke of Valentinois, who was
sweeping northward with his all-conquering flood of mercenaries.

But one there was who, though the very centre of all these merry doings,
the very one in whose honour and for whose delectation they were set
afoot, seemed listless and dispirited in that boisterous crowd. This
was Madonna Paola, to whom, rumour had it, that her kinsman, the Lord
Giovanni, was paying a most ardent suit.

I saw her daily now, and often would she choose me for her sole
companion; often, sitting apart with me, would she unburden her heart
and tell me much that I am assured she would have told no other. A
strange thing may it have seemed, this confidence between the Fool and
the noble Lady of Santafior--my Holy Flower of the Quince, as in my
thoughts I grew to name her. Perhaps it may have been because she found
me ever ready to be sober at her bidding, when she needed sober company
as those other fools--the greater fools since they accounted themselves
wise--could not afford her.

That winter adventure betwixt Cagli and Pesaro was a link that bound us
together, and caused her to see under my motley and my masking smile
the true Lazzaro Biancomonte whom for a little season she had known. And
when we were alone it had become her wont to call me Lazzaro, leaving
that other name that they had given me for use when others were at hand.
Yet never did she refer to my condition, or wound me by seeking to spur
me to the ambition to become myself again. Haply she was content that I
should be as I sas, since had I sought to become different it must have
entailed my quitting Pesaro, and this poor lady was so bereft of friends
that she could not afford to lose even the sympathy of the despised
jester.

It was in those days that I first came to love her with as pure a flame
as ever burned within the heart of man, for the very hopelessness of it
preserved its holy whiteness. What could I do, if I would love her,
but love her as the dog may love his mistress? More was surely not for
me--and to seek more were surely a madness that must earn me less. And
so, I was content to let things be, and keep my heart in check,
thanking God for the mercy of her company at times, and for the precious
confidences she made me, and praying Heaven--for of my love was I grown
devout--that her life might run a smooth and happy course, and ready,
in the furtherance of such an object, to lay down my own should the need
arise. Indeed there were times when it seemed to me that it was a good
thing to be a Fool to know a love of so rare a purity as that--such a
love as I might never have known had I been of her station, and in such
case as to have hoped to win her some day for my own.

One evening of late August, when the vines were heavy with ripe fruit,
and the scent of roses was permeating the tepid air, she drew me from
the throng of courtiers that made merry in the Palace, and led me out
into the noble gardens to seek counsel with me, she said, upon a matter
of gravest moment. There, under the sky of deepest blue, crimsoning to
saffron where the sun had set, we paced awhile in silence, my own senses
held in thrall by the beauty of the eventide, the ambient perfumes
of the air and the strains of music that faintly reached us from the
Palace. Madonna's head was bent, and her eyes were set upon the ground
and burdened, so my furtive glance assured me, with a gentle sorrow.
At length she spoke, and at the words she uttered my heart seemed for a
moment to stand still.

"Lazzaro," said she, "they would have me marry."

For a little spell there was a silence, my wits seeming to have grown
too numbed to attempt to seek an answer. I might be content, indeed, to
love her from a distance, as the cloistered monk may love and worship
some particular saint in Heaven; yet it seems that I was not proof
against jealousy for all the abstract quality of my worship.

"Lazzaro," she repeated presently, "did you hear me? They would have me
marry."

"I have heard some such talk," I answered, rousing myself at last; "and
they say that it is the Lord Giovanni who would prove worthy of your
hand."

"They say rightly, then," she acknowledged. "The Lord Giovanni it is."

Again there was a silence, and again it was she who broke it.

"Well, Lazzaro?" she asked. "Have you naught to say?"

"What would you have me say, Madonna? If this wedding accords with your
own wishes, then am I glad."

"Lazzaro, Lazzaro! you know that it does not."

"How should I know it, Madonna?"

"Because your wits are shrewd, and because you know me. Think you this
petty tyrant is such a man as I should find it in my heart to conceive
affection for? Grateful to him am I for the shelter he has afforded us
here; but my love--that is a thing I keep, or fain would keep, for some
very different man. When I love, I think it will be a valorous knight, a
gentleman of lofty mind, of noble virtues and ready address."

"An excellent principle on which to go in quest of a husband, Madonna
mia. But where in this degenerate world do you look to find him?"

"Are there, then, no such men?"

"In the pages of Bojardo and those other poets whom you have read too
earnestly there may be."

"Nay, there speaks your cynicism," she chided me. "But even if my
ideals be too lofty, would you have me descend from the height of such
a pinnacle to the level of the Lord Giovanni--a weak-spirited craven, as
witnesses the manner in which he permitted the Borgias to mishandle him;
a cruel and unjust tyrant, as witnesses his dealing with you, to seek no
further instances; a weak, ignorant, pleasure-loving fool, devoid of wit
and barren of ambition? Such is the man they would have me wed. Do
not tell me, Lazzaro, that it were difficult to find a better one than
this."

"I do not mean to tell you that. After all, though it be my trade to
jest, it is not my way to deal in falsehood. I think, Madonna, that if
we were to have you write for us such an appreciation of the High and
Mighty Giovanni Sforza, you would leave a very faithful portrait for the
enlightenment of posterity."

"Lazzaro, do not jest!" she cried. "It is your help I need. That is the
reason why I am come to you with the tale of what they seek to force me
into doing."

"To force you?" I cried. "Would they dare so much?"

"Aye, if I resist them further."

"Why, then," I answered, with a ready laugh, "do not resist them
further."

"Lazzaro!" she cried, her accents telling of a spirit wounded by what
she accounted a flippancy.

"Mistake me not," I hastened to elucidate. "It is lest they should
employ force and compel you at once to enter into this union that I
counsel you to offer no resistance. Beg for a little time, vaguely
suggesting that you are not indisposed to the Lord Giovanni's suit."

"That were deceit," she protested.

"A trusty weapon with which to combat tyranny," said I.

"Well? And then?" she questioned. "Such a state of things cannot endure
for ever. It must end some day."

I shook my head, and I smiled down upon her a smile that was very full
of confidence.

"That day will never dawn, unless the Lord Giovanni's impatience
transcends all bounds."

She looked at me, a puzzled glance in her eyes, a bewildered expression
knitting her fine brows.

"I do not take your meaning, my friend," she complained.

"Then mark the enucleation. I will expound this meaning of mine through
the medium of a parable. In Babylon of old, there dwelt a king whose
name was Belshazzar, who, having fallen into habits of voluptuousness
and luxury, was so enslaved by them as to feast and make merry whilst
a certain Darius, King of the Medes, was marching in arms against his
capital. At a feast one night the fingers of a man's hand were seen to
write upon the wall, and the words they wrote were a belated warning:
'Mene, mene, tekel, upharsin.'"

She looked at me, her eyes round with inquiry, and a faint smile of
uncertainty on her lips.

"Let me confess that your elucidation helps me but little."

"Ponder it, Madonna," I urged her. "Substitute Giovanni Sforza for
Belshazzar, Cesare Borgia for King Darius, and you have the key to my
parable."

"But is it indeed so? Does danger threaten Pesaro from that quarter?"

"Aye, does it," I answered, almost impatiently. "The tide of war is
surging up, and presently will whelm us utterly. Yet here sits the Lord
Giovanni making merry with balls and masques and burle and banquets,
wholly unprepared, wholly unconscious of his peril. There may be no hand
to write a warning on his walls--or else, as in the case of Babylon, the
hand will write when it is too late to avert the evil--yet there are not
wanting other signs for those that have the wit to read them; nor is a
wondrous penetration needed."

"And you think then--" she began.

"I think that if you are obdurate with him, he and your brother
may hurry you by force into this union. But if you temporise with
half-promises, with suggestions that before Christmas you may grow
reconciled to his wishes, he will be patient."

"But what if Christmas comes and finds us still in this position?"

"It will need a miracle for that; or, at least, the death of Cesare
Borgia--an unlikely event, for they say he uses great precautions.
Saving the miracle, and providing Cesare lives, I will give the Lord
Giovanni's reign in Pesaro at most two months."

We had halted now, and were confronting each other in the descending
gloom.

"Lazzaro, dear friend," she cried, almost with gaiety, "I was wise to
take counsel with you. You have planted in my heart a very vigorous
growth of hope."

We turned soon after, and started to retrace our steps, for she might be
ill-advised to remain absent overlong.

I left her on the terrace in a very different spirit from that in which
she had come to me, bearing with me her promise that she would act as I
had advised her. No doubt I had taken a load from her gentle soul, and
oddly enough I had taken, too, a load from mine.

Things fell out as I said they would in far as Giovanni Sforza and
Filippo were concerned. Madonna's seeming amenability to their wishes
stayed their insistence, and they could but respect her wishes to let
the betrothal be delayed yet a little while. And during the weeks that
followed, it was I scarce know whether more pitiable or more amusing
to see the efforts that Giovanni made to win her ardently desired
affection.

Love has sharp eyes at times, and a dullard under the influence of the
baby god will turn shrewd and exert rare wiles in the conduct of his
wooing. Giovanni, by some intuition usually foreign to his dull nature,
seemed to divine what manner of man would be Madonna Paola's ideal, and
strove to pass himself off as possessed of the attributes of that ideal,
with an ardour that was pitiably comical. He became an actor by the side
of whom those comedians that played impromptus for his delectation were
the merest bunglers with the art. He gathered that Madonna Paola loved
the poets and their stately diction, and so, to please her better, he
became a poet for the season.

"Poeta nascitur" the proverb runs, and that proverb's truth was
doubtless forced home upon the Lord Giovanni at an early stage of his
excursions into the flowery meads of prosody. Fortunately he lacked the
supreme vanity that is the attribute of most poetasters, and he was able
to see that such things as after hours of midnight-labour he contrived
to pen, would evoke nothing but her amusement--unless, indeed, it were
her scorn--and render him the laughing-stock of all his Court.

So, in the wisdom of despair, he came to me, and with a gentleness that
in the past he had rarely manifested for me, he asked me was I skilled
in writing verse. There were not wanting others to whom he might have
gone, for there was no lack of rhymsters about his Court; but perhaps he
thought he could be more certain of my silence than of theirs.

I answered him that were the subject to my taste, I might succeed in
throwing off some passable lines upon it. He pressed gold upon me, and
bade me there and then set about fashioning an ode to Madonna Paola, and
to forget, when they were done, under pain of a whipping to the bone,
that I had written them.

I obeyed him with a right good-will. For what subject of all subjects
possible was there that made so powerful an appeal to my inclinations?
Within an hour he had the ode--not perhaps such a poem as might stand
comparison with the verses of Messer Petrarca, yet a very passable
effusion, chaste of conceit and palpitating with sincerity and
adoration. It was in that that I addressed her as the "Holy Flower of
the Quince," which was the symbol of the House of Santafior.

So great an impression made that ode that on the morrow the Lord
Giovanni came to me with a second bribe and a second threat of torture.
I gave him a sonnet of Petrarchian manner which went near to outshining
the merits of the ode. And now, these requests of the Lord Giovanni's
assumed an almost daily regularity, until it came to seem that did
affairs continue in this manner for yet a little while, I should have
earned me enough to have repurchased Biancomonte, and, so, ended my
troubles. And good was the value that I gave him for his gold. How good,
he never knew; for how was he, the clod, to guess that this despised
jester of his Court was pouring out his very soul into the lines he
wrote to the tyrant's orders?

It is scant wonder that, at last, Madonna Paola who had begun by
smiling, was touched and moved by the ardent worship that sighed from
those perfervid verses. So touched, indeed, was she as to believe the
Lord Giovanni's love to be the pure and holy thing those lines presented
it, and to conclude that his love had wrought in him a wondrous and
ennobling transformation. That so she thought I have the best of all
reasons to affirm, for I had it from her very lips one day.

"Lazzaro," she sighed, "it is occurring to me that I have done the Lord
Giovanni an injustice. I have misgauged his character. I held him to
be a shallow, unlettered clown, devoid of any finer feelings. Yet his
verses have a merit that is far above the common note of these writings,
and they breathe such fine and lofty sentiments as could never spring
from any but a fine and lofty soul."

How I came to keep my tongue from wagging out the truth I scarcely know.
It may be that I was frightened of the punishment that might overtake
me did I betray my master; but I rather think that it was the fear of
betraying myself, and so being flung into the outer darkness where there
was no such radiant presence as Madonna Paola's. For had I told her it
was I had penned those poems that were the marvel of the Court, she must
of necessity have guessed my secret, for to such quick wits as hers it
must have been plain at once that they were no vapourings of artistry,
but the hot expressions of a burning truth. It was in that--in their
supreme sincerity--that their chief virtue lay.

Thus weeks wore on. The vintage season came and went; the roses faded
in the gardens of the Palazzo Sforza, and the trees put on their autumn
garb of gold. October was upon us, and with it came, at last, the fear
that long ago should have spurred us into activity. And now that it
came it did not come to stimulate, but to palsy. Terror-stricken at the
conquering advance of Valentino--which was the name they now gave Cesare
Borgia; a name derived from his Duchy of Valentinois--Giovanni Sforza
abruptly ceased his revelling, and made a hurried appeal for help to
Francesco Gonzaga, Lord of Mantua--his brother-in-law, through the
Lord of Pesaro's first marriage. The Mantuan Marquis sent him a hundred
mercenaries under the command of an Albanian named Giacomo. As well
might he have sent him a hundred figs wherewith to pelt the army of
Valentino!

Disaster swooped down swiftly upon the Lord of Pesaro. His very people,
seeing in what case they were, and how unprepared was their tyrant to
defend them, wisely resolved that they would run no risks of fire and
pillage by aiding to oppose the irresistible force that was being hurled
against us.

It was on the second Sunday in October that the storm burst over the
Lord Giovanni's head. He was on the point of leaving the Castle to
attend Mass at San Domenico, and in his company were Filippo Sforza of
Santafior and Madonna Paola, besides courtiers and attendants, amounting
in all to perhaps a score of gallant cavaliers and ladies. The cavalcade
was drawn up in the quadrangle, and Giovanni was on the point of
mounting, when, of a sudden, a rumbling noise, as of distant thunder,
but too continuous for that, arrested him, his foot already in the
stirrup.

"What is that?" he asked, an ashen pallor overspreading his effeminate
face, as, doubtless, the thought of the enemy came uppermost in his
mind.

Men looked at one another with fear in their eyes and some of the ladies
raised their voices in querulous beseeching for reassurance. They had
their answer even as they asked. The Albanian Giacomo, who was now
virtually the provost of the Castle, appeared suddenly at the gates with
half a score of men. He raised a warning hand, which compelled the Lord
Giovanni to pause; then he rasped out a brisk command to his followers.
The winches creaked, and the drawbridge swung up even as with a clank
and rattle of chains the portcullis fell.

That done, he came forward to impart the ominous news which one of his
riders had brought him at the gallop from the Porta Romana.

A party of some fifty men, commanded by one of Cesare's captains, had
ridden on in advance of the main army to call upon Pesaro to yield
to the forces of the Church. And the people, without hesitation, had
butchered the guard and thrown wide the gates, inviting the enemy to
enter the town and seize the Castle. And to the end that this might be
the better achieved, a hundred or so had traitorously taken up arms, and
were pressing forward to support the little company that came, with
such contemptuous daring, to storm our fortress and prepare the way for
Valentino.

It was a pretty situation this for the Lord Giovanni, and here were fine
opportunities for some brave acting under the eyes of his adored Madonna
Paola. How would he bear himself now? I wondered.

He promised mighty well once the first shock of the news was overcome.

"By God and His saints!" he roared, "though it may be all that it is
given me to do, I'll strike a blow to punish these dastards who have
betrayed me, and to crush the presumption of this captain who attacks us
with fifty men. It is a contempt which he shall bitterly repent him."

Then he thundered to Giacomo to marshal his men, and he called upon
those of his courtiers who were knights to put on their armour that they
might support him. Lastly he bade a page go help him to arm, that he
might lead his little force in person.

I saw Madonna Paola's eyes gleam with a sudden light of admiration,
and I guessed that in the matter of Giovanni's valour her opinions were
undergoing the same change as the verses had caused them to undergo in
the matter of his intellect.

Myself, I was amazed. For here was a Lord Giovanni I seemed never to
have known, and I was eager to behold the sequel to so fine a prologue.




CHAPTER IX. THE FOOL-AT-ARMS


That valorous bearing that the Lord Giovanni showed whilst, with Madonna
Paola's glance upon him, his fear of seeming afraid was greater than his
actual fear of our assailants, he cast aside like a mantle once he was
within the walls of his Castle, and under the eyes of none save the page
and myself, for I followed idly at a respectful distance.

He stood irresolute and livid of countenance, his eagerness to arm and
to lead his mercenaries and his knights all departed out of him. It was
that curiosity of mine to see the sequel to his stout words that had led
me to follow him, and what I saw was, after all, no more than I might
have looked for--the proof that his big talk of sallying forth to battle
was but so much acting. Yet it must have been acting of such a quality
as to have deceived even his very self.

Now, however, by the main steps, he halted in the cool gloom of the
gallery, and I saw that fear had caught his heart in an icy grip and was
squeezing it empty. In his irresolution he turned about, and his gloomy
eye fell upon me loitering in the porch. At that he turned to the page
who followed in obedience to his command.

"Begone!" he growled at the lad, "I will have Boccadoro, there, to help
me arm." And with a poor attempt at mirth--"The act is a madness," he
muttered, "and so it is fitting that folly should put on my armour for
it. Come with me, you," he bade me, and I, obediently, gladly, went
forward and up the wide stone staircase after him, leaving the page to
speculate as he listed on the matter of his abrupt dismissal.

I read the Lord Giovanni's motives, as clearly as if they had been
written for me by his own hand. The opinion in which I might hold him
was to him a matter of so small account that he little cared that I
should be the witness of the weakness which he feared was about to
overcome him--nay, which had overcome him already. Was I not the one man
in Pesaro who already knew his true nature, as revealed by that matter
of the verses which I had written, and of which he had assumed the
authorship? He had no shame before me, for I already knew the very
worst of him, and he was confident that I would not talk lest he should
destroy me at my first word. And yet, there was more than that in his
motive for choosing me to go with him in that hour, as I was to learn
once we were closeted in his chamber.

"Boccadoro," he cried, "can you not find me some way out of this?" Under
his beard I saw the quiver of his lips as he put the question.

"Out of this?" I echoed, scarce understanding him at first.

"Aye, man--out of this Castle, out of Pesaro. Bestir those wits of
yours. Is there no way in which it might be done, no disguise under
which I might escape?"

"Escape?" quoth I, looking at him, and endeavouring to keep from my
eyes the contempt that was in my heart. Dear God! Had revenge been all I
sought of him, how I might have gloated over his miserable downfall!

"Do not stand there staring with those hollow eyes," he cried, anger
and fear blending horridly in his voice and rendering shrill its pitch.
"Find me a way. Come, knave, find me a way, or I'll have you broken on
the wheel. Set your wits to save that long, lean body from destruction.
Think, I bid you."

He was moving restlessly as he spoke, swayed by the agitation of terror
that possessed him like a devil. I looked at him now without dissembling
my scorn. Even in such an hour as this the habit of hectoring cruelty
remained him.

"What shall it avail me to think?" I asked him in a voice that was as
cold and steady as his was hot and quavering. "Were you a bird I might
suggest flight across the sea to you. But you are a man, a very human, a
very mortal man, although your father made you Lord of Pesaro."

Even as I was speaking, the thunder of the besiegers reached our
ears--such a dull roar it was as that of a stormy sea in winter time.
Maddened by his terror he stood over me now, his eyes flashing wildly in
his white face.

"Another word in such a tone," he rasped, his fingers on his dagger,
"and I'll make an end of you. I need your help, animal!"

I shook my head, my glance meeting his without fear. I was of twice his
strength, we were alone, and the hour was one that levelled ranks. Had
he made the least attempt to carry out his threat, had he but drawn an
inch of the steel he fingered, I think I should have slain him with my
hands without fear or thought of consequences.

"I have no help for you such as you need," I answered him. "I am but the
Fool of Pesaro. Whoever looked to a Fool for miracles?"

"But here is death," he almost moaned.

"Lord of Pesaro," I reminded him, "your mercenaries are under arms
by your command, and your knights are joining them. They wait for the
fulfilment of your promise to lead them out against the enemy. Shall you
fail them in such an hour as this?"

He sank, limp as an empty scabbard, to a chair.

"I dare not go. It is death," he answered miserably.

"And what but death is it to remain here?" I asked, torturing him with
more zest than ever he had experienced over the agonies of some poor
victim on the rack. "In bearing yourself gallantly there lies a slender
chance for you. Your people seeing you in arms and ready to defend them
may yet be moved to a return of loyalty."

"A fig for their loyalty," was his peevish, craven answer. "What shall
it avail me when I'm slain!"

God! was there ever such a coward as this, such a weak-souled,
water-hearted dastard?

"But you may not be slain," I urged him. And then I sounded a fresh
note. "Bethink you of Madonna Paola and of the brave things you promised
her."

He flushed a little, then paled again, then sat very still. Shame had
touched him at last, yet its grip was not enough to make a man of him.
A moment he remained irresolute, whilst that shame fought a hard battle
with his fears.

But those fears proved stronger in the end, and his shame was overthrown
by them.

"I dare not," he gasped, his slender, delicate hands clutching at the
arms of his chair. "Heaven knows I am not skilled in the use of arms."

"It asks no skill," I assured him. "Put on your armour, take a sword and
lay about you. The most ignorant scullion in your kitchens could perform
it given that he had the spirit."

He moistened his lips with his tongue, and his eyes looked dead as a
snake's. Suddenly he rose and took a step towards the armour that was
piled about a great leathern chair. Then he paused and turned to me once
more.

"Help me to put it on," he said in a voice that he strove to
render steady. Yet scarcely had I reached the pile and taken up the
breast-plate, when he recoiled again from the task. He broke into a
torrent of blasphemy.

"I will not sacrifice myself," he almost screamed. "Jesus! not I. I will
find a way out of this. I will live to return with an army and regain my
throne."

"A most wise purpose. But, meanwhile, your men are waiting for you;
Madonna Paola di Santafior is waiting for you, and--hark!--the bellowing
crowd is waiting for you."

"They wait in vain," he snarled. "Who cares for them? The Lord of Pesaro
am I."

"Care you, then, nothing for them? Will you have your name written in
history as that of a coward who would not lift his sword to strike one
blow for honour's sake ere he was driven out like a beast by the mere
sound of voices?"

That touched him. His vanity rose in arms.

"Take up that corselet," he commanded hoarsely. I did his bidding, and,
without a word, he raised his arms that I might fit it to his breast.
Yet in the instant that I turned me to pick up the back-piece, a crash
resounded through the chamber. He had hurled the breastplate to the
ground in a fresh access of terror-rage. He strode towards me, his eyes
glittering like a madman's.

"Go you!" he cried, and with outstretched arms he pointed wildly across
the courtyard. "You are very ready with your counsels. Let me behold
your deeds, Do you put on the armour and go out to fight those animals."

He raved, he ranted, he scarce knew what he said or did, and yet the
words he uttered sank deep into my heart, and a sudden, wild ambition
swelled my bosom.

"Lord of Pesaro," I cried, in a voice so compelling that it sobered him,
"if I do this thing what shall be my reward?"

He stared at me stupidly for a moment. Then he laughed in a silly,
crackling fashion.

"Eh?" he queried. "Gesu!" And he passed a hand over his damp brow, and
threw back the hair that cumbered it. "What is the thing that you would
do, Fool?"

"Why, the thing you bade me," I answered firmly. "Put on your armour,
and shut down the visor so that all shall think it is the Lord Giovanni,
Tyrant of Pesaro, who rides. If I do this thing, and put to rout the
rabble and the fifty men that Cesare Borgia has sent, what shall be my
reward?"

He watched me with twitching lips, his glare fixed upon me and a faint
colour kindling in his face. He saw how easy the thing might be. Perhaps
he recalled that he had heard that I was skilled in arms--having spent
my youth in the exercise of them, against the time when I might fling
the challenge that had brought me to my Fool's estate. Maybe he recalled
how I had borne myself against long odds on that adventure with Madonna
Paola, years ago. Just such a vanity as had spurred him to have me write
him verses that he might pretend were of his own making, moved him now
to grasp at my proposal. They would all think that Giovanni's armour
contained Giovanni himself. None would ever suspect Boccadoro the Fool
within that shell of steel. His honour would be vindicated, and he would
not lose the esteem of Madonna Paola. Indeed, if I returned covered with
glory, that glory would be his; and if he elected to fly thereafter,
he might do so without hurt to his fair name, for he would have amply
proved his mettle and his courage.

In some such fashion I doubt not that the High and Mighty Giovanni
Sforza reasoned during the seconds that we stood, face to face and
eye to eye, in that room, the cries of the impatient ones below almost
drowned in the roar of the multitude beyond.

At last he put out his hands to seize mine, and drawing me to the light
he scanned my face, Heaven alone knowing what it was he sought there.

"If you do this," said he, "Biancomonte shall be yours again, if it
remains in my power to bestow it upon you now or at any future time. I
swear it by my honour."

"Swear it by your fear of Hell or by your hope of Heaven and the compact
is made," I answered, and so palsied was he and so fallen in spirit that
he showed no resentment at the scorn of his honour my words implied, but
there and then took the oath I that demanded.

"And now," I urged, "help me to put on this armour of yours."

Hurriedly I cast off my jester's doublet and my head-dress with its
jangling bells, and with a wild exultation, a joy so fierce as almost
to bring tears to my eyes, I held my arms aloft whilst that poor craven
strapped about my body the back and breast plates of his corselet. I,
the Fool, stood there as arrogant as any knight, whilst with his noble
hands the Lord of Pesaro, kneeling, made secure the greaves upon
my legs, the sollerets with golden spurs, the cuissarts and the
genouilleres. Then he rose up, and with hands that trembled in his
eagerness, he put on my brassarts and shoulder-plates, whilst I, myself,
drew on my gauntlets. Next he adjusted the gorget, and handed me, last
of all, the helm, a splendid head-piece of black and gold, surmounted by
the Sforza lion.

I took it from him and passed it over my head. Then ere I snapped down
the visor and hid the face of Boccadoro, I bade him, unless he would
render futile all this masquerade, to lock the door of his closet, and
lie there concealed till my return. At that a sudden doubt assailed him.

"And what," quoth he, "if you do not return?"

In the fever that had possessed me this was a thing that had not entered
into my calculations, nor should it now. I laughed, and from the hollow
of my helmet not a doubt but the sound must have seemed charged with
mockery. I pointed to the cap and doublet I had shed.

"Why, then, Illustrious, it will but remain for you to complete the
change."

"Dog!" he cried; "beast, do you deride me?"

My answer was to point out towards the yard.

"They are clamouring," said I. "They wax impatient. I had better go
before they come for you." As I spoke I selected a heavy mace for only
weapon, and swinging it to my shoulder I stepped to the door. On the
threshold he would have stayed me, purged by his fear of what might
befall him did I not return. But I heeded him not.

"Fare you well, my Lord of Pesaro," said I. "See that none penetrates to
your closet. Make fast the door."

"Stay!" he called after me. "Do you hear me? Stay!"

"Others will hear you if you commit this folly," I called back to him.
"Get you to cover." And so I left him.

Below, in the courtyard, my coming was hailed by a great, enthusiastic
clamour. They had all but abandoned hope of seeing the Lord Giovanni, so
long had he been about his arming. As they brought forward my charger, I
sought with my eyes Madonna Paola. I beheld her by her brother--who, it
seemed, was not going with us--in the front rank of the spectators.
Her cheeks were tinged with a slight flush of excitement, and her eyes
glowed at the brave sight of armed men.

I mounted, and as I rode past her to take my place at the head of that
company, I lowered my mace and bowed. She detained me a moment, setting
her hand upon the glossy neck of my black charger.

"My Lord," she said, in a low voice, intended for my ear alone, "this is
a brave and gallant thing you do, and however slight may be your hope
of prevailing, yet your honour will be safe-guarded by this act, and
men will remember you with respect should it come to pass that a usurper
shall possess anon your throne. Bear you that in mind to lend you a glad
courage. I shall pray for you, my Lord, till you return."

I bowed, answering never a word lest my voice should betray me; and
musing on the matter of the strange roads that lead to a woman's heart,
I passed on, to gain the van.

Two months ago, knowing Giovanni as he was, he had been detestable to
her, and she contemplated with loathing the danger in which she stood
of being allied to him by marriage. Since then he had made good use of a
poor jester's mental gifts to incline her by the fervour of some verses
to a kindlier frame of mind, and now, making good use of that same
jester's courage, he completed her subjection by the display of it.
She was prepared to wed the Lord Giovanni with a glad heart and a proud
willingness whensoever he should desire it.

But Giacomo was beside me now, and in the quadrangle a silence reigned,
all waiting for my command. From without there came such a din as seemed
to argue that all hell was at the Castle gates. There were shouts of
defiance and screams of abuse, whilst a constant rain of stones beat
against the raised drawbridge.

They thought, no doubt, that Giovanni and his followers were at their
prayers, cowering with terror. No notion had they of the armed force,
some six score strong, that waited to pour down upon them. I briskly
issued my command, and four men detached themselves and let down the
bridge. It fell with a crash, and ere those without had well grasped the
situation we had hurled ourselves across and into them with the force of
a wedge, flinging them to right and to left as we crashed through with
hideous slaughter. The bridge swung up again when the last of Giacomo's
mercenaries was across, and we were shut out, in the midst of that
fierce human maelstrom.

For some five minutes there raged such a brief, hot fight as will be
remembered as long as Pesaro stands. No longer than that did it take for
the crowd of citizens to realise that war was not their trade, and that
they had better leave the fighting to Cesare Borgia's men; and so they
fell away and left us a clear road to come at the men-at-arms. But
already some forty of our saddles were empty, and the fight, though
brief, had proved exhausting to many of us.

Before us, like an array of mirrors in the October sun, shone the
serried ranks of the steel-cased Borgia soldiers, their lances in rest,
waiting to receive us. Their leader, a gigantic man whose head was armed
by no more than a pot of burnished steel, from which escaped the
long red ringlets of his hair, was that same Ramiro del' Orca who had
commanded the party pursuing Madonna Paola three years ago. He was,
since, become the most redoubtable of Cesare's captains, and his name
was, perhaps, the best hated in Italy for the grim stories that were
connected with it.

As we rode on he backed to join the foremost rank of his soldiers, and
his voice--a voice that Stentor might have envied--trumpeted a laugh at
sight of us.

"Gesu!" he roared, so that I heard him above the thunder of our hoofs.
"What has come to Giovanni Sforza. Has he, perchance, become a man since
Madonna Lucrezia divorced him? I will bear her the news of it, my good
Giovanni--my living thunderbolt of Jove!"

His men echoed his boisterous mood, infected by it, and this, I argued,
boded ill for the courage of those that followed me. Another moment and
we had swept into them, and many there were who laughed no more, or went
to laugh with those in Hell.

For myself I singled out the blustering Ramiro, and I let him know it
by a swinging blow of my mace upon his morion. It was a most
finely-tempered piece of steel, for my stroke made no impression on
it, though Ramiro winced and raised his stout sword to return the
compliment.

"Body of God!" he croaked, "you become a very god of war, Giovanni. To
me, then, my lusty Mars! We'll make a fight of it that poets shall sing
of over winter fires. Look to yourself!"

His sword caught me a cunning, well-aimed blow on the side of my helm,
and thence, glanced to my shoulder. But for the quality of Giovanni's
head-piece of a truth there had been an end to the warring of a Fool.
I smote him back, a mighty blow upon his epauliere that shore the steel
plate from his shoulder, and left him a vulnerable spot. At that he
swore ferociously, and his bloodshot eyes grew wicked as the fiend's. A
second time he essayed that side-long blow upon my helm, and with such
force and ready address that he burst the fastening of my visor on the
left, so that it swung down and left my beaver open.

With a cry of triumph he closed with me, and shortened his sword to stab
me in the face. And then a second cry escaped him, for the countenance
he beheld was not the countenance he had looked to see. Instead of
the fair skin, the handsome features and the bearded mouth of the
Lord Giovanni, he beheld a shaven face, a hooked nose and a complexion
swarthy as the devil's.

"I know you, rogue," he roared. "By the Host! your valour seemed too
fierce for Giovanni Sforza. You are Bocca--"

Exerting all the strength that I had been gradually collecting, I hurled
him back with a force that almost drove him from the saddle, and rising
in my stirrups I rained blow after blow upon his morion ere he could
recover.

"Dog!" I muttered softly, "your knowledge shall be the death of you."

He drew away from me at last, and during the moments that I spent in
readjusting my visor he sallied, and charged me again. His blustering
was gone and his face grown pale, for such blows as mine could not have
been without effect. Not a doubt of it but he was taken with amazement
to find such fighting qualities in a Fool--an amazement that must
have eclipsed even that of finding Boccadoro in the armour of Giovanni
Sforza.

Again he swung his sword in that favourite stroke of his; but this time
I caught the edge upon my mace, and ere he could recover I aimed a blow
straight at his face. He lowered his head, like a bull on the point of
charging, and so my blow descended again upon his morion, but with a
force that rolled him, senseless, from the saddle.

Before I could take a breathing space I was beset by, at least, a dozen
of his followers who had stood at hand during the encounter, never
doubting that victory must be ultimately with their invincible captain.
They drove me back foot by foot, fighting lustily, and performing--it
was said afterwards by the anxious ones that watched us from the Castle,
among whom was Madonna Paola--such deeds of strength and prowess as
never romancer sang of in his wildest flight of fancy.

My men had suffered sorely, but the brave Giacomo still held them
together, fired by the example that I set him, until in the end the day
was ours. Discouraged by the disabling of their captain, so soon as they
had gathered him up our opponents thought of nothing but retreat; and
retreat they did, hotly pursued by us, and never allowed to pause or
slacken rein until we had hurled them out of the town of Pesaro, to
get them back to Cesare Borgia with the tale of their ignominious
discomfiture.




CHAPTER X. THE FALL OF PESARO


As we rode back through the town of Pesaro, some fifty men of the six
score that had sallied from the Castle a half-hour ago, we found the
streets well-nigh deserted, the rebellious citizens having fled back to
the shelter of their homes, like rats to their burrows in time of peril.

As we advanced through the shambles that we had left about the Castle
gates, it occurred to me that within the courtyard a crowd would be
waiting to receive and welcome me, and it became necessary to devise
some means of avoiding this reception. I beckoned Giacomo to my side.

"Let it be given out that I will speak to no man until I have
rendered thanks to Heaven for this signal victory," I muttered to the
unsuspecting Albanian. "Do you clear a way for me so soon a we are
within."

He obeyed me so well that when the bridge had been let down, he preceded
me with a couple of his men and gently but firmly pressed back those
that would have approached--among the first of whom were Madonna Paola
and her brother.

"Way!" he shouted. "Make way for the High and Mighty Lord of Pesaro!"

Thus I passed through, my half-shattered visor sufficiently closed still
to conceal my face, and in this manner I gained the door of the eastern
wing and dismounted. Two or three attendants sprang forward, ready to
go with me that they might assist me to disarm. But I waved them
imperiously back, and mounted the stairs alone. Alone I crossed the
ante-chamber, and tapped at the door of the Lord Giovanni's closet.
Instantly it opened, for he had watched my return and been awaiting me.
Hastily he drew me in and closed the door.

He was flushed with excitement and trembling like a leaf. Yet at the
sight that I presented he lost some of his high colour, and recoiled to
stare at my armour, battered, dinted, and splashed with browning stains,
which loudly proclaimed the fray through which I had been.

He fell to praising my valour, to speaking of the great service I had
rendered him, and of the gratitude that he would ever entertain for me,
all in terms of a fawning, cloying sweetness that disgusted me more than
ever his cruelties had done. I took off my helmet whilst he spoke, and
let it fall with a crash. The face I revealed to him was livid with
fatigue, and blackened with the dust that had caked upon my sweat. He
came forward again and helped hastily to strip off my harness, and when
that was done he fetched a great silver basin and a ewer of embossed
gold from which he poured me fragrant rose-water that I might wash.
Macerated sweet herbs he found me, lupin meal and glasswort, the better
that I might cleanse myself; and when, at last, I was refreshed by
my ablutions, he poured me a goblet of a full-bodied golden wine that
seemed to infuse fresh life into my veins. And all the time he spoke
of the prowess I had shown, and lamented that all these years he should
have had me at his Court and never guessed my worth.

At length I turned to resume my clothes. And since it must excite
comment and perhaps arouse suspicion were I to appear in any but my
jester's garish livery, I once more assumed my foliated cape, my cap and
bells.

"Wear it yet for a little while," he said, "and thus complete the
service you have done me. Presently you may doff it for all time, and
resume your true estate. Biancomonte, as I promised you, shall be yours
again. The Lord of Pesaro does not betray his word."

I smiled grimly at the pride of his utterance.

"It is an easy thing," said I, "freely to give that which is no longer
ours."

He coloured with the anger that was ever ready.

"What shall that mean?" he asked.

"Why, that in a few days you will have Cesare Borgia here, and you will
be Lord of Pesaro no more. I have saved your honour for you. More than
that it were idle to attempt."

"Think not that I shall submit," he cried. "I shall find in Italy the
help I need to return and drive the usurper out. You must have faith in
that, yourself, else had you never bargained with me as you have done
for the return of your Estates."

To that I answered nothing, but urged him to go below and show himself;
and the better that he might bear himself among his courtiers, I
detailed to him the most salient features of that fight.

He went, not without a certain uneasiness which, however, was soon
dispelled by the thunder of acclamation with which he was received; not
only by his courtiers, but by the soldiers who had fought in that hot
skirmish, and who believed that it was he had led them.

Meanwhile I sat above, in the closet he had vacated, and thence I
watched him, with such mingling feelings in my heart as baffle now my
halting pen. Scorn there was in my mood and a hot contempt of him
that he could stand there and accept their acclamation with an air of
humility that I am persuaded was assumed: a certain envious anger was
there, too, to think that such a weak-kneed, lily-livered craven should
receive the plaudits of the deeds that I, his buffoon, had performed for
him. Those acclamations were not for him, although those who acclaimed
him thought so. They were for the man who had routed Ramiro del' Orca
and his followers, and that man assuredly was I. Yet there I crouched
above, behind the velvet curtains where none might see me, whilst he
stood smiling and toying with his brown beard and listening to the fine
words of praise that, I could imagine, were falling from the lips of
Madonna Paola, who had drawn near and was speaking to him.

There is in my nature a certain love of effectiveness, a certain taste
for theatrical parade and the contriving of odd situations. This bent of
mine was whispering to me then to throw wide the window, and, stemming
their noisy plaudits, announce to them the truth of what had passed. Yet
what if I had done so? They would have accounted it but a new jest of
Boccadoro, the Fool, and one so ill-conceived that they might urge the
Lord Giovanni to have him whipped for it.

Aye, it would have been a folly, a futile act that would have earned me
unbelief, contempt and anger. And yet there was a moment when jealousy
urged me almost headlong to that rashness. For in Madonna Paola's
eyes there was a new expression as they rested on the face of Giovanni
Sforza--an expression that told me she had come to love this man whom a
little while ago she had despised.

God! was there ever such an irony? Was there ever such a paradox? She
loved him, and yet it was not him she loved. The man she loved was the
man who had shown the qualities of his mind in the verses with which the
Court was ringing; the man who had that morning given proof of his high
mettle and knightly prowess by the deeds of arms he had performed. I was
that man--not he at whom so adoringly she looked. And so--I argued, in
my warped way and with the philosophy worthy of a Fool--it was I
whom she loved, and Giovanni was but the symbol that stood for me. He
represented the songs and the deeds that were mine.

But if I did not throw wide that window and proclaim the fact to ears
that would have been deaf to the truth of them, what think you that I
did? I took a subtler vengeance. I repaired to my own chamber, procured
me pen and ink, and, there, with a heart that was brimming over with
gall, I penned an epic modelled upon the stately lines of Virgil,
wherein I sang the prowess of the Lord Giovanni Sforza, describing that
morning's mighty feat of arms, and detailing each particular of the
combat 'twixt Giovanni and Ramiro del' Orca.

It was a brave thing when it was done; a finer and worthier poetical
achievement than any that I had yet encompassed, and that night, after
they had supped, as merrily as though Duke Valentino had never been
heard of, and whilst they were still sitting at their wine, I got me a
lute and stole down to the banqueting hall.

I announced myself by leaping on a table and loudly twanging the strings
of my instrument. There was a hush, succeeded by a burst of acclamation.
They were in a high good-humour, and the Fool with a new song was the
very thing they craved.

When silence was restored I began, and whilst my fingers moved
sluggishly across the strings, striking here and there a chord,
I recited the epic I had penned. My voice swelled with a feverish
enthusiasm whose colossal irony none there save one could guess. He, at
first surprised, grew angry presently, as I could see by the cloud that
had settled on his brow. Yet he restrained himself, and the rest of
the company were too enthralled by the breathless quality of my poem to
bestow their glances on any countenance save mine.

Madonna Paola sat upon the Lord of Pesaro's right, and her blue eyes
were round and her lips parted with enthusiasm as I proceeded. And when
presently I came to that point in the fight betwixt Giovanni and Ramiro
del' Orca, when Ramiro, having broken down the Lord Giovanni's visor,
was on the point of driving his sword into his adversary's face, I saw
her shrink in a repetition of the morning's alarm, and her bosom heaved
more swiftly, as though the issue of that combat hung now upon my lines
and she were made anxious again for the life of the man whom she had
learnt to love.

I finished on a slow and stately rhythm, my voice rising and falling
softly, after the manner of a Gregorian chant, as I dwelt on the piety
that had succeeded the Lord of Pesaro's brave exploits, and how upon his
return from the stricken field he had repaired straight to his closet,
his battered and bloody harness on his back, that he might kneel ere he
disarmed and render thanks to God for the victory vouchsafed him.

On that "Te Deum" I finished softly, and as my voice ceased and the
vibration of my last chord melted away, a thunder of applause was my
reward.

Men leapt from their chairs in their enthusiasm, and crowded round the
table on which I was perched, whilst, when presently I sprang down, one
noble woman kissed me on the lips before them all, saying that my mouth
was indeed a mouth of gold.

Madonna Paola was leaning towards the Lord Giovanni, her eyes shining
with excitement and filmed with tears as they proudly met his glance,
and I knew that my song had but served to endear him the more to her by
causing her to realise more keenly the brave qualities of the adventure
that I sang. The sight of it almost turned me faint, and I would have
eluded them and got away as I had come but that they lifted me up and
bore me so to the table at which the Lord Giovanni sat. He smiled, but
his face was very pale. Could it be that I had touched him? Could it be
that I had driven the iron into his soul, and that he could not bear to
confront me, knowing what a dastard I must deem him?

The splendid Filippo of Santafior had risen to his feet, and was waving
a white, bejewelled hand in an imperious demand for silence. When at
last it came he spoke, his voice silvery and his accents mincing.

"Lord of Pesaro; I demand a boon. He who for years has suffered the
ignominy of the motley is at last revealed to us as a poet of such
magnitude of soul and richness of expression that he would not suffer
by comparison with the great Bojardo or tim greater Virgil. Let him be
stripped for ever of that hideous garb he wears, and let him be treated,
hereafter, with the dignity his high gifts deserve. Thus shall the day
come when Pesaro will take honour in calling him her son."

Loud and long was the applause that succeeded his words, and when at
last it had died down, the Lord Giovanni proved equal to the occasion,
like the consummate actor that he was.

"I would," said he, "that these high gifts, of which to-night he has
afforded proof, could have been employed upon a worthier subject. I fear
me that since you have heard his epic you will be prone to overestimate
the deed of which it tells the story. I would, too, my friends," he
continued, with a sigh, "that it were still mine to offer him such
encouragement as he deserves. But I am sorely afraid that my days in
Pesaro are numbered, that my sands are all but run--at least, for a
little while. The conqueror is at our gates, and it would be vain to
set against the overwhelming force of his numbers the handful of
valiant knights and brave soldiers that to-day opposed and scattered his
forerunners. It is my intention to withdraw, now that my honour is safe
by what has passed, and that none will dare to say that it was through
fear that I fled. Yet my absence, I trust, may be but brief. I go to
collect the necessary resources, for I have powerful friends in this
Italy whose interests touching the Duca Valentino go hand in hand with
mine, and who will, thus, be the readier to lend me assistance. Once I
have this, I shall return and then--woe to the vanquished!"

The tide of enthusiasm that had been rising as he spoke, now overflowed.
Swords leapt from their scabbards--mere toy weapons were they, meant
more for ornament than offence, yet were they the earnest of the stouter
arms those gentlemen were ready to wield when the time came. He quieted
their clamours with a dignified wave of the hand.

"When that day comes I shall see to it that Boccadoro has his deserts.
Meanwhile let the suggestion of my illustrious cousin be acted upon, and
let this gifted poet be arrayed in a manner that shall sort better with
the nobility of his mind that to-night he has revealed to us."

Thus was it that I came, at last, to shed the motley and move among men
garbed as themselves. And with my outward trappings I cast off, too,
the name of Boccadoro, and I insisted upon being known again as Lazzaro
Biancomonte.

But in so far as the Court of Pesaro was concerned, this new life upon
which I was embarked was of little moment, for on the Tuesday that
followed that first Sunday in October of such momentous memory, the Lord
Giovanni's Court passed out of being.

It came about with his flight to Bologna, accompanied by the Albanian
captain and his men, as well as by several of the knights who had joined
in Sunday's fray. Ardently, as I came afterwards to learn, did he urge
Madonna Paola and her brother to go with them, and I believe that the
lady would have done his will in this had not the Lord Filippo opposed
the step. He was no warrior himself, he swore--for it was a thing he
made open boast of, affecting to despise all who followed the coarse
trade of arms--and, as for his sister, it was not fitting that she
should go with a fugitive party made up of a handful of knights and some
fifty rough mercenaries, and be exposed to the hardships and perils
that must be theirs. Not even when he was reminded that the advancing
conqueror was Cesare Borgia did it affect him, for despite his shallow,
mincing ways, and his paraded scorn of war and warriors, the Lord
Filippo was stout enough at heart. He did not fear the Borgia, he
answered serenely, and if he came, he would offer him such hospitality
as lay within his power.

He came at last, did the mighty Cesare, although between his coming and
Giovanni's flight a full fortnight sped. As for myself, I spent the time
at the Sforza Palace, whither the Lord Filippo had carried me as his
guest, he being greatly taken with me and determined to become my
patron. We had news of Giovanni, first from Bologna and later from
Ravenna, whither he was fled. At first he talked of returning to Pesaro
with three hundred men he hoped to have from the Marquis of Mantua. But
probably this was no more than another piece of that big talk of his,
meant to impress the sorrowing and repining Madonna Paola, who suffered
more for him, maybe, than he suffered himself.

She would talk with me for hours together of the Lord Giovanni, of his
mental gifts, and of his splendid courage and military address, and
for all that my gorge rose with jealousy and with the force of this
injustice to myself, I held my peace. Indeed, indeed, it was better
so. For all that I was no longer Boccadoro the Fool, yet as Lazzaro
Biancomonte, the poet, I was not so much better that I could indulge
any mad aspirations of my own such as might have led me to betray the
dastard who had arrayed his craven self in the peacock feathers of my
achievements.

In the course of the confidence with which the Lord Filippo honoured me
I made bold, on the eve of Cesare's arrival, to suggest to him that he
should remove his sister from the Palace and send her to the Convent of
Santa Caterina whilst the Borgia abode in the town, lest the sight of
her should remind Cesare of the old-time marriage plans which his family
had centred round this lady, and lead to their revival. Filippo heard
me kindly, and thanked me freely for the solicitude which my counsel
argued. For the rest, however, it was a counsel that he frankly admitted
he saw no need to follow.

"In the three years that are sped since the Holy Father entertained such
plans for the temporal advancement of his nephew Ignacio, the fortunes
of the House of Borgia have so swollen that what was then a desirable
match for one of its members is now scarcely worthy of their attention.
I do not think," he concluded, "that we have the least reason to fear a
renewal of that suit."

It may be that I am by nature suspicious and quick to see ignoble
motives in men's actions, but it occurred to me then that the Lord
Filippo would not be so greatly put about if indeed the Borgias were to
reopen negotiations for the bestowing of Madonna Paola's hand upon the
Pope's nephew Ignacio. That swelling of the Borgia fortunes which in the
three years had taken place and which, he contended, would render
them more ambitious than to seek alliance with the House of Santafior,
rendered them, nevertheless, in his eyes a more desirable family to be
allied with than in the days when he had counselled his sister's flight
from Rome. And so, I thought, despite what stood between her and the
Lord Giovanni, Filippo would know no scruple now in urging her into an
alliance with the House of Borgia, should they manifest a willingness to
have that old affair reopened.

On the 29th of that same month of October, Cesare arrived in Pesaro. His
entry was a triumphant procession, and the orderliness that prevailed
among the two thousand men-at-arms that he brought with him was a thing
that spoke eloquently for the wondrous discipline enforced by this great
condottiero.

The Lord Filippo was among those that met him, and like the time-server
that he was, he placed the Sforza Palace at his disposal.

The Duca Valentino came with his retinue and the gentlemen of his
household, among whom was ever conspicuous by his great size and red
ugliness the Captain Ramiro del' Orca, who now seemed to act in many
ways as Cesare's factotum. This captain, for reasons which it is
unnecessary to detail, I most sedulously avoided.

On the evening of his arrival Cesare supped in private with Filippo and
the members of Filippo's household--that is to say, with Madonna Paola
and two of her ladies, and three gentlemen attached to the person of
the Lord Filippo. Cesare's only attendants were two cavaliers of his
retinue, Bartolomeo da Capranica, his Field-Marshal, and Dorio Savelli,
a nobleman of Rome.

Cesare Borgia, this man whose name had so terrible a sound in the ears
of Italy's little princelings, this man whose power and whose great
gifts of mind had made him the subject of such bitter envy and fear,
until he was the best-hated gentleman in Italy--and, therefore, the most
calumniated--was little changed from that Cardinal of Valencia, in
whose service I had been for a brief season. The pallor of his face was
accentuated by the ill-health in which he found himself just then, and
the air of feverish restlessness that had always pervaded him was grown
more marked in the years that were sped, as was, after all, but natural,
considering the nature of the work that had claimed him since he had
deposed his priestly vestments. He was splendidly arrayed, and he bore
himself with an imperial dignity, a dignity, nevertheless, tempered with
graciousness and charm, and as I regarded him then, it was borne in upon
me that no fitter name could his godfathers have bestowed on him than
that of Cesare.

The Lord Filippo exerted all his powers worthily to entertain his noble
and illustrious guest, and by his extreme, almost servile affability it
not only would seem that he had forgotten the favour and shelter he
had received at the hands of the Lord Giovanni, but it confirmed my
suspicions of his willingness to advance his own fortunes by breaking
with the fallen tyrant in so far as his sister was concerned.

Short of actually making the proposal itself, it would seem that Filippo
did all in his power to urge his sister upon the attention of Cesare.
But Duke Valentino's mind at that time was too full of the concerns of
conquest and administration to find room for a matter to him so trifling
as the enriching of his cousin Ignacio by a wealthy alliance. To this
alone, I thought, was it due that Madonna Paola escaped the persecution
that might then have been hers.

On the morrow Cesare moved on to Rimini, leaving his administrators
behind him to set right the affairs of Pesaro, and ensure its proper
governing, in his name, hereafter.

And now that, for the present, my hopes of ever seeing my own wrongs
redressed and my estates returned to me were too slender to justify my
remaining longer in Pesaro, I craved of the Lord Filippo permission to
withdraw, telling him frankly that my tardily aroused duty called me to
my widowed mother, whom for some six years I had not seen. He threw no
difficulty in the way of my going; and I was free to depart. And now
came the hidden pain of my leave-taking of Madonna Paola. She seemed to
grieve at my departure.

"Lazzaro," she cried, when I had told her of my intention, "do you, too,
desert me? And I have ever held you my best of friends."

I told her of the mother and of the duty that I owed her, whereupon she
remonstrated no more, nor sought to do other than urge me to go to her.
And then I spoke of Madonna's kindness to me, and of the friendship with
which she had honoured one so lowly, and in the end I swore, with my
hand on my heart and my soul on my lips, that if ever she had work for
me, she would not need to call me twice.

"This ring, Madonna," said I, "was given me by the Lord Cesare Borgia,
and was to have proved a talisman to open wide for me the door to
fortune. It did better service than that, Madonna. It was the talisman
that saved you from your pursuers that day at Cagli, three years ago."

"You remind me, Lazzaro," she cried, "of how much you have sacrificed
in my service. Yours must be a very noble nature that will do so much to
serve a helpless lady without any hope of guerdon."

"Nay, nay," I answered lightly, "you must not make so much of it. It
would never have sorted with my inclinations to have turned man-at-arms.
This ring, Madonna, that once has served you, I beg that you will keep,
for it may serve you again."

"I could not, Lazzaro! I could not!" she exclaimed, recoiling, yet
without any show of deeming presumptuous my words or of being offended
by them.

"If you would make me the reward that you say I have earned, you will
do this for me. It will make me happier, Madonna. Take it"--I thrust it
into her unwilling hand--"and if ever you should need me send it back to
me. That ring and the name of the place where you abide by the lips of
the messenger you choose, and with a glad heart, as fast as horse can
bear me, shall I ride to serve you once again."

"In such a spirit, yes," said she. "I take it willingly, to treasure it
as a buckler against danger, since by means of it I can bring you to my
aid in time of peril."

"Madonna, do not overestimate my powers," I besought her. "I would have
you see in me no more than I am. But it sometimes happens that the mouse
may aid the lion."

"And when I need the lion to aid the mouse, my good Lazzaro, I will send
for you."

There were tears in her voice, and her eyes were very bright.

"Addio, Lazzaro," she murmured brokenly. "May God and His saints protect
you. I will pray for you, and I shall hope to see you again some day, my
friend."

"Addio, Madonna!" was all that I could trust myself to say ere I fled
from her presence that she might not see my deep emotion, nor hear the
sobs that were threatening to betray the anguish that was ravaging my
soul.




PART II. THE OGRE OF CESENA

CHAPTER XI. MADONNA'S SUMMONS

However great the part that my mother--sainted woman that she was--may
have played in my life, she nowise enters into the affairs of this
chronicle, so that it would be an irrelevance and an impertinence to
introduce her into these pages. Of the joy with which she welcomed me to
the little home near Biancomonte, in which the earnings of Boccadoro the
Fool had placed her, it could interest you but little to read in detail,
nor could it interest you to know of the gentle patience with which
she cheered and humoured me during the period that I sojourned there,
tilling the little plot she owned, reaping and garnering like any born
villano. With a woman's quick intuition she guessed perhaps the canker
that was eating at my heart, and with a mother's blessed charity she
sought to soothe and mitigate my pain.

It was during this period of my existence that the poetic gifts I had
discovered myself possessed of whilst at Pesaro, burst into full
bloom; and not a little relief did I find in the penning of those
love-songs--the true expression of what was in my heart--which have
since been given to the world under the title of Le Rime di Boccadoro.
And what time I tended my mother's land by day, and wrote by night of
the feverish, despairing love that was consuming me, I waited for the
call that, sooner or later, I knew must come. What prophetic instinct
it was had rooted that certainty in my heart I do not pretend to say.
Perhaps my hope was of such a strength that it assumed the form of
certainty to solace the period of my hermitage. But that some day
Madonna Paola's messenger would arrive bringing me the Borgia ring, I
was as confident as that some day I must die.

Two years went by, and we were in the Autumn of 1502, yet my faith
knew no abating, my confidence was strong as ever. And, at last, that
confidence was justified. One night of early October, as I sat at supper
with my mother after the labours of the day, a sound of hoofs disturbed
the peace of the silent night. It drew rapidly nearer, and long before
the knock fell upon our door, I knew that it was the messenger from my
lady.

My mother looked at me across the board, an expression of alarm
overspreading her old face. "Who," her eyes seemed to ask me, "was this
horseman that rode so late?"

My hound rose from the hearth with a growl, and stood bristling, his
eyes upon the door. White-haired old Silvio, the last remaining retainer
of the House of Biancomonte, came forth from the kitchen, with inquiry
and fear blending on his wrinkled, weather-beaten countenance.

And I, seeing all these signs of alarm, yet knowing what awaited me
on the threshold, rose with a laugh, and in a bound had crossed the
intervening space. I flung wide the door, and from the gloom without a
man's voice greeted me with a question.

"Is this the house of Messer Lazzaro Biancomonte?"

"I am that Lazzaro Biancomonte," answered I. "What may your pleasure
be?"

The stranger advanced until he came within the light. He was plainly
dressed, and wore a jerkin of leather and long boots. From his air I
judged him a servant or a courier. He doffed his hat respectfully, and
held out his right hand in which something was gleaming yellow. It was
the Borgia ring.

"Pesaro," was all he said.

I took the ring and thanked him, then bade him enter and refresh himself
ere he returned, and I called old Silvio to bring wine.

"I am not returning," the man informed me. "I am a courier riding to
Parma, whom Madonna charged with that message to you in passing."

Nevertheless he consented to rest him awhile and sip the wine we set
before him, and what time he did so I engaged him in talk, and led him
to tell me what he knew of the trend of things at Pesaro, and what news
there was of the Lord Giovanni. He had little enough to tell. Pesaro
was flourishing and prospering under the Borgia dominion. Of the Lord
Giovanni there was little news, saving that he was living under the
protection of the Gonzagas in Mantua, and that so long as he was content
to abide there the Borgias seemed disposed to give him peace.

Next I made him tell me what he knew of Filippo di Santafior and Madonna
Paola. On this subject he was better informed. Madonna Paola was well
and still lived with her brother at the Palace of Pesaro. The Lord
Filippo was high in favour with the Borgias, and Cesare lately had been
frequently his guest at Pesaro, whilst once, for a few days, the Lord
Ignacio de Borgia had accompanied his illustrious cousin.

I flushed and paled at that piece of news, and the reason of her summons
no longer asked conjecture. It was an easy thing for me, knowing what I
knew, to fill in the details which the courier omitted in ignorance from
the story.

The Lord Filippo, seeking his own advancement, had so urged his sister
upon the notice of the Borgia family--perhaps even approached Cesare--in
such a manner that it was again become a question of wedding her to
Ignacio, who had, meanwhile, remained unmarried. I could read that
opportunist's motives as easily as if he had written them down for my
instruction. Giovanni Sforza he accounted lost beyond redemption, and I
could imagine how he had plied his wits to aid his sister to forget
him, or else to remember him no longer with affection. Whether he had
succeeded or not I could not say until I had seen her; but meanwhile,
deeming ripe the soil of her heart for the new attachment that should
redound so much to his own credit--now that the House of Borgia had
risen to such splendid heights--he was driving her into this alliance
with Ignacio.

Faithful to the very letter of the promise I had made her, I set out
that same night, after embracing my poor, tearful mother, and promising
to return as soon as might be. All night I rode, my soul now tortured
with anxiety, now exalted at the supreme joy of seeing Madonna, which
was so soon to be mine. I was at the gates of Pesaro before matins, and
within the Palazzo Sforza ere its inmates had broken their fast.

The Lord Filippo welcomed me with a certain effusion, chiding me for my
long absence and the ingratitude it had seemed to indicate, and never
dreaming by what summons I was brought back.

"You are well-returned," he told me in conclusion. "We shall need you
soon, to write an epithalamium."

"You are to be wed, Magnificent?" quoth I at last, at which he laughed
consumedly.

"Nay, we shall need the song for my sister's nuptials. She is to wed the
Lord Ignacio Borgia, before Christmas."

"A lofty theme," I answered with humility, "and one that may well demand
resources nobler than those of my poor pen."

"Then get you to work at once upon it. I will have your chamber
prepared."

He sent for his seneschal, a person--like most Of the servants at the
Palace--strange to me, and he gave orders that I should be sumptuously
lodged. He was grown more splendid than ever in the prosperity that
seemed to surround him here at Pesaro, in this Palace that had undergone
such changes and been so enriched during the past two years as to go
near defying recognition.

When the seneschal had shown me to the quarters he had set apart for me,
I made bold to make inquiries concerning Madonna Paola.

"She is in the garden, Illustrious," answered the seneschal, deeming
me, no doubt, a great lord, from the respect which Filippo had indicated
should be shown me. "Madonna has the wisdom to seek the little sunshine
the year still holds. Winter will be soon upon us."

I agreed with the old man, and dismissed him. So soon as he was gone, I
quitted my chamber, and all dust staineded as I was I made my way down
to the garden. A turn in one of the boxwood-bordered alleys brought me
suddenly face to face with Madonna Paola.

A moment we stood looking at each other, my heart swelling within me
until I thought that it must burst. Then I advanced a step and sank on
one knee before her.

"You sent for me, Madonna. I am here." There was a pause, and when
presently I looked up into her blessed face I saw a smile of infinite
sorrow on her lips, blending oddly with the gladness that shone from her
sweet eyes.

"You faithful one," she murmured at last. "Dear Lazzaro, I did not look
for you so soon."

"Within an hour of your messenger's arrival I was in the saddle, nor did
I pause until I had reached the gates of Pesaro. I am here to serve you
to the utmost of my power, Madonna, and the only doubt that assails me
is that my power may be all too small for the service that you need."

"Is its nature known to you?" she asked in wonder. Then, ere I had
answered, she bade me rise, and with her own hand assisted me.

"I have guessed it," answered I, "guided by such scraps of information
as from your messenger I gleaned. It concerns, unless I err, the Lord
Ignacio Borgia."

"Your wits have lost nothing of their quickness," she said, with a sad
smile, "and I doubt me you know all."

"The only thing I did not know your brother has just told me--that
you are to be wed before Christmas. He has ordered me to write your
epithalamium."

She drew into step beside me, and we slowly paced the alley side by
side, and, as we went, withered leaves overhead, and withered leaves to
make a carpet for our fret, she told me in her own way more or less
what I have set down, even to her brother's self-seeking share in the
transaction that she dubbed hideous and abhorrent.

She was little changed, this winsome lady in the time that was sped. She
was in her twenty-first year, but in reality she seemed to me no older
than she had been on that day when first I saw her arguing with her
grooms upon the road to Cagli. And from this I reassured myself that she
had not been fretted overmuch by the absence of the Lord Giovanni.

Presently she spoke of him and of her plighted word which her brother
and those supple gentlemen of the House of Borgia were inducing her to
dishonour.

"Once before, in a case almost identical, when all seemed lost, you
came--as if Heaven directed--to my rescue. This it is that gives me
confidence in such aid as you might lend me now."

"Alas! Madonna," I sighed, "but the times are sorely changed and the
situations with them. What is there now that I can do?"

"What you did then. Take me beyond their reach."

"Ah! But whither?"

"Whither but to the Lord Giovanni? Is it not to him that my troth is
plighted?"

I shook my head in sorrow, a thrust of jealousy cutting me the while.

"That may not be," said I. "It were not seemly, unless the Lord Giovanni
were here himself to take you hence."

"Then I will write to the Lord Giovanni," she cried. "I will write, and
you shall bear my letter."

"What think you will the Lord Giovanni do?" I burst out, with a scorn
that must have puzzled her. "Think you his safety does not give him care
enough in the hiding-place to which he has crept, that he should draw
upon himself the vengeance of the Borgias?"

She stared at me in ineffable surprise. "But the Lord Giovanni is
brave and valiant," she cried, and down in my heart I laughed in bitter
mockery.

"Do you love the Lord Giovanni, Madonna?" I asked bluntly.

My question seemed to awaken fresh astonishment. It may well be that it
awakened, too, reflection. She was silent for a little space. Then--

"I honour and respect him for a noble, chivalrous and gifted gentleman,"
she answered me, and her answer made me singularly content, spreading a
balm upon the wounds my soul had taken. But to her fresh intercessions
that I should carry a letter to him, I shook my head again. My mood was
stubborn.

"Believe me, Madonna, it were not only unwise, but futile."

She protested.

"I swear it would be," I insisted, with a convincing force that left her
staring at me and wondering whence I derived so much assurance. "We
must wait. From now till Christmas we have more than two months. In two
months much may befall. As a last resource we may consider communication
with the Lord Giovanni. But it is a forlorn hope, Madonna, and so we
will leave it until all else has failed us."

She brightened at my promise that at least if other measures proved
unavailing, we should adopt that course, and her brightening flattered
me, for it bore witness to the supreme confidence she had in me.

"Lazzaro," said she, "I know you will not fail me. I trust you more than
any living mam; more, I think, than even the Lord Giovanni, whom, if God
pleases, I shall some day wed."

"Thanks, Madonna mia," I answered, gratefully indeed. "It is a trust
that I shall ever strive to justify. Meanwhile have faith and hope, and
wait."

Once before, when, to escape the schemes of her brother who would have
wed her to the Lord Giovanni, she had appealed to me, the counsel I had
given her had been much the same as that which I gave her now. At the
irony of it I could have laughed had any other been in question but
Madonna Paola--this tender White Flower of the Quince that was like to
be rudely wilted by the ruthless hands of scheming men.




CHAPTER XII. THE GOVERNOR OF CESENA


That night I would have supped in my own quarters but that Filippo sent
for me and bade me join him and swell the little court he kept. At times
I believe he almost thought that he was the true Lord of Pesaro--an
opinion that may have been shared by not a few of the citizens
themselves. Certainly he kept a greater state and was better housed than
the duke of Valentinois' governor.

It was a jovial company of perhaps a dozen nobles and ladies that met
about his board, and Filippo bade his servants lay for me beside him. As
we ate he questioned me touching the occupation that I had found during
my absence from Pesaro. I used the greatest frankness with him, and
answered that my life had been partly a peasants, partly a poet's.

"Tell me what you wrote," he bade me his eyes resting on my face with a
new look of interest, for his love of letters was one of the few things
about him that was not affected.

"A few novelle, dealing with court-life; but chiefly verses," answered
I.

"And with these verses--what have you done?"

"I have them by me, Illustrious," I answered. He smiled, seemingly well
pleased.

"You must read them to us," he cried. "If they rival that epic of yours,
which I have never forgotten, they should be worth hearing."

And presently, supper being done, I went at his bidding to my chamber
for my precious manuscripts, and, returning, I entertained the company
with the reading of a portion of what I had written. They heard me with
an attention that might have rendered me vain had my ambition really
lain in being accounted a great writer; and when I paused, now and
again, there was a murmur of applause, and many a pat on the shoulder
from Filippo whenever a line, a phrase or a stanza took his fancy.

I was perhaps too absorbed to pay any great attention to the impression
my verses were producing, but presently, in one of my pauses, the
Lord Filippo startled me with words that awoke me to a sense of my
imprudence.

"Do you know, Lazzaro, of what your lines remind me in an extraordinary
measure?"

"Of what, Excellency?" I asked politely, raising my eyes from my
manuscript. They chanced to meet the glance of Madonna Paola. It was
riveted upon me, and its expression was one I could not understand.

"Of the love-songs of the Lord Giovanni Sforza," answered he. "They
resemble those poems infinitely more than they resemble the epic you
wrote two years ago."

I stammered something about the similarity being merely one of subject.
But he shook his head at that, and took good note of my confusion.

"No," said he, "the resemblance goes deeper. There is the same facile
beauty of the rhymes the same freshness of the rhythm--remotely
resembling that of Petrarca, yet very different. Conceits similar to
those that were the beauty spots of the Lord Giovanni's verses
are ubiquitous in yours, and above all there is the same fervent
earnestness, the same burning tone of sincerity that rendered his
strambotti so worthy of admiration."

"It may be," I answered him, my confusion growing under the steady gaze
of Madonna Paola, "it may be that having heard the verses of the Lord
Giovanni, I may, unconsciously, have modelled my own lines upon those
that made so deep an impression on me."

He looked at me gravely for a moment.

"That might be an explanation," he answered deliberately, "but frankly,
if I were asked, I should give a very different one."

"And that would be?" came, sharp and compelling, the voice of Madonna.

He turned to her, shrugged his shoulders and laughed. "Why, since you
ask me," he said, "I should hazard the opinion that Lazzaro, here, was
of considerable assistance to the Lord Giovanni in the penning of those
verses with which he delighted us all--and you, Madonna, I believe,
particularly."

Madonna Paola crimsoned, and her eyes fell. The others looked at us
with inquiring glances--at her, at Filippo and at me. With a fresh laugh
Filippo turned to me.

"Confess now, am I not right?" he asked good-humouredly.

"Magnificent," I murmured in tones of protest, "ask yourself the
question. Was it a likely thing that the Lord Giovanni would enlist the
services of his jester in such a task?"

"Give me a straightforward answer," he insisted. "Am I right or wrong?"

"I am giving you more than a straightforward answer, my lord," I still
evaded him, and more boldly now. "I am setting you on the high-road to
solve the matter for yourself by an appeal to your own good sense and
reason. Was it in the least likely, I repeat, that the Lord Giovanni
would seek the services of his Fool to aid him write the verses in
honour of the lady of his heart?"

With a burst of mocking laughter, Filippo smote the table a blow of his
clenched hand.

"Your prevarications answer me," he cried. "You will not say that I am
wrong."

"But I do say that you are wrong!" I exclaimed, suddenly inspired. "I
did not assist the Lord Giovanni with his verses. I swear it."

His laughter faded; and his eyes surveyed me with a sudden solemnity.

"Then why did you evade my question?" he demanded shrewdly. And then his
countenance changed as swiftly again. It was illumined by the light of
sudden understanding. "I have it," he cried. "The answer is plain. You
did not assist the Lord Giovanni to write them. Why? Because you wrote
them yourself, and you gave them to him that he might pass them off as
his own."

It was a merciful thing for me that the whole company fell into a burst
of laughter and applauded Filippo's quick discernment, which they never
doubted. All talked at once, and a hundred proofs were advanced in
support of Filippo's opinion. The Lord Giovanni's celebrated dullness
of mind, amounting almost to stupidity, was cited, and they reminded one
another of the profound astonishment with which they had listened to the
compositions that had suddenly burst from him.

Filippo turned to his sister, on whose pale face I saw it written that
she was as convinced as any there, and my feelings were those of a
dastard who has broken faith with the man who trusted him.

"Do you appreciate now, Madonna," he murmured, "the deceits and wiles by
which that craven crept like a snake into your esteem?"

I guessed at once that by that thrust he sought to incline her more to
the union he had in view for her.

"At least he was no craven," answered she. "His burning desire to please
me may have betrayed him into this foolish duplicity. But he still
must live in my memory as a brave and gallant gentleman; or have you
forgotten, Filippo, that noble combat with the forces of Ramiro del'
Orca?"

To such a question Filippo had no answer, and presently his mood sobered
a little. For myself, I was glad when the time came to withdraw from
that company that twitted and pestered me and played upon my sense of
shame at the imprudence I had committed.

Now that I look back, I can scarce conceive why it should have so
wrought upon me; for, in truth, the little love I bore the Lord Giovanni
might rather have led me to rejoice that his imposture should be laid
bare to the eyes of all the world. I think that really there was an
element of fear in my feelings--fear that, upon reflection, Madonna
Paola might ask herself how came that burning sincerity into the
love-songs written in her honour which it was now disclosed that I had
penned. The answer she might find to such a question was one that might
arouse her pride and so outrage it as to lead her to cast me out of her
friendship and never again suffer me to approach her.

Such a conclusion, however, she fortunately did not arrive at. Haply she
accounted the fervour of those lines assumed, for when on the morrow she
met me, she did no more than gently chide me for the deceit that I had
had a hand in practising upon her. She accepted my explanation that my
share in that affair had been wrung from me with threats of torture, and
putting it from her mind she returned to the matter of the approaching
alliance she sought to elude, renewing her prayers that I should aid
her.

"I have," she told me then, "one other friend who might assist us, and
who has the power perhaps if he but has the will. He is the Governor of
Cesena, and for all that he holds service under Cesare Borgia, yet
he seems much devoted to me, and I do not doubt that to further my
interests he would even consent to pit his wits against those of the
family he serves."

"In which case, Madonna," answered I, spurred to it, perhaps, by an
insensate pang of jealousy at the thought that there should be another
beside myself to have her confidence, "he would be a traitor. And it
is ever an ill thing to trust a traitor. Who once betrays may betray
again."

That she manifested no resentment, but, on the contrary, readily agreed
with me, showed me how idle had been that jealousy of mine, and made me
ashamed of it.

"Why yes," she mused, "it is the very thought that had occurred to me,
and caused me to spurn the aid he proffered when last he was here."

"Ah!" I cried. "What aid was that?"

"You must know, Lazzaro," said she, "that he comes often to Pesaro from
Cesena, being a man in whom the Duke places great trust, and on whom he
has bestowed considerable powers. He never fails to lie at the Palace
when he comes, and he seems to--to have conceived a regard for me. He is
a man of twice my years," she added hurriedly, "and haply looks upon me
as he might upon a daughter."

I sniffed the air. I had heard of such men.

"A week ago, when last he came, I was cast down and grieved by the
affair of this marriage, which Filippo had that day disclosed to me. The
Governor of Cesena, observing my sadness, sought my confidence with a
kindliness of which you would scarce believe him capable; for he is a
fierce and blustering man of war. In the fulness of my heart there was
nothing that seemed so desirable as a friendly ear into which I might
pour the tale of my affliction. He heard me gravely, and when I had done
he placed himself at my disposal, assuring me that if I would but trust
myself to him, he would defeat the ends of the House of Borgia. Not
until then did I seem to bethink me that he was the servant of that
house, and his readiness to betray the hand that paid him sowed mistrust
and a certain loathing of him in my mind. I let him see it, perhaps,
which was unwise, and, may be, even ungrateful. He seemed deeply
wounded, and the subject was abandoned. But I have since thought that
perhaps I acted with a rashness that was--"

"With a rashness that was eminently justifiable," I interrupted her.
"You could not have been better advised than to have mistrusted such a
man."

But touching this same Governor of Cesena, there was a fine surprise in
store for me. At dusk some two days later there was a sudden commotion
in the courtyard of the Palace, and when I inquired of a groom into its
cause, I was informed that his Excellency the Governor of Cesena had
arrived.

Curious to see this man whose willingness to betray the house he served,
where Madonna was concerned, was by no means difficult to probe, I
descended to the banqueting-hall at supper time.

They were not yet at table when I entered, and a group was gathered in
the centre of the room about a huge man, at sight of whose red head and
crimson, brutal face I would have turned and sought again the refuge of
my own quarters but that his wolf's eye had already fastened on me.

"Body of God!" he swore, and that was all. But his eyes were on me in a
marvellous stare, as were now--impelled by that oath of his--the eyes
of all the company. We looked at each other for a moment, then a great
laugh burst from him, shaking his vast bulk and wrinkling his hideous
face. He thrust the intervening men aside as if they had been a growth
of sedges he would penetrate, and he advanced towards me; the Lord
Filippo and his sister looking on with all the rest in interested
surprise.

In front of me he halted, and setting his hands on his hips he regarded
me with a brutal mirth.

"What may your trade be now?" he asked at last contemptuously.

I had taken rapid stock of him in the seconds that were sped, and from
the surpassing richness of his apparel, his gold-broidered doublet and
crimson, fur-edged surcoat, I knew that Messer Ramiro del' Orca was
grown to the high estate of Governor of Cesena.

"A new trade even as yours," I answered him.

"Nay, that is no answer," he cried, overlooking my offensiveness. "Do
you still follow the trade of arms?"

"I think," Filippo interposed, "that our Excellency is in some error.
This gentleman is Lazzaro Biancomonte, a poet of whom Italy will one day
be proud, despite the fact that for a time he acted as the Lord Giovanni
Sforza's Fool."

Ramiro looked at his interlocutor, as the mastiff may look at the lap
dog. He grunted, and blew out his cheeks.

"There is yet another part he played," said he, "as I have good cause
to remember--for he is the only man that can boast of having unhorsed
Ramiro del' Orca. He was for a brief season the Lord Giovanni Sforza
himself."

"How?" asked the profoundly amazed Filippo, whilst all present pressed
closer to miss nothing of the disclosure that seemed to impend. Myself,
I groaned. There was naught that I could say to stem the tide of
revelation that was coming.

"Do you then keep this paladin here arrayed like a clerk?" quoth Ramiro
in his sardonic way. "And can it be that the secret of his feat of arms
has been guarded so well that you are still in ignorance of it?"

Filippo's wits worked swiftly, and swiftly they pieced together the
hints that Ramiro had let fall.

"You will tell us," said he, "that the fight in the streets of Pesaro,
in which your Excellency's party suffered defeat, was led by Biancomonte
in the armour of Giovanni Sforza?"

Ramiro looked at him with that displeasure with which the jester visits
the man who by anticipation robs his story of its points.

"It was known to you?" growled he.

"Not so. I have but learnt it from you. But it nowise astonishes me."

And he looked at his sister, whose eyes devoured me, as if they would
read in my soul whether this thing were indeed true. Under her eyes I
dropped my glance like a man ashamed at hearing a disgraceful act of his
paraded.

"Had it indeed been the Lord Giovanni, he had been dead that day,"
laughed Ramiro grimly. "Indeed it was nothing but my astonishment
at sight of the face I was about to stab, after having broken the
fastenings of his visor that stayed my hand for long enough to give him
the advantage. But I bear you no grudge for that," he ended, turning on
me with a ferocious smile, "nor yet for that other trick by which--as
Boccadoro the Fool--you bested me. I am not a sweet man when thwarted,
yet I can admire wit and respect courage. But see to it," he ended,
with a sudden and most unreasonable ferocity, his visage empurpling if
possible still more, "see to it that you pit neither that courage nor
that wit against me again. I have heard the story of how you came to
be Fool of the Court of Pesaro. Cesena is a dull place, and we might
enliven it by the presence of a jester of such nimble wits as yours."

He turned without awaiting my reply, and strode away to take his place
at table, whilst I walked slowly to my accustomed seat, and took little
part in the conversation that ensued, which, as you may imagine, had me
and that exploit of mine for scope.

Anon an elephantine trumpeting of laughter seemed to set the air
a-quivering. Ramiro was lying back in his chair a prey to such a passion
of mirth that it swelled the veins of his throat and brow until I
thought that they must burst--and, from my soul, I hoped they would.
Adown his rugged cheeks two tears were slowly trickling. The Lord
Filippo, as presently transpired, had been telling him of the epic I
had written in praise of the Lord Giovanni's prowess. Naught would now
satisfy that ogre but he must have the epic read, and Filippo, who had
retained a copy of it, went in quest of it, and himself read it aloud
for the delight of all assembled and the torture of myself who saw in
Madonna Paola's eyes that she accounted the deception I had practised on
her a thing beyond pardon.

Filippo had a taste for letters, as I think I have made clear, and he
read those lines with the same fire and fervour that I, myself, had
breathed into them two years ago. But instead of the rapt and breathless
attention with which my reading had been attended, the present company
listened with a smile, whilst ever and anon a short laugh or a quiet
chuckle would mark how well they understood to-night the subtle ironies
which had originally escaped them.

I crept away, sick at heart, while they were still making sport over my
work, cursing the Lord Giovanni, who had forced me to these things, and
my own mad mood that had permitted me in an evil hour to be so forced.
Yet my grief and bitterness were little things that night compared with
what Madonna was to make them on the morrow.

She sent for me betimes, and I went in fear and trembling of her wrath
and scorn. How shall I speak of that interview? How shall I describe the
immeasurable contempt with which she visited me, and which I felt was
perhaps no more than I deserved.

"Messer Biancomonte," said she coldly, "I have ever accounted you my
friend, and disinterested the motives that inspired a heart seemingly
noble to do service to a forlorn and helpless lady. It seems that I
was wrong. That the indulging of a warped and malignant spirit was the
inspiration you had to appear to befriend me."

"Madonna, you are over-cruel," I cried out, wounded to the very soul of
me.

"Am I so?" she asked, with a cold smile upon her ivory face. "Is it not
rather you who were cruel? Was it a fine thing to do to trick a lady
into giving her affection to a man for gifts which he did not possess?
You know in what manner of regard I held the Lord Giovanni Sforza so
long as I saw him with the eyes of reason and in the light of truth. And
you, who were my one professed friend, the one man who spoke so loudly
of dying in my service, you falsified my vision, you masked him--either
at his own and at my brother's bidding, or else out of the malignancy of
your nature--in a garb that should render him agreeable in my eyes. Do
you realise what you have done? Does not your conscience tell you? You
have contrived that I have plighted my troth to a man such as I believed
the Lord Giovanni to be. Mother of Mercy!" she ended, with a scorn
ineffable; "when I dwell upon it now, it almost seems that it was to
you I gave my heart, for yours were the deeds that earned my regard--not
his."

Such was the very argument that I had hugged to my starving soul, at
the time the things she spoke of had befallen, and it had consoled me as
naught in life could have consoled me. Yet now that she employed it with
such a scornful emphasis as to make me realise how far beneath her I
really was, how immeasurably beyond my reach was she, it was as much
consolation to me as confession without absolution may be to the
perishing sinner. I answered nothing. I could not trust myself to speak.
Besides, what was there that I could say?

"I summoned you back to Pesaro," she continued pitilessly, "trusting in
your fine words and deeming honest the offer of services you made me.
Now that I know you, you are free to depart from Pesaro when you will."

Despite my shame, I dared, at last, to raise my eyes. But her face was
averted, and she saw nothing of the entreaty, nothing of the grief that
might have told her how false were her conclusions. One thing alone
there was might have explained my actions, might have revealed them in a
new light; but that one thing I could not speak of.

I turned in silence, and in silence I quitted the room; for that, I
thought, was, after all, the wisest answer I could make.




CHAPTER XIII. POISON


Despite Madonna Paola's dismissal, I remained in Pesaro. Indeed, had
I attempted to leave, it is probable that the Lord Filippo would have
deterred me, for I was much grown in his esteem since the disclosures
that had earned me the disfavour of Madonna. But I had no thought of
going. I hoped against hope that anon she might melt to a kinder mood,
or else that by yet aiding her, despite herself, to elude the Borgia
alliance, I might earn her forgiveness for those matters in which she
held that I had so gravely sinned against her.

The epithalamium, meanwhile, was forgotten utterly and I spent my days
in conceiving wild plans to save her from the Lord Ignacio, only to
abandon them when in more sober moments their impracticable quality was
borne in upon me.

In this fashion some six weeks went by, and during the time she never
once addressed me. We saw much during those days of the Governor of
Cesena. Indeed his time seemed mainly spent in coming and going 'twixt
Cesena and Pesaro, and it needed no keen penetration to discern the
attraction that brought him. He was ever all attention to Madonna, and
there were times when I feared that perhaps she had been drawn into
accepting the aid that once before he had proffered. But these fears
were short-lived, for, as time sped, Madonna's aversion to the man grew
plain for all to see. Yet he persisted until the very eve, almost, of
her betrothal to Ignacio.

One evening in early December I chanced, through the purest accident,
to overhear her sharp repulsion of the suit that he had evidently been
pressing.

"Madonna," I heard him answer, with a snarl, "I may yet prove to you
that you have been unwise so to use Ramiro del' Orca."

"If you so much as venture to address me again upon the subject," she
returned in the very chilliest accents, "I will lay this matter of your
odious suit before your master Cesare Borgia."

They must have caught the sound of my footsteps in the gallery in which
they stood, and Ramiro moved away, his purple face pale for once, and
his eyes malevolent as Satan's.

I reflected with pleasure that perhaps we had now seen the last of him,
and that before that threat of Madonna's he would see fit to ride home
to Cesena and remain there. But I was wrong. With incredible effrontery
and daring he lingered. The morrow was a Sunday, and, on the Tuesday or
Wednesday following, Cesare Borgia and his cousin Ignacio were expected.
Filippo was in the best of moods, and paid more heed to the Governor
of Cesena's presence at Pesaro than he did to mine. It may be that he
imagined Ramiro del' Orca to be acting under Cesare's instructions.

That Sunday night we supped together, and we were all tolerably gay, the
topic of our talk being the coming of the bridegroom. Madonna's was the
only downcast face at the board. She was pale and worn, and there were
dark circles round her eyes that did much to mar the beauty of her angel
face, and inspired me with a deep and sorrowing pity.

Ramiro announced his intention of leaving Pesaro on the morrow, and ere
he went he begged leave to pledge the beautiful Lady of Santafior,
who was so soon to become the bride of the valiant and mighty Ignacio
Borgia. It was a toast that was eagerly received, so eager and
uproariously that even that poor lady herself was forced to smile,
for all that I saw it in her eyes that her heart was on the point of
breaking.

I remember how, when we had drunk, she raised her goblet--a beautiful
chaste cup of solid gold--and drank, herself, in acknowledgment; and I
remember, too, how, chancing to move my head, I caught a most singular,
ill-omened smile upon the coarse lips of Messer Ramiro.

At the time I thought of it no more, but in the morning when the
horrible news that spread through the Palace gained my ears, that smile
of Ramiro del' Orca recurred to me at once.

It was from the seneschal of the Palace that I first heard that tragic
news. I had but risen, and I was descending from my quarters, when I
came upon him, his old face white as death, a palsy in his limbs.

"Have you heard the news, Ser Lazzaro?" he cried in a quavering voice.

"The news of what?" I asked, struck by the horror in his face.

"Madonna Paola is dead," he told me, with a sob.

I stared at him in speechless consternation, and for a moment I seemed
forlorn of sense and understanding.

"Dead?" I remember whispering. "What is it you say?" And I leaned
forward towards him, peering into his face. "What is it you say?"

"Well may you doubt your ears," he groaned. "But, Vergine Santissima!
it is the truth. Madonna Paola, that sweet angel of God, lies cold and
stiff. They found her so this morning."

"God of Heaven!" I cried out, and leaving him abruptly I dashed down the
steps.

Scarce knowing what I did, acting upon an impulsive instinct that was as
irresistible as it was unreasoning, I made for the apartments of Madonna
Paola. In the antechamber I found a crowd assembled, and on every face
was pallid consternation written. Of my own countenance I had a glimpse
in a mirror as I passed; it was ashen, and my hollow eyes were wild as a
madman's.

Someone caught me by the arm. I turned. It was the Lord Filippo, pale
as the rest, his affectations all fallen from him, and the man himself
revealed by the hand of an overwhelming sorrow. With him was a grave,
white-bearded gentleman, whose sober robe proclaimed the physician.

"This is a black and monstrous affair, my friend," he murmured.

"Is it true, is it really true, my lord?" I cried in such a voice that
all eyes were turned upon me.

"Your grief is a welcome homage to my own," he said. "Alas, Dio Santo!
it is most hideously true. She lies there cold and white as marble, I
have just seen her. Come hither, Lazzaro." He drew me aside, away from
the crowd and out of that antechamber, into a closet that had been
Madonna's oratory. With us came the physician.

"This worthy doctor tells me that he suspects she has been poisoned,
Lazzaro."

"Poisoned?" I echoed. "Body of God! but by whom? We all loved her. There
was not in Pesaro a man worthy of the name but would have laid down his
life in her service. Who was there, then, to poison that dear saint?"

It was then that the memory of Ramiro del' Orca, and the look that in
his eyes I had surprised whilst Madonna drank, flashed back into my
mind.

"Where is the Governor of Cesena?" I cried suddenly. Filippo looked at
me with quick surprise.

"He departed betimes this morning for his castle. Why do you ask?"

I told him why I asked; I told him what I knew of Ramiro's attentions to
Madonna, of the rejection they had suffered, and of the vengeance he had
seemed to threaten. Filippo heard me patiently, but when I had done he
shook his head.

"Why, all being as you say, should he work so wanton a destruction?" he
asked stupidly, as if jealousy were not cause enough to drive an evil
man to destroy that which he may not possess. "Nay, nay, your wits are
disordered. You remember that he looked at Madonna whilst she drank, and
you construe that into a proof that he had poisoned the cup she drank
from. But then it is probable that we all looked at her in that same
moment."

"But not with such eyes as his," I insisted.

"Could he have administered the poison with his own hands?" asked the
doctor gravely.

"No," said I, "that were a difficult matter. But he might have bribed a
servant to drop a powder in her wine."

"Why then," said he, "it should be an easy thing to find the servant. Do
you chance to remember who served the wine?"

"I remember," answered Filippo readily.

"Let the man be questioned; let him be racked if necessary. Thus shall
you probably arrive at a true knowledge; thus discover under whose
directions he was working."

It was the only thing to do, and Filippo sent me about it there and
then, telling me the servant in question was a Venetian of the name of
Zabatello. If confirmation had been needed that this fellow had been the
tool of the poisoner--there was no reason to suppose that he would have
done the thing to have served any ends of his own--that confirmation
I had upon discovering that Zabatello was fled from Pesaro, leaving no
trace behind him.

Men were sent out by the Lord Filippo in every direction to endeavour
to find the rogue and bring him back. Whether they caught him or not
seemed, after all a little thing to me. She was dead; that was the
one all-absorbing, all-effacing fact that took possession of my mind,
blotting out all minor matters that might be concerned with it. Even
the now assured fact that she had been poisoned was a thing that found
little room in my consideration on that day of my burning grief.

She was dead, dead, dead! The hideous phrase boomed again and again
through my distracted mind. Compared with that overwhelming catastrophe,
what signified to me the how or why or when she had died. She was dead,
and the world was empty.

For hours I sat on the rocks, alone by the sea, on that stormy day of
December, and I indulged my grief where no prying eyes could witness it,
amid the solitude of wild and angry Nature. And the moan and thud with
which the great waves hurled themselves against the base of the black
rock on which I was perched afforded but a feeble echo of the storm that
raged and beat within my desolated soul.

She was dead, dead, dead! The waves seemed to shout it as they leapt
up and spattered me with brine; the wind now moaned it piteously, now
shrieked it fiercely as it scudded by, wrapping its invisible coils
about me, and seeming intent on tearing me from my resting-place.

Towards evening, at last, I rose, and skirting the Castle, I entered the
town, dishevelled and bedraggled, yet caring nothing what spectacle I
might afford. And presently a grim procession overtook me, and at sight
of the black, cowled and visored figures that advanced in the lurid
light of their wax torches, I fell on my knees there in the street, and
so remained, my knees deep in the mud, my head bowed, until her sainted
body had been borne past. None heeded me. They bore her to San Domenico,
and thither I followed presently, and in the shadow of one of the
pillars of the aisle I crouched whilst the monks chanted their funereal
psalms.

The singing ended, the friars departed, and presently those of the Court
and the sight-seers from the streets began to leave the church. In an
hour I was alone--alone with the beloved dead, and there, on my knees,
I stayed, and whether I prayed or blasphemed during that horrid hour, my
memory will not let me say.

It may have been towards the third hour of night when at last I
staggered up--stiff and cramped from my long kneeling on the cold stone.
Slowly, in a half-dazed condition, I move down the aisle and gained the
door of the church. I essayed to open it. It resisted my efforts, and
then I realised that it was locked for the night.

The appreciation of my position afforded me not the slightest dismay. On
the contrary, I think my feelings were rather of relief. I had not known
whither I should repair--so distraught was my mood--and now chance had
settled the matter for me by decreeing that I should remain.

I turned and slowly I paced back until I stood beside the great black
catafalque, at each corner of which a tall wax taper was burning. My
footsteps rang with a hollow sound through the vast, gloomy spaces of
that cold, empty church; my very breathing seemed to find an echo in it.
But these were not things to occupy my mind in such a season, no more
than was the icy cold by which I was half-numbed--yet of which I seemed
to remain unconscious in the absorbing anguish that possessed me.

Near the foot of the bier there was a bench, and there I sat me down,
and resting my elbows on my knees I took my dishevelled head between my
frozen hands. My thoughts were all of her whose poor murdered clay was
there encased above me. I reviewed, I think, each scene of my life where
it had touched on hers; I evoked every word she had addressed to me
since first I had met her on the road to Cagli.

And anon my mood changed, and, from cold and frozen that it had been
by grief, it grew ablaze with the fire of anger and the lust to wreak
vengeance upon him that had brought her to this condition. Let Filippo
fear to move without proofs, let him doubt such proofs as I had set
before him and deem them overslender to warrant action. Such scruples
should not serve to restrain me. I was no lukewarm brother. Here in
Pesaro I would remain until her poor body was delivered to the earth,
and then I would set out upon a last emprise. Messer Ramiro del' Orca
should account to me for this vile deed.

There in the House of Peace I sat gnawing my hands and maturing my
bloody plans whilst the night wore on. Later a still more frenzied mood
obsessed me--a burning desire to look again upon the sweet face of her I
had loved, the sainted visage of Madonna Paola. What was there to deter
me? Who was there to gainsay me?

I stood up and uttered that challenge aloud in my madness. My voice
echoed mournfully up the aisles, and the sound of the echo chilled me,
yet my purpose gathered strength.

I advanced, and after a moment's pause, with the silver-broidered hem of
the pall in my hands, I suddenly swept off that mantle of black cloth,
setting up such a gust of wind as all but quenched the tapers. I caught
up the bench on which I had been sitting, and, dragging it forward, I
mounted it and stood now with my breast on a level with the coffin-lid.
I laid hands on it and found it unfastened. Without thought or care of
how I went about the thing, I raised it and let it crash over to the
ground. It fell on the stone flags with a noise like that of thunder,
which boomed and reverberated along the gloomy vault above.

A figure, all in purest white, lay there under my eyes, the face covered
by a veil. With deepest reverence, and a prayer to her sainted soul to
forgive the desecration of my loving hands, I tremblingly drew that veil
aside. How beautiful she was in the calm peace of death! She lay there
like one gently sleeping, the faintest smile upon her lips, and as I
looked it seemed hard to believe that she was truly dead. Why, her
lips had lost nothing of their colour; they were as rosy red--or nearly
so--as ever I had seen them in life. How could this be? The lips of the
dead are wont to put on a livid hue. I stared a moment, my reverence and
grief almost effaced by the intensity of my wonder. This face, so ivory
pale, wore not the ashen aspect of one that would never wake again.
There was a warmth about that pallor. And then I caught my nether lip
in my teeth until it bled, and it is a miracle that I did not scream,
seeing how overwrought was my condition.

For it had seemed to me that the draperies on her bosom had slightly
moved, a gentle, almost imperceptible heave as if she breathed. I
looked, and there it came again.

God! into what madness was I come that my eyes could so deceive me? It
was the draught that stirred the air about the church and blew great
shrouds of wax adown the taper's yellow sides. I manned myself to a more
sober mood, and looked again.

And now my doubts were all dispelled. I knew that I had mastered any
errant fancy, and that my eyes were grown wise and discriminating, and I
knew, too, that she lived. Her bosom slowly rose and fell; the colour
of her lips, the hue of her cheeks confirmed the assurance that she
breathed. The poison had failed in its work.

I paused a second yet to ponder. That morning her appearance had been
such that the physician had been deceived by it, and had pronounced her
cold. Yet now there were these signs of life. What could it portend
but that the effects of the poison were passing off and that she was
recovering?

In the wild madness of joy that sent the blood drumming and beating
through my brain, my first impulse was to run for help. Then I bethought
me of the closed doors, and I realised that no matter how I shouted none
would hear me. I must succour her myself as best I could, and meanwhile
she must be protected from the chill air of that December night in
that church that was colder than the tomb. I had my cloak, a heavy,
serviceable garment; and if more were needed, there was the pall which I
had removed, and which lay in a heap about the legs of my bench.

I leaned forward, and passing my hand under her head, I gently raised
it. Then slipping it downwards, I thrust my arm after it until I had her
round the waist in a firm grip. Thus I raised her from the coffin,
and the warmth of her body on my arm, the ready, supple bending of her
limbs, were so many added proofs that she was not dead.

Gently and reverently I lifted her in my arms, an intoxication of holy
joy pervading me, and the prayers falling faster from my lips than ever
they had done since as a lad I had recited them at my mother's knee. A
moment I laid her on the bench, whilst I divested myself of my cloak.
Then suddenly I paused, and stood listening, holding my breath.

Steps were advancing towards the door.

My first impulse was to rush forward and call to those who came,
shouting my news and imploring their help. Then a sudden, an almost
instinctive suspicion caught and chilled me. Who was it came at such an
hour? What could any man seek in the Church of San Domenico at dead of
night? Was the church indeed their goal, or were they but passers-by?

That last question went not long unanswered. The steps came nearer,
whilst I stood appalled, my skin roughening like a dog's. They halted at
the door. Something heavy hurtled against it.

A voice, the voice of Ramiro del' Orca--I knew it upon the
instant--reached my ears which concentration had rendered superacute.

"It is locked, Baldassare. Get out those tools of yours and force it."

My wits were working now at fever-pace. It may be that I am swift of
thought beyond the ordinary man, or it may be that what then came to me
was either a flash of inspiration or the conclusion to which I leapt by
instinct. But in that moment the whole plot of Madonna's poisoning was
revealed to me. Poisoned she had been--aye, but by some drug that did
but produce for a little while the outward appearance of death so truly
simulated as to deceive the most experienced of doctors. I had heard
of such poisons, and here, in very truth, was one of them at work. His
vengeance on her for her indifference to his suit was not so clumsy
and primitive as that of simply slaying her. He had, by his infernal
artifice, intended, secretly, to bear her off. To-morrow when men found
a broken church-door and a violated bier, they would set the sacrilege
down to some wizard who had need of the body for his dark practices of
magic.

I cursed myself in that hour that I had not earlier been moved to peer
into her coffin whilst yet there might have been time to have saved her.
Now? The sweat stood out in beads upon my brow. At that door there were,
to judge by the sound of footsteps and of voices, some three or four men
besides Messer Ramiro. For only weapon I had my dagger. What could I
do with that to defend her? Ramiro's plan would suffer no frustration
through my discovery; when to-morrow the sacrilege was discovered the
cold body of Lazzaro Biancomonte lying beside the desecrated bier would
be but an item in the work of profanation they would find--an item that
nowise would modify the conclusion to which I anticipated they would
come.




CHAPTER XIV. REQUIESCAT!


A strange and mysterious thing is the working of terror on the human
mind. Some it renders incapable of thought or action, paralysing their
limbs and stagnating the blood in their veins; such creatures die in
anticipating death. Others under the stress of that grim passion have
their wits preternaturally sharpened. The instinct of self-preservation
assumes command of all their senses, and urges them to swift and
feverish action.

I thank God with a full heart that to this latter class do I belong.
After one gelid moment, spent with eyes and mouth agape, my hands fallen
limp beside me and my hair bristling with affright, I became myself
again and never calmer than in that dread moment. I went to work with
superhuman swiftness. My cheeks may have been livid, my very lips
bloodless; but my hands were steady and my wits under full control.

Concealment--concealment for myself and her--was the thing that now
imported; and no sooner was the thought conceived than the means were
devised. Slender means were they, yet Heaven knows I was in no case
to be exacting, and since they were the best the place afforded I must
trust to them without demurring, and pray God that Messer Ramiro might
lack the wit to search. And with that fresh hope it came to me that
I must find a way so to dispose as to make him believe that to search
would be a futile waste of energy.

The odds against me lay in the little time at my disposal. Yet a little
time there was. The door was stout, and Messer Ramiro might take
no violent means of bursting it, lest the noise should arouse the
street--and I well could guess how little he would relish having lights
to shine upon this deed of night of his.

With what tools his sbirro was at work I could not say; but surely they
must be such as would leave me a few moments. Already the fellow had
begun. I could make out a soft crunching sound, as of steel biting into
wood. To act, then!

With movements swift as a cat's, and as silent, I went to work. Like
a ghost I glided round the coffin to the other side, where the lid was
lying. I took it up, and when for a moment I had deposited Madonna Paola
on the ground, I mounted the bench and gently but quickly set back that
lid as it had been. Next, I gathered up the cumbrous pall, and mounting
the bench once more I spread it across the coffin. This way and that I
pulled it, straightening it into the shape that it had worn when first I
had entered, and casting its folds into regular lines that would lend it
the appearance of having remained undisturbed.

And what time I toiled, the half of my mind intent upon my task, the
other half was as intent upon the progress of the worker at the door.

At last it was done. I set the bench where first it had been, at the
foot of the catafalque, and gathering up Madonna in my arms, as though
her weight had been an infant's, I bore her swiftly out of the circle of
light of those four tapers into the black, impenetrable gloom beyond.
On I sped towards the high-altar, flying now as men fly in evil dreams,
with the sensation of an enemy upon them and their progress a mere
standing-still.

Thus I gained the chancel, hurtling against the railing as I passed, and
pausing for an instant, wondering whether those without could have heard
the noise which in my clumsiness I had made. But the grinding sound
continued uninterrupted, and I breathed more freely. I mounted the
altar-steps, the distant light behind me still feebly guiding me; I ran
round to the right, and heaved a great sigh of relief to find my hopes
verified, and that the altar of San Domenico was as the altar of other
churches I had known. It stood a pace or so from the wall, and behind it
there was just such narrow hiding-room as I had looked to find.

I paused at the mouth of that black opening, and even as I paused,
something hard that gave out a metallic sound fell at the far end of the
church. Instinct told me it was the lock which those miscreants had cut
from the door. I waited for no more, but like a beast scudding to cover
I plunged into that black space.

Madonna, wrapped in my cloak as she was, I set down upon the ground, and
then I crept forward on hands and knees and thrust out my head, trusting
to the darkness to envelop me.

I waited thus for some seconds, my heart beating now against my ribs as
if it would hurl itself out of my bosom, my head and face on fire with
the fever of reaction that succeeded my late cold pallor.

From where I watched it was impossible to see the door hidden in the
black gloom. Away in the centre of the church, an island of light in
that vast sea of blackness, stood the catafalque with its four wax
torches. Something creaked, and almost immediately I saw the flames of
those tapers bend towards me, beaten over by the gust that smote them
from the door. Thus I surmised that Ramiro and his men had entered. The
soft fall of their feet; for they were treading lightly now, succeeded,
and at last they came into view, shadowy at first, then sharply outlined
as they approached the light.

A moment they stood in half-whispered conversation, their voices a
mere boom of sound in which no word was to be distinguished. Then I saw
Ramiro suddenly step forward--I knew him by his great height--and drag
away, even as I had done, the pall that hid the coffin. Next he seized
the bench and gave a brisk order to his men in a less cautious voice, so
that I caught his words.

"Spread a cloak," said he, and, in obedience, the four that were with
him took a cloak among them, each holding one of its corners. It was
thus that he meant to bear her with him.

He mounted now the bench, and I could imagine with what elation of mind
he put out his hands to remove the coffin-lid. As well as if his soul
had been transformed into a book conceived for my amusement did I
surmise the exultant mood that then possessed him. He had tricked
Filippo; he had out-witted us all--Madonna herself, included--and he was
leaving no trace behind him that should warrant any so much as to dare
to think that this vile deed was the work of Messer Ramiro del' Orca,
Governor of Cessna.

But Fate, that arch-humourist, that jester of the gods, delights in
mighty contrasts, and has a trick of exalting us by false hopes and
hollow lures on the very eve of working our discomfiture. From the soul
that but a moment back had been aglow with evil satisfaction there burst
a sudden blasphemous cry of rage that disregarded utterly the sanctity
of that consecrated place.

"By the Death of Christ! the coffin is empty!"

It was the roar of a beast enraged, and it was succeeded by a heavy
crash as he let fall the coffin-lid; a second later a still louder sound
awoke the night-echoes of that silent place. In a burst of maniacal
frenzy he had caught the coffin itself a buffet of his mighty fist, and
hurled it from its trestles.

Then he leapt down from the bench, and flung all caution to the winds in
the excitement that possessed him.

"It is a trick of that smooth-faced knave Filippo," he cried. "They have
laid a trap for us, animals, and you never informed yourselves."

I could imagine the foam about the corners of his mouth, the swelling
veins in his brow, and the mad bulging of his hideous eyes, for terror
spoke in his words, and the Governor of Cesena, overbearing bully though
he was, could on occasion, too, become a coward.

"Out of this!" he growled at them. "See that your swords hang ready.
Away!"

One of them murmured something that I could not catch. Mother in
Heaven! if it should be a suggestion of what actually had taken place, a
suggestion that the church should be searched ere they abandoned it? But
Ramiro's answer speedily relieved my fears.

"I'll take no risks," he barked. "Come! Let us go separately. I first,
and do you follow me and get clear of Pesaro as best you can." His voice
grew lower, and from what else he said I but caught the words, "Cesena"
and "to-morrow night," from which I gathered that he was appointing that
as their next meeting-place.

Ramiro went, and scarce had the echoes of his footsteps died away ere
the others followed in a rush, fearful of being caught in some trap that
was here laid for them, and but restrained from flying on the instant by
their still greater fear of that harsh master, Ramiro.

Thanking Heaven for this miraculous deliverance, and for the wit it
had lent me so to prepare a scene that should thoroughly mislead those
ravishers, I turned me now to Madonna Paola. Her breathing was grown
more heavy and more regular, so that in all respects she was as one
sleeping healthily. Soon I hoped that she might awaken, for to seek to
bear her thence and to the Palace in my arms would have been a madness.
And now it occurred to me that I should have restoratives at hand
against the time of her regaining consciousness. Inspiration suggested
to me the wine that should be stored in the sacristy for altar purposes.
It was unconsecrated, and there could be no sacrilege in using it.

I crept round to the front of the altar. At the angle a candle-branch
protruded, standing no higher than my head. It held some three or four
tapers, and was so placed to enable the priest to read his missal at
early Mass on dark winter mornings. I plucked one of the candles from
its socket, and hastening down the church, I lighted it from one of the
burning tapers of the bier. Screening it with my hand, I retraced my
steps and regained the chancel. Then turning to the left, I made for a
door that I knew should give access to the sacristy. It yielded to my
touch, and I passed down a short stone-flagged passage, and entered the
spacious chamber beyond. An oak settle was placed against one wall, and
above it hung an enormous, rudely-carved crucifix. Facing it against the
other wall loomed a huge piece of furniture, half-cupboard, half-buffet.
On a bench in a corner stood a basin and ewer of metal, whilst a few
vestments hanging beside these completed the furniture of this austere
and white-washed chamber. Setting my candle on the buffet, I opened one
of the drawers. It was full of garments of different kinds, among which
I noticed several monks' habits. I rummaged to the bottom only to find
some odd pairs of sandals.

Disappointed, I closed the drawer and tried another, with no better
fortune. Here were under-vestments of fine linen, newly washed and
fragrant with rosemary. I abandoned the drawer and gave my attention to
the cupboard above. It was locked, but the key was there. It opened,
and my candle reflected a blaze on gold and silver vessels, consecrated
chalices; a dazzling monstra, and several richly-carved ciboria of solid
gold, set with precious stones. But in a corner I espied a dark-brown,
gourd-shaped object. It was a skin of wine, and, with a half-suppressed
cry of joy, I seized it. In that instant a piercing scream rang through
the stillness of the church, and startled me so that I stood there for
some seconds, frozen in horror, a hundred wild conjectures leaping to my
mind.

Had Ramiro remained hidden, and was he returned? Did the scream mean
that Madonna Paola had been awakened by his rough hands?

A second time it came, and now it seemed to break the hideous spell that
its first utterance had cast over me. Dropping the leather bottle,
I sped back, down the stone passage to the door that abutted on the
chancel.

There, by the high-altar, I saw a form that seemed at first luminous and
ghostly, but in which presently I recognised Madonna Paola, the dim rays
of the distant tapers finding out the white robe with which her limbs
were hung. She was alone, and I knew then that it was but the very
natural fear consequent upon awakening in such a place that had provoked
the cry I had heard.

"Madonna," I called, advancing swiftly towards her. "Madonna Paola!"
There was a gasp, a moment's stillness, then--

"Lazzaro?" She cried, questioningly. "What has happened? Why am I here?"

I was beside her now, and found her trembling like an aspen.

"Something horrible has happened, Madonna," I answered. "But it is over
now, and the evil is averted."

"But how came I here?"

"That you shall learn." I stooped to gather up the cloak which had
slipped from her shoulders as she advanced. "Do you wrap this about
you," I urged her, and with my own hands I assisted to enfold her in
that mantle. "Are you faint, Madonna?" I asked.

"I scarce know," she answered in a frightened voice. "There is a black
horror upon me. Tell me," she implored again, "what does it mean?"

I drew her away now, promising to satisfy her in the fullest manner once
she were out of these forbidding surroundings. I led her to the sacristy
and seating her upon the settle I produced that wine-skin once again.

At first she babbled like a child of not being thirsty; but I was
insistent.

"It is no matter of quenching thirst, Madonna," I told her. "The wine
will warm and revive you. Come Madonna mia, drink."

She obeyed me now, and having got the first gulp down her throat she
drank a lusty draught that was not long in bringing a healthier colour
to replace the ashen pallor of her cheeks.

"I am so cold, Lazzaro," she complained.

I turned to the drawer in which I had espied the rough monks' habits,
and pulling one out I held it for her to don. She sat there now, in that
garment of coarse black cloth, the cowl flung back upon her shoulder,
the fairest postulate that ever entered upon a novitiate.

"You are good to me, Lazzaro," she murmured plaintively, "and I have
used you very ill." She paused a second, passing her hand across her
brow. Then--"What is the hour?" she asked.

It was a question that I left unheeded. I bade her brace herself and
have courage for the tale I was to tell. I assured her that the horror
of it was all passed and that she had naught to fear. So soon as her
natural curiosity should be satisfied it should be hers to return to her
brother at the Palace.

"But how came I thence?" she cried. "I must have lain in a swoon, for
I remember nothing." And then her swift mind, leaping to a reasonable
conclusion; and assisted, perhaps, by the memory of the shattered
catafalque which she had seen--"Did they account me dead, Lazzaro?" she
asked of a sudden, her eyes dilating with a curious affright as they
were turned upon my own.

"Yes, Madonna," answered I, "you were accounted dead." And, with that, I
told her the entire story of what had befallen, saving only that I left
my own part unmentioned, nor sought to explain my opportune presence
in the church. When I spoke of the coming of Ramiro and his knaves she
shuddered and closed her eyes in very awe. At length, when I had done,
she opened them again, and again she turned them full upon me. Their
brightness seemed to increase a moment, and then I saw that she was
quietly weeping.

"And you were there to save me, Lazzaro?" she murmured brokenly.
"Lazzaro mio, it seems that you are ever at hand when I have need of
you. You are indeed my one true friend--the one true friend that never
fails me."

"Are you feeling stronger, Madonna?" I asked abruptly, roughly almost.

"Yes, I am stronger." She stood up as if to test her strength. "Indeed
little ails me saving the horror of this thing. The thought of it seems
to turn me sick and dizzy."

"Sit then and rest," said I. "Presently, when you are more recovered, we
will set out."

"Whither shall we go?" she asked.

"Why, to the Palace, to your brother."

"Why, yes," she answered, as though it were the last suggestion that
she had been expecting, "And to-morrow--it will be to-morrow, will it
not?--comes the Lord Ignacio to claim his bride. He will owe you no mean
thanks, Lazzaro."

There was a pause. I paced the chamber, a hundred thoughts crowding my
mind, but overriding them all the conjecture of how far it might be from
matins, and how soon we might be discovered by the monks. Presently she
spoke again.

"Lazzaro," she inquired very gently, "what was it brought you to the
church?"

"I came with the others, Madonna, to the burial service," answered I,
and fearing such questions as might follow--questions that I had been
dreading ever since I had brought her to the sacristy--"If you are
recovered we had best be going," I told her gruffly.

"Nay, I am not yet enough recovered," answered she. "And before we go,
there are some points in this strange adventure that I would have you
make clear to me. Meanwhile, we are very well here. If the good fathers
come upon us, what shall it signify?"

I groaned inwardly, and I grew, I think, more afraid than when Ramiro
and his men had broken into the church an hour ago.

"What kept you here after all were gone?"

"I remained to pray, Madonna," I answered brusquely. "Is aught else to
be done in a church?"

"To pray for me, Lazzaro?" she asked.

"Assuredly, Madonna."

"Faithful heart," she murmured. "And I had used you so cruelly for
the deception you practised. But you merited my cruelty, did you not,
Lazzaro? Say that you did, else must I perish of remorse."

"Perhaps I deserved it, Madonna. But perhaps not so much as you
bestowed, had you but understood my motives," I said unguardedly.

"If I had understood your motives?" she mused. "Aye, there is much I do
not understand. Even in this night's transactions there are not wanting
things that remain mysterious despite the explanations you have supplied
me. Tell me, Lazzaro, what was it led you to suppose that I still lived?

"I did not suppose it," I blundered like a fool, never seeing whither
her question led.

"You did not?" she cried, in deep surprise; and now, when it was
too late, I understood. "What was it, then, induced you to lift the
coffin-lid?"

"You ask me more than I can tell you," I answered, almost roughly. "Do
you thank God, Madonna, that it was so, and never plague your mind to
learn the 'why' of it."

She looked at me with eyes that were singularly luminous.

"But I must know," she insisted. "Have I not the right? Tell me now: Was
it that you wished to see my face again before they gave me over to the
grave?"

"Perhaps it was that, Madonna," I answered in confusion, avoiding her
glance. Then--"Shall we be going?" I suggested fiercely. But she never
heeded that suggestion.

She spoke as if she had not heard, and the words she uttered seemed to
turn me into stone.

"Did you love me then so much, dear Lazzaro?"

I swung round to face her now, and I know that my face was white--whiter
than hers had been when I had beheld her in her coffin. My eyes seemed
to burn in their sockets as they met hers. A madness overtook me and
whelmed my better judgment. I had undergone so much that day through
grief, and that night through a hundred emotions, that I was no longer
fully master of myself. Her words robbed me, I think, of my last
lingering shred of reason.

"Love you, Madonna?" I echoed, in a voice that was as unlike my own as
was the mood that then possessed me. "You are the air I breathe, the
sun that lights my miserable world. You are dearer to me than honour,
sweeter than life. You are the guardian angel of my existence, the saint
to whom I have turned morning and evening in my prayers for grace. Do I
love you, Madonna--?"

And there I paused. The thought of what I did and what the consequences
must be rushed suddenly upon me. I shivered as a man shivers in awaking.
I dropped on my knees before her, bowing my head and flinging wide my
arms.

"Forgive, Madonna," I cried entreatingly. "Forgive and forget. Never
again will I offend."

"Neither forgive nor forget will I," came her voice, charged with an
ineffable sweetness, and her hands descended on my bowed bead, as if
she would bless and soothe me. "I am conscious of no offence that craves
forgiveness, and what you have said I would not forget if I could.
Whence springs this fear of yours, dear Lazzaro? Am I more than woman,
or you less than man that you should tremble for the confession that in
a wild moment I have dragged from you? For that wild moment I shall be
thankful to my life's end; for your words have been the sweetest ever
my poor ears listened to. Once I thought that I loved the Lord Giovanni
Sforza. But it was you I loved; for the deeds that earned him my
affection were deeds of yours and not of his. Once I told you so in
scorn. Yet since then I have come soberly to ponder it. I account you,
Lazzaro, the noblest friend, the bravest gentleman and the truest lover
that the world has known. Need it surprise you, then, that I love you
and that mine would be a happy life if I might spend it in growing
worthy of this noble love of yours?"

There was a knot in my throat and tears in my eyes--a matter at which I
take no shame. Air seemed to fail me for a moment, and I almost thought
that I should swoon, so overcome was I. Transport the blackest soul from
among the damned of Hell, wash it white of its sins and seat it on one
of the glorious thrones of Heaven, then ponder its emotions, and you
may learn something of what I felt. At last, when I had mastered the
exquisite torture of my joy--

"Madonna mia," I cried, "bethink you of what you say. You are the noble
lady of Santafior, and I--"

"No more of this," she interrupted me. "You are Lazzaro Biancomonte, of
patrician birth, no matter to what odd shifts a cruel fortune may have
driven you. Will you take me?"

She had my face between her palms, and she forced my glance to meet her
own saintly eyes.

"Will you take me, Lazaro?" she repeated.

"Holy Flower of the Quince!" was all that I could murmur, whereat she
gently smiled. "Santo Fior di Cotogno!"

And then a great sadness overwhelmed me. A tide that neaped the frail
bark of happiness high and dry upon the shores of black despair.

"To-morrow Madonna, comes the Lord Ignacio Borgia," I groaned.

"I know, I know," said she. "But I have thought of that. Paula Sforza
di Santafior is dead. Requiescat! We must dispose that they will let her
rest in peace."




CHAPTER XV. AN ILL ENCOUNTER


Speechless I stared at her a moment, so taken was I with the immensity
of the thing that she suggested. Fear, amazement, and joy jostled one
another for the possession of my mind.

"Why do you look so, Lazzaro?" she exclaimed at last. "What is it daunts
you?

"How is the thing possible?" quoth I.

"What difficulty does it present?" she questioned back. "The Governor
of Cesena has rendered very possible what I propose. We may look on him
to-morrow as our best friend."

"But Ramiro knows," I reminded her.

"True, but do you think that he will dare to tell the world what he
knows? He might be asked to say how he comes by his knowledge, and that
should prove a difficult question to answer. Tell me, Lazzaro," she
continued, "if he had succeeded in carrying me away, what think you
would have been said in Pesaro to-morrow when the coffin was found
empty?"

"They would assume that your body had been stolen by some wizard or some
daring student of anatomy."

"Ah! And if we were quietly to quit the church and be clear of Pesaro
before morning, would not the same be said?"

"Probably," answered I.

"Then why hesitate? Is it that you do not love me enough, Lazzaro?"

I smiled, and my eyes must have told her more than any protestation
could. Then I sighed. "I hesitate, Madonna, because I would not have you
do now what you might come, hereafter, bitterly to repent. I would
not let you be misled by the impulse of a moment into an act whose
consequences must endure as long as life itself."

"Is that the reasoning of a lover?" she asked me, very quietly. "Is
this cold argument, this weighing of issues, consistent with the stormy
passion you professed so lately?"

"It is," I answered stoutly. "It is because I love you more than I love
myself that I would have you reflect ere you adventure your life upon
such a broken raft as mine. You are Paola Sforza di Santafior, and I--"

"Enough of that," she interrupted me, rising. She swept towards me, and
before I knew it her hands were on my shoulders, her face upturned, and
her blue eyes on mine, depriving me of all will and all resistance.

"Lazzaro," said she, and there was an intensity almost fierce in her
low tones, "moments are flying and you stand here reasoning with me,
and bidding me weigh what is already weighed for all time. Will you wait
until escape is rendered impossible, until we are discovered, before you
will decide to save me, and to grasp with both hands this happiness of
ours that is not twice offered in a lifetime?"

She was so close to me that I could almost feel the beating of her
heart. Some subtle perfume reaching me and combining with the
dominion that her eyes seemed to have established over me completed
my subjugation. I was as warm wax in her hands. Forgotten were all
considerations of rank and station. We were just a man and a woman whose
fates were linked irrevocably by love. I stooped suddenly, under the
sway of an impulse, I could not resist, and kissed her upturned face,
turning almost dizzy in the act. Then I broke from her clasp, and
bracing myself for the task to which we stood committed by that kiss--

"Paola," said I, "we must devise the means to get away. I will bear you
to my mother's home near Biancomonte, that you may dwell there at least
until we are wed. But the thing that exercises my mind is how to make
our unobserved escape from Pesaro."

"I have thought of it already," she informed me quietly.

"You have thought of it?" I cried. "And of what have you thought?"

For answer she stepped back a pace, and drew the cowl of the monk's
habit over her head until her features were lost in the shadows of it.
She stood before me now, a diminutive Dominican brother. Her meaning
was clear to me at once. With a cry of gladness I turned to the drawer
whence I had taken the habit in which she was arrayed, and selecting
another one I hastily donned it above the garments that I wore.

No sooner was it done than I caught her by the arm.

"Come, Madonna," I bade her in an urgent voice. At the first step she
stumbled. The habit was so long that it cumbered her feet. But that was
a difficulty soon conquered. With my dagger I cut a piece from the skirt
of it, enough to leave her freedom of movement; and, that accomplished,
we set out.

We crossed the church swiftly and silently, and a moment I left her
in the porch whilst I surveyed the street. All was quiet. Pesaro still
slept, and it must have wanted some two hours or more to the dawn.

A fine rain was falling as we sallied out, and there was a sting in the
December wind which made us draw our cowls the tighter about our face.
Abandoning the main street, I led her down some narrow alleys, deserted
like all the rest of the city, and not so much as a stray cat abroad in
that foul weather. It was very dark, and a hundred times we stumbled,
whilst in some places I almost carried her bodily to avoid the filth of
the quarter we were traversing. At length we gained the space in front
of the gates that open on to the northern road, known as Porta Venezia,
and I would have blundered on and roused the guard to let us out, using
the Borgia ring once more--that talisman whose power had grown during
these years, so that it would now open me almost any door in Italy. But
Paola stayed me. Wisely she counselled that we should do nothing that
might draw too much attention upon ourselves, and she urged me to wait
until the dawn, when the guard would be astir and the gates opened.

So we fled to the shelter of a porch, and there we waited, huddling
ourselves out of the reach of the icy rain. We talked little during the
time we spent there. For my own part I had overmuch food for thought,
and a very natural anxiety racked me. Soon the monks would be descending
to the church, and they would discover the havoc there, and spread the
alarm.

Who could say but that they might even discover the abstraction of the
two habits from the sacristy, and the hue and cry for two men in the
sackcloth of Dominicans would be afoot--for they would infer that
two men so disguised had made off with the body of Madonna Paola.
The thought stirred me like a goad. I stood up. The night was growing
thinner, and, suddenly, even as I rose, a light gleamed from one of the
Windows of the guard-house.

"God be thanked for that fellow's early rising," I cried out. "Come,
Madonna, let us be moving."

And I added my newly-conceived reasons for quitting the place without
further delay.

Cursing us for being so early abroad--a curse to which I responded with
a sonorous "Pax Domini sit tecum" the still somnolent sentinel opened
the post and let us pass. I was glad in the end that we had waited and
thus avoided the necessity of showing my ring, for should inquiries be
made concerning two monks, that ring of mine might have betrayed the
identity of one of them. I gave thanks to Heaven that I knew the country
well. A quarter of a league or so from Pesaro we quitted the high-road
and took to the by-paths with which I was well acquainted.

Day came, grey and forbidding at first, but presently the rain
ceased and the sun flashed out a thousand diamonds from the drenched
hedge-rows.

We plodded on; and at length, towards noon, when we had gained the
neighbourhood of the village of Cattolica, we halted at the hut of a
peasant on a small campagna. I had divested myself of my monk's habit,
and cut away the cowl from Madonna's. She had thereafter fashioned it
by means that were mysterious to my dull man's mind into a more
feminine-looking garb.

Thus we now presented ourselves to the old man who was the sole tenant
of that lonely and squalid house. A ducat opened his door as wide as it
would go, and gave us free access to every cranny of his dwelling. Food
he procured us--rough black bread, some pieces of roasted goat, and some
goat's milk--and on this we regaled ourselves as though it had been a
ducal banquet, for hunger had set us in the mood to account anything
delicious. And when we had eaten we fell to talking, the old man having
left us to go about such peasant duties as claimed his attention, and
our talk concerned ourselves, our future first, and later on our past. I
remember that Madonna returned to the matter of the deception that I had
practised, seeking to learn what reasons had impelled me, and I answered
her in all truth.

"Madonna mia, I think it must have been to win your love. When Giovanni
Sforza bade me, with many a threat, to write those verses, I undertook
the task with ready gladness, for in its performance I was to pour out
the tale of the passion that was consuming my poor heart. It occurred to
me that if those verses were worthy, you might come to love their author
for their beauty, and so I strove to render them beautiful. It was the
same spirit urged me to don the Lord Giovanni's armour and fight in that
splendid if futile skirmish. Even as you had come to love the author for
his verses, so might you come to love the warrior for his valour. That
you should account the one and the other the work of Giovanni Sforza
was to me a little thing, since I was well content to think that you
but loved him because you accounted his the things that I had performed.
Therefore was I the one you truly loved, although you did not know it.
Could you but conceive what consolation that reflection was to me, you
would deal lightly with me for my deceit."

"I can conceive it," she answered, very gently, her eyes downcast; "and
now that I know the motives that impelled you, I almost love you for
that deceit itself, for it seems to me that it holds some quality well
worthy of devotion."

Such was our talk, all of a nature to help us to a better understanding
of each other, and all seeming to endear us more and more by showing us
how close the past had already drawn us.

Later I rose and announced my intention of adventuring into Cattolica,
there to procure her garments more seemly than those she wore, in which
she might journey on and come into the presence of my mother. Also,
there was in Cattolica a man I knew, of whom I hoped for the loan of
enough money to enable me to purchase mules, to the end that we might
journey in more dignity and comfort. It was then about the twentieth
hour, and I hoped to return by nightfall. I took my leave of Madonna,
enjoining her to rest and to seek sleep whilst I was absent; and with
that I set out.

Cattolica was no more than a half-league distant, and I looked to reach
it in a half-hour or so. I fell into thought as I trudged along, and I
was building plans for the sunlit future that was to be ours. I was a
man transformed that day, and I could have sung in spite of the chill
December wind that buffeted me, so full of joy and gladness was my
heart.

At Biancomonte I was likely to spend my days as little better than a
peasant, but surely a peasant's estate with such a companion as was to
be mine was preferable to an emperor's throne without her.

The bleak landscape seemed to me invested with a beauty that at no other
time I should have noticed. God was good. I swore a thousand times, the
world was a good world--so good that Heaven could scarce be better.

I had come, perhaps, the better half of the distance I had to travel,
and I was giving full rein to my joyous fancy, when suddenly I espied
ahead a company of horsemen. They were approaching me at a brisk
pace, but I took no thought of them, accounting myself secure from any
molestation. If it so happened that it was a search party from Pesaro,
seeking two men disguised as monks who had ravished the coffin
of Madonna Paola di Santafior, what should they want of Lazzaro
Biancomonte? And so, in my confidence, I advanced even as they trotted
quickly towards me.

Not until they were within a matter of a hundred paces did I raise my
eyes to take their measure; and then I halted on my step, smitten of a
sudden by an unreasoning and unreasonable fear, to see at their head
the bulky form of the Governor of Cesena. He saw me, too, and, what
was worse, he recognised me on the instant, for he clapped spurs to his
horse and came at me as if he would ride me down. Within three paces of
me he drew up his steed. Whether the memory of the other two occasions
on which I had thwarted him arose now in his mind and made him wonder
had not some fatality brought me across his path again to send awry his
pretty schemes concerning Madonna Paula, I cannot say for certain; yet
some suspicion of it occurred to me and filled me with apprehension.

"Body of Bacchus!" he roared. "Is it truly you, Boccadoro?"

"They call me Biancomonte now, Magnificent," I answered him. But my tone
was respectful, for it could profit me nothing to incense him.

"A fig for what they call you," he snapped contemptuously. "Whence are
you?"

"From Pesaro," I answered truthfully.

"From Pesaro? But you are travelling towards it."

"True. I was making for Cattolica, but I missed my way in seeking to
shorten it. I am now returning by the high-road."

The explanation satisfied him on that point, and being satisfied, he
asked me when I had left Pesaro. A moment I hesitated.

"Late last night," said I at last. He looked, at me, my foolish
hesitation having perhaps unslipped a suspicion that was straining at
its leash.

"In that case," said he, "you can scarcely have heard the strange story
that is being told there?"

I looked at him, as if puzzled, for a second. "If you mean the story of
Madonna Paoia's end, I heard it yesterday."

"Why, what story was that?" quoth he in some surprise, his beetling
brows coming together in one broad line of fur.

I shrugged my shoulders. "Men said that she had been poisoned."

"Oh, that," he cried indifferently. "But men say to-day that her
body was stolen from the Church of San Domenico where it lay. An odd
happening, is it not?" And his eyes covered me in a fierce scrutiny that
again suggested to me those suspicions of his that I might be the man
who had anticipated him. I was soon to learn that he had more grounds
than at first I thought for those same suspicions.

"Odd, indeed," I answered calmly, for all that I felt my pulses
quickening with apprehension. "But is it true?" I added.

He shrugged his shoulders. "Rumour's habit is to lie," he answered.
"Yet for such a lie as that, so monstrous an imagination would be needed
that, rather, am I inclined to account it truth. There are no more poets
in Pesaro since you left. But at what hour was it that you quitted the
city?"

To hesitate again were to betray myself; it were to suggest that I
was seeking an answer that should sort well with the rest of my story.
Besides, what could the hour signify?

"It would be about the first hour of night," I said. He looked at me
with increasing strangeness.

"You must indeed have wandered from your road to have got no farther
than this in all that time. Perhaps you were hampered by some heavy
burden?" He leered evilly, and I turned cold.

"I was burdened with nothing heavier than this body of mine and a rather
uneasy conscience."

"Where, then, have you tarried?"

At this I thought it time to rebel. Were I too meekly to submit to this
examination, my very meekness might afford him fresh grounds for doubts.

"Once have I told you," I answered wearily, "that I lost my way. And,
however much it may flatter me to have your Excellency evincing such an
interest in my concerns, I am at a loss to find a reason for it."

He leered prodigiously once more, and his eyebrows shot up to the level
of his cap.

"I will tell you, brute beast," he answered me. "I question you because
I suspect that you are hiding something from me."

"What should I hide from your Excellency?"

He dared not enlighten me on that point, for should his suspicions prove
unfounded he would have uselessly betrayed himself.

"If you are honest, why do you lie?"

"I?" I ejaculated. "In what have I lied?"

"In that you have told me that you left Pesaro at the first hour of
night. At the third hour you were still in the Church of San Domenico,
whither you followed Madonna Paola's bier."

It was my turn to knit my brows. "Was I indeed?" quoth I. "Why, yes, it
may well be. But what of that? Is the hour in which I quitted Pesaro a
matter of such moment as to be worth lying over? If I said that I left
about the first hour, it is because I was under the impression that it
was so. But I was so distraught by grief at Madonna's death that I may
have been careless in my account of time."

"More lies," he blazed with sudden passion. "It may have been the third
hour, you say. Fool, the gates of Pesaro close at the second hour of
night. Where are your wits?"

Outwardly calm, but inwardly in a panic--more for Madonna's sake than
for my own--I promptly held out the hand on which I wore the Borgia
ring. In a flash of inspiration did that counter suggest itself to me.

"There is a key that will open any gate in Romagna at any hour."

He looked at the ring, and of what passed in his mind I can but offer a
surmise. He may have remembered that once before I had fooled him
with the help of that gold circlet; or he may have thought that I
was secretly in the service of the Borgias, and that, acting in their
interests, I had carried off Madonna Paola. Be that as it may, the sight
of the ring threw him into a fury. He turned on his horse.

"Lucagnolo!" he called, and a man of officer's rank detached himself
from the score of men-at-arms and rode forward. "Let six men escort me
home to Cesena. Take you the remainder and beat up the country for
three leagues about this spot. Do not leave a house outside Cattolica
unsearched. You know what we are seeking?"

The man inclined his head.

"If it is within the circle you have appointed, we will find it," he
answered confidently.

"Set about it," was the surly command, and Ramiro turned again to me.
"You have gone a little pale, good Messer Boccadoro," he sneered. "We
shall soon learn whether you have sought to fool me. Woe betide you,
should it be so. We bear a name for swift justice at Cesena."

"So be it then," I answered as calmly as I might. "Meanwhile, perhaps
you will now suffer me to go my ways."

"The readier since your way must lie with ours."

"Not so, Magnificent, I am for Cattolica."

"Not so, animal," he mimicked me with elephantine grace, "you are for
Cesena, and you had best go with a good will. Our manner of constraining
men is reputed rude." He turned again. "Ercole, take you this man behind
you. Assist him, Stefano."

And so it was done, and a few minutes later I was riding, strapped to
the steel-clad Ercole, away from Paola at every stride. Thus at every
stride the anguish that possessed me increased, as the fear that they
must find her rose ever higher.




CHAPTER XVI. IN THE CITADEL OF CESENA


I will not harass you at any further length with the feelings that were
mine as we sped northward towards Cesena. If you are a person of some
imagination and not destitute of human sympathy you will be able to
surmise them; if you are not--why then, my tale is not for you, and
it is more than probable that you will have wearied of it and flung it
aside long before you reach this page.

We rode so hard that by sunset Cesena was in sight, and ere night had
fallen we were within the walls of the citadel. It was when we had
dismounted and I stood in the courtyard between Ercole and another of
the soldiers that Ramiro again addressed me.

"Animal," said he, "they tell me that I bear a name for harsh measures
and rough ways. You shall be a witness hereafter of how deeply I am
maligned. For instead of putting you to the question and loosening your
lying tongue with the rack, I am content to keep you a prisoner until my
men return with that which I suspect you to be hiding from me. But if
I then discover that you have sought to fool me, you shall flutter from
Ramiro del' Orca's flagstaff."

He pointed up to the tower of the Castle, from which a beam protruded,
laden at that moment with a ghastly burden just discernible in the
thickening gloom. He named it well when he called it his "flagstaff,"
and the miserable banner of carrion that hung from it was a fitting
pennon for the ruthless Governor of Cesena. Worthy was he to have worn
the silver hauberk of Werner von Urslingen with its motto, "The enemy of
God, of pity and of mercy."

Forbidding, black-browed men caught me with rough hands and dragged me
off to a dank, unlighted prison, as empty of furniture as it was full of
noisome smells. And there they left me to my ugly thoughts and my
deeply despondent mood what time the Governor of Cesena supped with his
officers in the hall of the Castle.

Ramiro drank deep that night as was his habit, and being overladen
with wine it entered his mind that in one of his dungeons lay Lazzaro
Biancomonte, who, at one time, had been known as Boccadoro, the merriest
Fool in Italy. In his drunkenness he grew merry, and when Ramiro del'
Orca grew merry men crossed themselves and betook them to their prayers.
He would fain be amused, and to serve that end he summoned one of his
sbirri and bade the fellow drag Boccadoro from his dungeon and fetch him
into his presence.

When they came for me I turned cold with fear that Madonna was already
taken, and, by contrast with such a fear as that, the reflection that he
might carry out his threat to hang me from that black beam of his, faded
into insignificant proportions.

They ushered me into a great hall, not ill-furnished, the floor strewed
plentifully with rushes, and warmed by an enormous fire of blazing oak.
By the door stood two pikemen in armour, like a pair of statues; in the
centre of the floor was a heavy oaken board, laden now with flagons and
beakers, at which sat Ramiro with a pair of gossips so villainous to
look at, that the sight of them reminded me of the adage "God makes a
man and then accompanies him."

The Governor made a hideous noise at sight of me, which I was
constrained to accept as an expression of horrid glee.

"Boccadoro," said he, "do you recall that when last I had the honour of
being entertained by your pert tongue, I promised you that did you ever
cross my path again I would raise you to the dignity of Fool of my Court
of Cesena?"

Into what magniloquence does vanity betray us! His Court of Cesena! As
well might you describe a pig-sty as a bower of roses.

But his words, despite the unsavoury thing of which they seemed to
hold a promise, fell sweetly on my ear, inasmuch as for the time they
relieved my fears touching Madonna. It was not to advise me of her
capture that he had had me haled into his odious presence. I gathered
courage.

"Have you not fools enough already at Cesena?" I asked him.

A moment he looked as if he were inclining to anger. Then he burst into
a coarse laugh, and turned to one of his gossips.

"Did I not tell you, Lampugnani, that his wit was quick and penetrating?
Hear him, rogue. Already has he discerned your quality." He laughed
consumedly at his own jest, and turning to me he pointed to a crimson
bundle on a chair beside me. "Take those garments," he roughly bade me.
"Go dress yourself in them, then come you back and entertain us."

Without answering him, and already anticipating the nature of the
clothes he bade me don, I lifted one of the garments from the heap. It
was a foliated jester's cap, with a bell hanging from every point, which
gave out a tinkling sound as I picked it up. I let it fall again as
though it had scorched me, the memory of what stood between Madonna
Paola and me rising like a warning spectre in my mind. I would not again
defile myself by the garb of folly; not again would I incur the shame of
playing the Fool for the amusement of others.

"May it please your Excellency to excuse me," I answered in a firm tone.
"I have made a vow never again to put on motley."

He eyed me sardonically for a moment, as if enjoying in anticipation the
pleasure of compelling me against my will. He sat back in his chair and
threw one heavily-booted leg across the other.

"In the Citadel of Cesena," said he, "we fear neither God nor Devil, and
vows are as water to us--things we cannot stomach. It does not please me
to excuse you."

I may have paled a little before the sinister smile with which he
accompanied his words, but I stood my ground boldly.

"It is not," said I, "a question of what a vow may be to you and yours,
but of what a vow is to me. It is a thing I cannot break."

"Sangue di Cristo!" he snarled, "we will break it for you, then--that
or your bones. Resolve yourself, beast, the motley or the rack--or yet,
if you prefer it, there is the cord yonder." And he pointed to the far
end of the chamber where some ropes were hanging from a pulley, the
implements of the ghastly torture of the cord. Of such a nature was this
monster that he made a torture-chamber of his dining-hall.

"Let the rogue make acquaintance with it," laughed Lampugnani, showing
a mouthful of yellow teeth behind the black beard that bushed his lips.
"I'll swear his dancing would afford us more amusement than his quips.
Swing him up, Illustrious."

But the Illustrious seemed to ponder the matter.

"You shall have five minutes in which to decide," he informed me
presently. "They say that I am cruel. Behold how patient is my clemency.
Five minutes shall you have where many another would hang you out of
hand for bearding him as you have done me."

"You may begin at once," said I. "neither five minutes nor five years
will alter my determination."

His brow grew black with anger. "We shall see," was all he said.

There was a silence now in which we waited, a storm of thoughts battling
in my mind. Presently Ramiro caught up one of the flagons and applied
it to his cup. It proved empty, and in a gust of passion he hurled it
against the wall where it burst into a thousand pieces. Clearly he was
very angry, and it taxed my wits to account for the little measure of
patience he was showing me.

"Beppo!" he called. A page lounging by the buffet sprang to attention.
He was a slender, rather delicate lad, fair of hair and blue of eyes,
not more than twelve years of age. An elderly man who stood beside
him--one Mariani, the seneschal of Cesena--stepped forward also,
solicitude in his glance.

"Bring me wine," bawled the ogre. "Must I tell you what I need? If you
do not put those eyes of yours to better service, I'll have them plucked
from your empty head. Bestir, animal."

The old man caught up a beaker from the buffet and handed it to the boy.

"Here, my son," said he. "Hasten to his Excellency."

The lad took the beaker from his father's hands, and trembling in his
fear of Ramiro's anger, he sprang forward to serve him. In his haste
the poor youth slipped in some grease that had clung to the rushes.
In seeking to recover himself he tripped over the feet of one of the
halberdiers that guarded me, and measured his length upon the floor at
Ramiro's feet, flooding the Governor's legs with the wine he carried.

How shall I tell you of the horror that was the sequel?

For just one instant Ramiro looked down at the sprawling lad, his eyes
glowing like a madman's. Then suddenly he rose, stooped, and set one
hand to the boy's belt, the other to the collar of his jerkin. Feeling
himself lifted, and knowing whose were the dread hands that held him,
poor Beppo uttered a single scream of terror. Then Ramiro swung him
round with an ease that displayed the man's prodigious strength. For
just a second he seemed to hesitate how to dispose of the human bundle
that he held. Then, as if suddenly taking his resolve, that devil hurled
the lad across the little intervening space, straight into the heart of
the blazing fire.

Beppo hurtled against the logs with a sickening crash, and a thousand
sparks leapt up and vanished in the cavern of the chimney. Ramiro
wheeled sharply about, and snatching the pike from the hands of one of
my guards, he pinned down the poor body of the boy to make sure of his
victim's entire destruction.

Away by the buffet old Mariani looked on with a face as grey as ashes,
his eyes protruding in horror at the thing they witnessed. One glimpse I
had of him, and I scarce know which was the sight that sickened me more,
the fathers anguish or the twitching limbs of the burning child. Two
legs and two arms protruded from the blaze and writhed and wriggled
horribly what time the flames peeled the garments from them and licked
the flesh from the bones. At length they fell still and sank down into
the white heat of the logs, a hideous, pungent odour spreading through
the chamber. From the old man by the buffet, who had stood spellbound
during this ghastly scene, there broke at last an anguished cry.

"Mercy, my lord, mercy!"

The Governor of Cesena straightened himself from his task, pulled the
pike from the flames, and restored it to the man-at-arms. Then turning
to Mariani:

"Fetch me wine," he bade him curtly, as he seated himself once more
upon the chair from which he had risen to perform that deed of ghastly
ruthlessness.

A torch spluttered suddenly in its sconce, and the fierce hissing of the
fire--like some monster licking its chops over a bloody meal--were the
only sounds that disturbed the stillness that ensued.

Every man there, including Ramiro's table companions, was white to the
lips; for accustomed though they might be to horrors in that brigand's
nest, this was a horror that surpassed anything they had ever witnessed.
The silence irked Messer Ramiro. He looked round from under his shaggy
brows, and he spluttered out an oath.

"Will you bring me this wine, pig?" he growled at the almost senseless
Mariani, and in his air and voice there was a promise of such terrific
things that the old man put aside his horror to make room for his fears,
and mechanically seizing another flagon he hurried forward to minister
to the wants of his fearful lord.

Ramiro eyed him with cynical amusement.

"Your hand shakes, Mariani," he derided him. "Are you cold? Go warm
yourself," he added, with a brutal laugh and a jerk of his thumb towards
the fire.

My eyes have looked upon some gruesome sights, and I have heard such
tales of ruthless cruelty as you would deem almost passing possibility.
I have read of the awful doings of the Lord Bernabo Visconti at Milan in
the olden time, but I believe that compared with this monster of Cesena
that same Bernabo was no worse than a sucking dove. How it befell that
men permitted him to live, how it was that none bethought him to put
poison in his wine or a knife in his back, is something that I shall
never wholly understand. Could it be that these robbers of whom he made
a hedge for his protection were no better than himself, or was it that
the man's terrific brutality was on such a scale that it filled them
with an almost supernatural awe of him? To men better versed than am I
in the mysterious ways of human nature do I leave the answering of these
questions.

The ogre turned his bloodshot eyes upon me, as with his hand he caressed
his tawny beard. He seemed to have cooled a little now, and to have
regained some mastery of his drunken self. Old Mariani tottered back to
his buffet, and stood leaning against it, his eyes wandering, with the
look of a man demented, to the fire that had devoured his child. There,
indeed, if he escaped the madness with which the poignancy of his grief
was threatening him, was a tool that might turn its edge against this
inhuman monster, this devil, this bloody carnifex of a Governor.

"Chance," said Ramiro, "has designed that you should see something of
how we deal with clumsy knaves at Cesena, Boccadoro. To disobedient
ones I can assure you that we are not half so merciful. There is no such
short shrift for them. You have had more than the time I promised you
for reflection. The garments await you yonder. Let us know--"

The door opened suddenly, and a servant entered.

"A courier from the Lord Vitellozzo Vitelli, Tyrant of Città di
Castello," he announced, unwittingly breaking in upon Ramiro's words,
"with urgent messages for the high and Mighty Governor of Cesena."

On the instant Ramiro rose, the expression of his face changing from
cynical amusement to sober concern, the task upon which he was engaged
forgotten.

"Admit him instantly," he commanded. And whilst he waited he paced the
chamber in long strides, his chin thrust slightly forward, suggestive of
deep thought. And during that pause, I, too, was thinking. Not indeed
of him, nor vainly speculating upon such matters as might be involved
in the message, the announcement of which seemed so deeply to engage his
mind, but chiefly of my own and Madonna Paola's concerns.

It was not fear of what I had seen that now sent my thoughts into a new
channel and inspired me with the wisdom of obeying Ramiro del' Orca's
behest that I should don the hateful motley and play the Fool for his
diversion. It was not that I feared death; it was that I feared what the
consequences of my death might be to Paola di Santafior.

However desperate a position may seem, unlooked-for loopholes often
present themselves, and so long as we live and have sound limbs to aid
us to seize such opportunities as may offer, it is a weak thing utterly
to abandon hope.

Was it, then, not better to submit to the shame of the motley once again
for a little time, when by so doing I might perhaps live to work my
own salvation, and Madonna's should she suffer capture, rather than
stubbornly to invite him to put me to death out of a feeling of false
pride?

The very resolve seemed to lend me strength and to revive the hope that
lay moribund in my breast. And then, scarce was it taken, when the door
again opened, and a man, who was splashed from head to foot with mud, in
earnest of how hard he had ridden, was ushered in.

He advanced to Meser Ramiro, bowed and presented a package. Ramiro broke
the seal, and standing with his back to the fire, immediately in the
light shed by one of the wax torches, he read the letter. Then his eyes
wandered to the man who had brought it, and to me it seemed that they
dwelt particularly upon the hat the courier was holding in his hand.

"Take this good fellow to the kitchen," he bade the servant that had
introduced him, "let him be fed and rested." Then, turning to the man,
himself, "I shall require you to set out at daybreak with my answer,"
he said; and so, with a wave of the hand, he dismissed him. As the
messenger departed Ramiro returned to the table, filled himself a cup of
wine and drank.

"What says the Lord Vitelli?" Lampugnani ventured to ask him.

"If he knew you," answered Ramiro, with a scowl, "he would counsel me to
strangle some of the over-inquisitive rascals that surround me."

"Over-inquisitive?" echoed Lampugnani boldly. "Body of God! It
were enough to wake the curiosity of an ecstatic hermit to have a
mud-splashed courier from Citta di Castello at Cesena three times within
one little week."

Ramiro looked at him, and by his glance it was plain to see that the
words had jarred his temper. Whatever it was that Vitelli wrote to
Ramiro, this gentleman was not minded to divulge it.

"If you have supped, Lampugnani," said the Governor slowly, his eyes
upon his offending officer, "perhaps you will find some duty to perform
ere you seek your bed."

Lampugnani turned crimson, and for a moment seemed to hesitate. Then he
rose. He was a man of choleric aspect, and that he served under Ramiro
del' Orca was as much a danger to the Governor as to himself. He had not
the air of one whom it was wise to threaten in however veiled a manner.

"Shall I fetch you this fellow's hat ere I sleep?" he inquired, with
contemptuous insolence.

Not a word did Ramiro answer him, but his glance fastened upon
Lampugnani with an expression before which that impudent ruffian lowered
his own bold eyes. Thus for a moment; then with an awkward laugh to
cover the intimidation that he felt, Lampugnani walked heavily from the
room and banged the door after him.

There was about it all a strangeness that set my wits to work in a
mighty busy fashion. That work suffered interruption by the harsh voice
of Ramiro.

"Are you resolved, Boccadoro?" he growled at me. "Have you decided for
the motley or the cord?"

Instantly I fell into the part I was to play.

"Did I choose the latter," said I, with an assumption of sudden airiness
and such a grimace as was part and parcel of my old-time trade, "then
were I truly worthy of the former, for I should have proved myself,
indeed, a fool. Yet if I choose the former, I pray that you'll not
follow the same course of reasoning, and hold me worthy of the latter."

When he had understood its subtleties; for his wits were of a quality
that would have disgraced a calf, he roared at the conceit, and
seemingly thrown into a better humour by the promise of more such
entertainment, he bade my guards release me, and urged me to assume the
motley without more delay.

What time I was obeying him my mind was returning to that matter of
Lampugnani's words, and it is not difficult to understand how I should
arrive at the only possible conclusion they suggested. The hats of the
other messengers from Vitelli, that the officer had mentioned, had been
brought to Ramiro. The reason for this that at once arose in my mind
was that within the messenger's hat there was a second and more secret
communication for the Governor.

This secrecy and Ramiro's display of anger at seeing a hint of it
betrayed by Lampugnani struck me, not unnaturally, as suspicious. What
were these hidden communications that passed between Vitellozzo Vitelli
and the Governor of Cesena? It was a matter of which I could not pretend
to offer a solution, but, nevertheless, it was one, I thought, that
promised to repay investigation.

Ramiro grew impatient, and my reflections suffered interruption by his
rough command that I should hasten. One of the men-at-arms helped me to
truss my points, and when that was done I stepped forward--Boccadoro the
Fool once more.




CHAPTER XVII. THE SENESCHAL

For an hour or so that night I played the Fool for Messer Ramiro's
entertainment in a manner which did high justice to the fame that at
Pesaro I had earned for the name of Boccadoro.

Beginning with quip and jest and paradox, aimed now at him, now at the
officer who had remained to keep him company in his cups, now at the
servants who ministered to him, now at the guards standing at attention,
I passed on later to play the part of narrator, and I delighted his foul
and prurient mind with the story of Andreuccio da Perugia and another
of the more licentious tales of Messer Giovanni Boccacci. I crimson now
with shame at the manner in which I set myself to pander to his mood
that with my wit I might defend my life and limbs, and preserve them for
the service of my Holy Flower of the Quince in the hour of her need.

One man alone of all those present did I spare my banter. This was the
old seneschal, Miriani. He stood at his post by the buffet, and ever and
anon he would come forward to replenish Messer Ramiro's cup in obedience
to the monsters imperious orders.

What fortitude was it, I wondered, that kept the old man outwardly so
calm? His face was as the face of one who is dead, its features set and
rigid, its colour ashen. But his step was tolerably firm, and his hand
seemed to have lost the trembling that had assailed it under the first
shock of the horror he had witnessed.

As I watched him furtively I thought that were I Ramiro I should beware
of him. That frozen calm argued to me some terrible labour of the mind
beneath that livid mask. But the Governor of Cesena appeared insensible,
or else he was contemptuous of danger from that quarter. It may even
have delighted his outrageous nature to behold a man whose son he had
done to death with such brutality continue obedient and submissive to
his will, for it may have flattered his vanity by the concession that
bearing seemed to make to his grim power.

An hour went by, my second tale was done, and I was now entrancing
Messer Ramiro with some impromptu verses upon the divorce of Giovanni
Sforza, a theme set me by himself, when I was interrupted by the arrival
of a soldier, who entered unannounced.

I paled and turned cold at the cry with which Ramiro rose to greet him,
and the words he dropped, which told me that here was one of the riders
of the party that, under Lucagnolo, had been ordered to search the
country about Cattolica. Had they found Madonna?

"Messer Lucagnolo," the fellow announced, "has sent me to report to you
the failure of his search to the west and north of Cattolica. He has
beaten the country thoroughly for three leagues of the town on those two
sides, as you desired him, but unfortunately without result. He is
now spreading his search to the south, and not a house is being left
unvisited. By morning he hopes to report again to your Excellency."

A wild wave of joy swept through my soul. They had ransacked the country
west and north of Cattolica without result. Why then, assuredly, they
had missed the peasant's hut that sheltered her, and where she waited
yet for my return. Their search to the south I knew would prove equally
futile. I could have fallen on my knees in a prayer of thanksgiving had
my surroundings been other than they were.

Ramiro's eye wandered round to me and settled on me in a lowering
glance. By his face it was plain that the message disappointed him.

"I wonder," said he, "whether we could make you talk?" And from me his
eyes roamed on to the instrument of torture at the end of that long
chamber. I grew sick with fear, for if he were to do this thing, and
maim me by it, how should I avail myself or her hereafter?

"Excellency," I cried, "since you met me you have hinted at something
that I am hiding from you, at something touching which I could give you
information did I choose. What it may be passes all thought of mine. But
this I do assure you: no torture could make me tell you what I do not
know, nor is any torture needed to extract from me such information as I
may be possessed of. I do but beg that you wilt frankly question me upon
this matter, whatever it may be, and your Excellency shall be answered
to the best of my knowledge."

He looked at me as if taken aback a little by my assurance and the
seemingly transparent candour of my speech, and in his face I saw that
he believed me. A moment he hesitated yet; then--

"I am seeking knowledge concerning Madonna Paolo di Santafior," he said
presently, resuming, as he spoke, his seat at table. "As I told you, the
body, which was believed to be dead, was stolen in the night from San
Domenico. Know you aught of this?"

It may be an ignoble thing to lie, but with what other weapon was I to
fight this brigand? Surely if an exception can be made to the rule, and
a lie become a meritorious thing, such an occasion as this would surely
justify such an exception.

"I know nothing," I answered boldly, unhesitatingly, and even with a
ring of truth and sincerity that was calculated to convince, "nor can
I even believe this rumour. It is a wild story. That the body has been
stolen may be true enough. Such things occur; though he was a bold man
who laid hands upon the body of a person of such importance. But that
she lives--Gesu! that is an old wife's tale. I had, myself, the word of
the Lord Filippo's physician that she was dead."

"Nevertheless, this old wife's tale, as you dub it, is one of which I
have had confirmation. Lend me your wits, Boccadoro, and you shall
not regret it. Exercise them now, and conjecture me who could have
abstracted the body from the church. In seeking this information I am
acting in the interests of the noble House of Borgia which I serve and
to which she was to have been allied, as you well know."

I could have laughed to see how the apparent sincerity of my denial had
convinced him to such an extent that he even sought my help to discover
the true thief, and to account for his interest in the matter he lied to
me of his service to the House of Borgia.

"I will gladly lend you these wits," said I, "to disprove to you the
rumour of which you say that you have confirmation. Let us accept the
statement that the body has been stolen. That much, no doubt, is true,
for even rumours require some slight foundation. But who in all this
world could say that when the body was taken it was not dead?
Clearly but one man--he that administered the poison. And, I ask your
Excellency, would he be likely to tell the world what he had done?"

He might have answered me: "I am that man." But he did not. Instead, he
hung his head, as if pondering the words of wisdom I had uttered--words
meant to convince him of my own innocence in the matter; and this they
achieved, at least in part. He flashed me a look of sudden suspicion, it
is true; but it faded almost as soon as it shone from his brooding eye.

"Maybe I am a fool that I do not string you up and test the truth of
what you say," he grumbled. "But I incline to believe you, and you are a
merry rogue. You shall remain and have peace and comfort so long as you
amuse me. But tremble if I discover that you have sought to deceive me.
You shall have the cord first and other things after, and your death
shall be the thing you'll pray for long before it takes you from my
vengeance. If you know aught, speak now and you shall find me merciful.
Your life and liberty shall be the recompense of your honesty towards
me."

"I repeat, Excellency," I answered, without changing colour, "that all
that I know have I already told you."

He was convinced, I think, for the time being.

"Get you gone, then," he bade me. "I have other business to deal with
ere I sleep. Mariani, see that Boccadoro is well lodged."

The old man bowed, and lifting a torch from its socket, he silently
motioned me to go with him. I made Messer Ramiro a profound obeisance,
and withdrew in the wake of the seneschal.

He led me up a flight of stairs that rose from the hall and along a
gallery that ran half round it, then plunging down a corridor he halted
presently, and, opening a door, ushered me into a tolerably furnished
room.

A servant followed hanging the clothes that I had worn when I arrived.

The old man lingered a moment after the servant had withdrawn, and his
hollow eyes rested on me for a second. I thought that he was on the
point of saying something, and I waited returning his glance with one
that quailed before the anguish of his own. I feared to speak, to offer
an expression of the sympathy that filled my heart; for in that strange
place I could not tell how far a man was to be trusted--even a man so
wronged as this one. On his own part it may be that a like doubt beset
him concerning me, for in the end he departed as he had come, no word
having passed his ashen lips.

Left alone, I surveyed my surroundings by the light of the taper he had
left in the iron sconce on the wall. The single window overlooked the
courtyard, so that even had I been disposed and able to cut through the
iron that barred it, I should but succeed in falling into the hands of
the guards who abounded in that nest of infamy.

So that, for the night at least, the notion of flight must be abandoned.
What the morrow would bring forth we must wait and see. Perhaps some way
of escape would offer itself. Then my thoughts returned to Paola, and I
was tortured by surmises as to her fate, and chiefly as to how she could
have eluded the search that must have been made for her in the hut where
I had left her. Had the peasant befriended her, I wondered; and what
did she think of my protracted absence? I sat on the edge of the bed and
gave rein to my conjectures. The noises in the castle had all ceased,
and still I sat on, unconscious of time, my taper burning low.

It may have been midnight when I was startled by the sound of a stealthy
step in the corridor near my door. A heavy footfall I should have left
unheeded, but this soft tread aroused me on the instant, and I sat
listening.

It halted at my door, and was succeeded by a soft, scratching sound.
Noiselessly I rose, and with ready hands I waited, prepared, in the
instinct of self-preservation, to fall upon the intruder, however futile
the act might be. But the door did not open as I expected. Instead, the
scratching sound continued, growing slightly louder. Then it occurred to
me, at last, that whoever came might be a friend craving admittance, and
proceeding stealthily that others in the castle might not overhear him.

Swiftly I crossed to the door, and opened. On the threshold a dark
figure straightened itself from a stooping posture, and the light of the
taper behind me fell on a face of a pallor that seemed to glisten in its
intensity. It was the face of Mariani, the seneschal of the Castle of
Cessna.

One glance we exchanged, and intuitively I seemed to apprehend the
motive of this midnight visit. He came either to bring me aid or to seek
mine, with vengeance for his guerdon. I stood aside, and silently he
entered my room and closed the door.

"Quench your taper," he bade me in a husky whisper.

Without hesitation I obeyed him, a strange excitement thrilling me. For
a second we stood in the dark, then another light gleamed as he plucked
away the cloak that masked a lanthorn which he had brought with him. He
set the lanthorn on the floor, and held the cloak in his hand, ready
at a moment's notice to conceal the light in its folds. Then pulling me
down beside him on the bed, where he had perched himself:

"My friend," said he, "it may be that I bring you assistance."

"Speak, then," I bade him. "You shall not find me slow to act if there
is the need or the way."

"So I had surmised," he said. "Are you not that same Boccadoro, Fool of
the Court of Pesaro, who donned the Lord Giovanni's armour and rode out
to do battle in his stead?"

I answered him that I was that man.

"I have heard the tale," said he. "Indeed, all Italy has heard it, and
knows you for a man of steel, as strong and audacious as you are cunning
and resourceful. I know against what desperate odds you fought that day,
and how you overcame this terrible Ramiro. This it is that leads me to
hope that in the service of your own ends you may become the instrument
of my vengeance."

"Unfold your project, man," I muttered, fiercely almost, in my burning
eagerness. "Let me hear what you would have me do."

He did not answer me until a sob had shaken his old frame.

"That boy," he muttered brokenly, "that golden-haired angel sent me for
the consolation of my decaying years, that lad whom Ramiro destroyed so
foully and wantonly, was my son. Futile though the attempt had proved, I
had certainly set my hands at the tyrants neck, but that I founded hopes
on you of a surer and more terrible revenge. That thought has manned me
and upheld me when anguish was near to slaying me outright. To see the
boy burn so under my very eyes! God of mercy and pity! That I should
have lived so long!"

"Your child burned but a moment, suffered but an instant; for the
deed, Ramiro will burn in Hell through countless generations, through
interminable ages."

It was a paltry consolation, perhaps, but it was the best that then
occurred to me.

"Meanwhile," I begged him, "do you tell me what you would have me do."

I urged him to it that he might, thereby, suffer his mind to rest a
moment from pondering that ghastly thing that he had witnessed, that
scene that would live before his eyes until they closed in their last
sleep.

"You heard Lampugnani quip Ramiro with the fact that three messengers
have ridden desperately within the week from Citta di Castello to
Cesena, and you heard, perhaps, his obscure reference to the hat?"

"I heard both, and both I weighed," said I. The old man looked at me as
if surprised.

"And what," he asked, "was the conclusion you arrived at?"

"Why, simply this: that whilst the messenger bore some letter from
Vitelli to Ramiro that should serve to lull the suspicions of any who,
wondering at so much traffic between these two, should be moved to take
a peep into those missives, the true letter with which the courier rides
is concealed within the lining of his hat--probably unknown even to
himself."

He stared at me as though I had been a wizard.

"Messer Boccadoro--" he began.

"My name," I corrected him, "is Biancomonte--Lazzaro Biancomonte."

"Whatever be your name," he returned, "of the quality of your wits there
can be no question. You have guessed for yourself the half of what I was
come to tell you. Has your shrewdness borne you any further? Have you
concluded aught concerning the nature of those letters?"

"I have concluded that it might repay some trouble to discover what is
contained in letters that are sent with so much secrecy. I can conceive
nothing that might lie between the Lord of Citta di Castello and this
ruffian of Cesena, and yet--treason lurks often where least it is
expected, and treason makes stranger bed-fellows than misfortune."

"Lampugnani was no fool, and yet a great fool," the old man murmured. He
surmised what you have surmised. With each of the messengers Ramiro
has dealt in the same manner. He has sent each to be fed and refreshed
whilst waiting to return with the answer he was penning. For their
refreshment he has ordered a very full, stout wine--not drugged, for
that they might discover upon awaking; but a wine that of itself would
do the work of setting them to sleep very soundly. Then, when all slept,
and only he remained at table, like the drunkard that he is, it has been
his habit to descend himself to the kitchen and possess himself of
the messenger's hat. With this he has returned to the hall, opened the
lining and withdrawn a letter.

"Then, as I suppose, he has penned his answer, thrust it into the
lining, where the other one had been, and secured it, as it was before,
with his own hands. He has returned the hat to the place from whence he
took it, and when the courier awakens in the morning there is another
letter put into his hand, and he is bidden to bear it to Vitelli."

He paused a moment; then continued: "Lampugnani must have suspected
something and watched Ramiro to make sure that his suspicions were well
founded. In that he was wise, but he was a fool to allow Ramiro to see
what lie he had discovered. Already he has paid the penalty. He is lying
with a dagger in his throat, for an hour ago Ramiro stabbed him while he
slept."

I shuddered. What a place of blood was this! Could it be that Cesare
Borgia had no knowledge of what things were being performed by his
Governor of Cesena?

"Poor Lampugnani!" I sighed. "God rest his soul."

"I doubt but he is in Hell," answered Mariani, without emotion. "He
was as great a villain as his master, and he has gone to answer for his
villainy even as this ugly monster of a Ramiro shall. But let Lampugnani
be. I am not come to talk of him.

"Returning from his bloody act, Ramiro ordered me to bed. I went, and
as I passed Lampugnani's room I saw the door standing wide. It was thus
that I learnt what had befallen. I remembered his words concerning the
hat and I remembered old suspicions of my own aroused by the thought
of the potent wine which Ramiro had ordered me to see given to the
couriers. I sped back to the gallery that overlooks the hall. Ramiro was
absent, and I surmised at once that he was gone to the kitchen. Then was
it that I thought of you and of what service you might render if things
were indeed as I now more than suspected. Like an inspiration it came to
me how I might prepare your way. I ran down to the hall, sweating in
my terror that he should return ere I had performed the task I went on.
From the buffet I drew a flagon of that same stout wine that Ramiro used
upon his messengers. I ripped away the seal and crimson cord by which it
is distinguished, and placing it on the table I removed the flagon I had
set for him before I had first departed.

"Then I fled back to the gallery, and from the shadows I watched for his
return. Soon he came, bearing a hat in his hand; and from that hat he
took a letter, all as you have surmised. He read it, and I saw his face
lighten with a fierce excitement. Then he helped himself freely to wine,
and drank thirstily, for all that he was overladen with it. One of the
qualities of this wine is that in quenching thirst it produces yet a
greater. Ramiro drank again, then sat with the letter before him in the
light of the single taper I had left burning. Presently he grew sleepy.
He shook himself and drank again. Then again he sat conning his epistle,
and thus I left him and came hither in quest of you."

There followed a pause.

"Well?" I asked at length. "What is it you would have me do? Stab him as
he sleeps?"

He shook his head. "That were too sweet and sudden a death for him. If
it had been no more than a matter of that, my old arms would have lent
me strength enough. But think you it would repay me for having seen my
boy pinned by that monster's pike to the burning logs?"

"What is it, then, you ask of me?"

"If that letter were indeed the treasonable document we account it; if
its treason should be aimed at Cesare Borgia--it could scarce be aimed
at another--would it not be a sweet thing to obtain possession of it?"

"Aye, but when he wakes to-morrow and finds it gone--what then? You know
this Governor of Cesena well enough to be assured that he would ransack
the castle, torture, rack, burn and flay us all until the missive were
forthcoming."

"That," he groaned, "is what deterred me. If I had the means of getting
the letter sent to Cesare Borgia, or of escaping with it myself from
Cesena, I should not have hesitated. Cesare Borgia is lying at Faenza,
and I could ride there in a day. But it would be impossible for me to
leave the place before morning. I have duties to perform in the town,
and I might get away whilst I am about them, but before then the letter
will have been missed, and no one will be allowed to leave the citadel."

"Why then," said I, "the only hope lies in abstracting that letter in
such a manner that he shall not suspect the loss; and that seems a very
desperate hope."

We sat in silence for some moments, during which I thought intently to
little purpose.

"Does he sleep yet, think you?" I asked presently.

"Assuredly he must."

"And if I were to go to the gallery, is there any fear that I should be
discovered by others?"

"None. All at Cesena are asleep by now."

"Then," said I, rising, "let us take a look at him. Who knows what may
suggest itself? Come." I moved towards the door, and he took up his
lanthorn and followed me, enjoining me to tread lightly.




CHAPTER XVIII. THE LETTER


On tiptoe I crept down that corridor to the gallery above the
banqueting-hall, secure from sight in the enveloping darkness, and
intent upon allowing no sound to betray my presence, lest Ramiro should
have awakened. Behind me, treading as lightly, came Messer Mariani.

Thus we gained the gallery. I leaned against the stout oaken balustrade,
and looked down into the black pit of the hall, broken in the centre by
the circle of light from the two tapers that burnt upon the table. The
other torches had all been quenched.

At the table sat Messer Ramiro, his head fallen forward and sideways
upon his right arm which was outstretched and limp along the board.
Before him lay a paper which I inferred to be the letter whose
possession might mean so much.

I could hear the old man breathing heavily beside me as I leaned there
in the dark, and sought to devise a means by which that paper might be
obtained. No doubt it would be the easiest thing in the world to snatch
it away without disturbing him. But there was always to be considered
that when he waked and missed the letter we should have to reckon with
his measures to regain possession of it.

It became necessary, therefore, to go about it in a manner that should
leave him unsuspicious of the theft. A little while I pondered this,
deeming the thing desperate at first. Then an idea came to me on a
sudden, and turning to Mariani I asked him could he find me a sheet of
paper of about the size of that letter held by Ramiro. He answered me
that he could, and bade me wait there until he should return.

I waited, watching the sleeper below, my excitement waxing with every
second of the delay. Ramiro was snoring now--a loud, sonorous snore that
rang like a trumpet-blast through that vast empty hall.

At last Mariani returned, bringing the sheet of paper I had asked for,
and he was full of questions of what I intended. But neither the place
nor the time was one in which to stand unfolding plans. Every moment
wasted increased the uncertainty of the success of my design. Someone
might come, or Ramiro might awaken despite the potency of the wine he
had been given--for on so well-seasoned a toper the most potent of wines
could have but a transient effect.

So I left Mariani, and moved swiftly and silently to the head of the
staircase.

I had gone down two steps, when, in the dark, I missed the third, the
bells in my cap jangling at the shock. I brought my teeth together and
stood breathless in apprehension, fearing that the noise might awaken
him, and cursing myself for a careless fool to have forgotten those
infernal bells. Above me I heard a warning hiss from old Mariani,
which, if anything, increased my dread. But Ramiro snored on, and I was
reassured.

A moment I stood debating whether I should go on, or first return to
divest myself of that cap of mine. In the end I decided to pursue the
latter course. The need for swift and sudden movement might come ere
I was done with this adventure, and those bells might easily be the
undoing of me. So back I went to the surprise and infinite dismay
of Mariani until I had whispered in his ear the reason. We retreated
together to the corridor, and there, with his help, I removed my
jangling headgear, which I left him to restore to my chamber.

Whilst he went upon that errand I returned once more on mine, and this
time I gained the foot of the stairs without mishap, and stood in the
hall. Ramiro's back was towards me. On my right stood the tall buffet
from which the boy had fetched him wine that evening; this I marked out
as the cover to which I must fly in case of need.

A second I stood hesitating, still considering my course; then I went
softly forward, my feet making no sound in the rushes of the floor. I
had covered half the distance, and, growing bolder, I was advancing more
swiftly and with less caution, when suddenly my knee came in contact
with a three-legged stool that had been carelessly left where none would
have suspected it. The blow may have hurt afterwards, indeed, I was
conscious of a soreness at the knee; but at the moment I had no thought
or care for physical pain. The bench went over with a crash, and for all
that the rushes may have deadened in part the sound of its fall, to my
nervous ear it boomed like the report of a cannon through the stillness
of the place.

I turned cold as ice, and the sweat of fear sprang out to moisten
me from head to foot. Instantly I dropped on all fours, lest Ramiro,
awaking suddenly, should turn; and I waited for the least sign that
should render advisable my seeking the cover of the buffet. In the
gallery above I could picture old Mariani clenching his teeth at the
noise, his knees knocking together, and his face white with horror; for
Ramiro's snoring had abruptly ceased. It came to an end with a choking
catch of the breath, and I looked to see him raise his head and start up
to ascertain what it was that had aroused him. But he never stirred,
and for all that he no longer snored, his breathing continued heavy and
regular, so that I was cheered by the assurance that I had but disturbed
his slumber, not dispelled it.

Yet, since I had disturbed and lightened it, a greater precaution was
now necessary, and I waited there for some ten minutes maybe, a period
that must have proved a very eternity to the old man upstairs. At last I
had the reward of hearing the snoring recommence; lightly at first, but
soon with all its former fullness.

I rose and proceeded now with a caution that must guard me from any
more unlooked-for obstacles. Moreover, as I approached, the darkness was
dispelled more and more at every stride in the direction of the light.
At last I reached the table, and stood silent as a spectre at Ramiro's
side, looking down upon the features of the sleeping man.

His face was flushed, and his tawny hair tumbled about his damp brow;
his lips quivered as he breathed. For a moment, as I stood gazing on
him, there was murder in my mind. His dagger hung temptingly in his
girdle. To have drawn it and rid the world of this monster might have
been a worthy deed, acceptable in the eyes of Heaven. But how should
it profit me? Rather must it prove my destruction at the hands of his
followers, and to be destroyed just then, with Paola depending upon me,
and life full of promise once I regained my liberty, was something I had
no mind to risk.

My eyes wandered to the letter lying on the table. If this were of the
nature we suspected, it should prove a safer tool for his destruction.

To read it as it lay was an easy matter, and it came to me then that
ere I decided upon my course it might be well that I should do so. If
by chance it were innocent of treason, why, then, I might resort to the
risk of that other and more desperate weapon--his own dagger.

At the foot of the short flight of steps that led from the hall to the
courtyard I could hear the slow pacing of the sentry placed there by
Ramiro. But unless he were summoned, it was extremely unlikely that the
fellow would leave his post, so that, I concluded, I had little to fear
from that quarter. I drew back and taking up a position behind Ramiro's
chair--a position more favourable to escape in the untoward event of
his awaking--I craned forward to read the letter over his shoulder. I
thanked God in that hour for two things: that my sight was keen, and
that Vitellozzo Vitelli wrote a large, bold hand.

Scarcely breathing, and distracted the while by the mad racing of my
pulses, I read; and this, as nearly as I can remember, is what the
letter contained:

"ILLUSTRIOUS RAMIRO--Your answer to my last letter reached me
safely, and it rejoiced me to learn that you had found a man for our
undertaking. See that you have him in readiness, for the hour of action
is at hand. Cesare goes south on the second or third day of the New
Year, and he has announced to me his intention of passing through Cesena
on his way, there to investigate certain charges of maladministration
which have been preferred against you. These concern, in particular,
certain misappropriation of grain and stores, and an excessive severity
of rule, of which complaints have reached him. From this you will gather
that out of a spirit of self-defence, if not to earn the reward which
we have bound ourselves to pay you, it is expedient that you should not
fail us. The occasion of the Duke's visit to Cesena will be, of all, the
most propitious for our purpose. Have your arbalister posed, and may God
strengthen his arm and render true his aim to the end that Italy may
be rid of a tyrant. I commend myself to your Excellency, and I shall
anxiously await your news.

"VITELLOZZO VITELLI."

Here indeed were my hopes realised. A plot there was, and it aimed at
nothing less than the Duca Valentino's life. Let that letter be borne to
Cesare Borgia at Faenza, and I would warrant that within a dozen hours
of his receipt of it he would so dispose that all who had suffered by
the cruel tyranny of Ramiro del' Orca would be avenged, and those
who were still suffering would be relieved. In this letter lay my own
freedom and the salvation of Madonna Paula, and this letter it behoved
me at once to become possessed. It was a safer far alternative than that
dagger of his.

A moment I stood pondering the matter for the last time, then stepping
sideways and forward, so that I was again beside him, I put out my hand
and swiftly whipped the letter from the table. Then standing very still,
to prevent the slightest rustle, I remained a second or two observing
him. He snored on, undisturbed by my light-fingered action.

I drew away a pace or two, as lightly as I might, and folding the letter
I thrust it into my girdle. Then from my open doublet I drew the sheet
that Mariani had supplied me, and, advancing again, I placed it on the
table in a position almost identical with that which the original had
occupied, saving that it was removed a half-finger's breadth from his
hand, for I feared to allow it actually to touch him lest it should
arouse him.

Holding my breath, for now was I come to the most desperate part of my
undertaking, I caught up one of the tapers and set fire to a corner of
the sheet. That done, I left the candle lying on its side against
the paper, so as to convey the impression to him, when presently he
awakened, that it had fallen from it sconce. Then, without waiting for
more, I backed swiftly away, watching the progress of the flames as they
devoured the paper and presently reached his hand and scorched it.

At that I dropped again on all fours, and having gained the corner of
the buffet, I crouched there, even as with a sudden scream of pain he
woke and sprang upright, shaking his blistered hand. As a matter of
instinct he looked about to see what it was had hurt him. Then his eyes
fell upon the charred paper on the table, and the fallen candle, which
was still burning across one end of it, and even to the dull wits of
Ramiro del' Orca the only possible conclusion was suggested. He stared
at it a moment, then swept that flimsy sheet of ashes from the table
with an oath, and sank back once more into his great leathern chair.

"Body of God!" he swore aloud, "it is well that I had read it a dozen
times. Better that it should have been burnt than that someone should
have read it whilst I slept."

The idea of such a possibility seemed to rouse him to fresh action, for
seizing the fallen candle and replacing it in its socket, he rose once
more, and holding it high above his head he looked about the hall.

The light it shed may have been feeble, and the shadows about my buffet
thick; but, as I have said, my doublet was open, and some ray of that
weak candlelight must have found out the white shirt that was showing
at my breast, for with a sudden cry he pushed back his chair and took a
step towards me, no doubt intent upon investigating that white something
that he saw gleaming there.

I waited for no more. I had no fancy to be caught in that corner,
utterly at his mercy. I stood up suddenly.

"Magnificent, it is I," I announced, with a calm and boundless
effrontery.

The boldness of it may have staggered him a little, for he paused,
although his eyes were glowing horribly with the frenzy that possessed
him, the half of which was drunkenness, the other fear and wrath lest I
should have seen his treacherous communication from Vitelli.

"What make you here?" he questioned threateningly.

"I thirsted, Excellency," I answered glibly. "I thirsted, and I
bethought me of this buffet where you keep your wine."

He continued to eye me, some six paces off, his half-drunken wits no
doubt weighing the plausibility of my answer. At last--

"If that be all, what cause had you to hide?" he asked me shrewdly.

"One of your candles fell over and awakened you," said I. "I feared you
might resent my presence, and so I hid."

"You came not near the table?" he inquired. "You saw nothing of the
paper that I held? Nay, by the Host! I'll take no risks. You were born
'neath an unlucky star, fool; for be your reason for your presence here
no more than you assert, you have come in a season that must be fatal to
you."

He set the candle on the table, then carrying his hand to his girdle he
withdrew it sharply, and I caught the gleam of a dagger.

In that instant I thought of Mariani waiting above, and like a flash it
came to me that if I could outpace this drunken brigand, and, gaining
the gallery well ahead of him, transfer that letter to the old man's
hands, I should not die in vain. Cesare Borgia would avenge me, and
Madonna Paola, at least, would be safe from this villain. If Mariani
could reach Valentino at Faenza, I would answer for it that within
four-and-twenty hours Messer Ramiro del' Orca would be the banner on
that ghastly beam that he facetiously dubbed his flagstaff; and he would
be the blackest, dirtiest banner that ever yet had fluttered there.

The thought conceived in the twinkling of an eye, I acted upon without
a second's hesitation. Ere Ramiro had taken his first step towards me,
I had sprung to the stairs and I was leaping up them with the frantic
speed of one upon whose heels death is treading closely.

A singular, fierce joy was blent with my measure of fear; a joy at the
thought that even now, in this extremity, I was outwitting him, for
never a doubt had he that the burnt paper he had found on the table was
all that was left of Vitelli's letter. His fears were that I might have
read it, but never a suspicion crossed his mind of such a trick as I had
played upon him.

So I sped on, the gigantic Ramiro blundering after me, panting and
blaspheming, for although powerful, his bulk and the wine he had taken
left him no nimbleness. The distance between us widened, and if only
Mariani would have the presence of mind to wait for me at the mouth of
the passage, all would be as I could wish it before his dagger found my
heart.

I was assuring myself of this when in the dark I stumbled, and
striking my legs against a stair I hurtled forward. I recovered almost
immediately, but, in my frenzy of haste to make up for the instant lost,
I stumbled a second time ere I was well upon my feet.

With a roar Ramiro must have hurled himself forward, for I felt my ankle
caught in a grip from which there was no escaping, and I was roughly and
brutally dragged back and down those stairs; now my head, now my breast
beating against the steps as I descended them one by one.

But even in that hour the letter was my first thought, and I found a way
to thrust it farther under my girdle so that it should not be seen.

At last I reached the hall, half-stunned, and with all the misery of
defeat and the certainty of the futility of my death to further torture
my last moments. Over me stood Ramiro, his dagger upheld, ready to
strike.

"Dog!" he taunted me, "your sands are run."

"Mercy, Magnificent," I gasped. "I have done nothing to deserve your
poniard."

He laughed brutally, delaying his stroke that he might prolong my agony
for his drunken entertainment.

"Address your prayers to Heaven," he mocked me, "and let them concern
your soul."

And then, like a flash of inspiration came the words that should delay
his hand.

"Spare me," I cried "for I am in mortal sin."

Impious, abandoned villain, though he was, he said too much when he
boasted that he feared neither God nor Devil. He was prone to forget
his God, and the lessons that as a babe he had learnt at his mother's
knee--for I take it that even Ramiro del' Orca had once been a babe--but
deep down in his soul there had remained the fear of Hell and an almost
instinctive obedience to the laws of Mother Church. He could perform
such ruthless cruelties as that of hurling a page into the fire to
punish his clumsiness; he could rack and stab and hang men with the
least shadow of compunction or twinge of conscience, but to slay a man
who professed himself to be in mortal sin was a deed too appalling even
for this ruthless butcher.

He hesitated a second, then he lowered his hand, his face telling me
clearly how deeply he grudged me the respite which, yet, he dared not do
other than accord me.

"Where shall I find me a priest?" he grumbled. "Think you the Citadel of
Cesena is a monastery? I will wait while you make an act of contrition
for your sins. It is all the shrift I can afford you. And get it done,
for it is time I was abed. You shall have five minutes in which to clear
your soul."

By this it seemed to me--as it may well seem to you--that matters were
but little mended, and instead of employing the respite he accorded me
in the pious collecting of thoughts which he enjoined, I sat up--very
sore from my descent of the stairs--and employed those precious moments
in putting forward arguments to turn him from, his murderous purpose.

"I have lived too ungodly a life," I protested, "to be able to squeeze
into Paradise through so narrow a tate. As you would hope for your own
ultimate salvation, Excellency, I do beseech you not to imperil mine."

This disposed him, at least, to listen to me, and proceeded to assure
him of the harmless nature of my visit to the hall in quest of wine to
quench my thirst. I was running the grave risk of dying with lies on my
lips, but I was too desperate to give the matter thought just then. His
mood seemed to relent; the delay, perhaps, had calmed his first access
of passion, and he was grown more reasonable. But when Ramiro cooled he
was, perhaps, more malignant than ever, for it meant a return to
natural condition, and Ramiro's natural condition was one of cruelty
unsurpassed.

"It may be as you say," he answered me at last, sheathing his dagger,
"and at least you have my word that I will not slay you without first
assuring myself that you have lied. For to-night you shall remain in
durance. To-morrow we will apply the question to you."

The hope that had been reviving in my breast fell dead once more, and
I turned cold at that threat. And yet, between now and to-morrow,
much might betide, and I had cause for thankfulness, perhaps, for this
respite. Thus I sought to cheer myself. But I fear I failed. To-morrow
he would torture me, not so much to ascertain whether I had spoken
truly, but because to his diseased mind it afforded diversion to witness
a man's anguish. No doubt it was that had urged him now to spare my life
and accord me this merciless piece of mercy.

In a loud voice he called the sentry who was pacing below; and in a
moment the man appeared in answer to that summons.

"You will take this knave to the chamber set apart for him up there, and
you will leave him secure under lock and bar, bringing me the key of his
door."

The fellow informed himself which was the chamber, then turning to me he
curtly bade me go with him. Thus was I haled back to my room, with the
promise of horrors on the morrow, but with the night before me in which
to scheme and pray for some miracle that might yet save me. But the days
of miracles were long past. I lay on my bed and deplored with many a
sigh that bitter fact. And if aught had been wanting to increase the
weight of fear and anguish on my already over-burdened mind, and to aid
in what almost seemed an infernal plot to utterly distract me, I had it
in fresh, wild conjectures touching Madonna Paola. Where indeed could
she be that Ramiro's men had failed to find her for all that they had
scoured that part of the country in which I had left her to wait for my
return? What if, by now, worse had befallen her than the capture with
which Ramiro's lieutenant was charged?

With such doubts as these to haunt me, fretted as I was by my utter
inability to take a step in her service, I lay. There for an hour or
so in such agony of mind as is begotten only of suspense. In my girdle
still reposed the treasonable letter from Vitelli to Ramiro, a mighty
weapon with which to accomplish the butcher's overthrow. But how was I
to wield it imprisoned here?

I wondered why Mariani had not returned, only to remember that the
soldier who had locked me in had carried the key of my prison-chamber to
Ramiro.

Suddenly the stillness was disturbed by a faint tap at my door. My
instincts and my reason told me it must be Mariani at last. In an
instant I had leapt from the bed and whispered through the keyhole:

"Who is there?"

"It is I--Mariani--the seneschal," came the old man's voice, very
softly, but nevertheless distinctly. "They have taken the key."

I groaned, then in a gust of passion I fell to cursing Ramiro for that
precaution.

"You have the letter?" came Mariani's voice again.

"Aye, I have it still," I answered.

"Have you seen what it contains?"

"A plot to assassinate the Duke--no less. Enough to get this bloody
Ramiro broken on the wheel."

I was answered by a sound that was as a gasp of malicious joy. Then the
old man's voice added:

"Can you pass it under the door? There is a sufficient gap."

I felt, and found that he was right; I could pass the half of my hand
underneath. I took the letter and thrust it through. His hands fastened
on it instantly, almost snatching it from my fingers before they were
ready to release it.

"Have courage," he bade me. "Listen. I shall endeavour to leave Cesena
in the morning, and I shall ride straight for Faenza. If I find the Duke
there when I arrive, he should be here within some twelve or fourteen
hours of my departure. Fence with Ramiro, temporise if you can till
then, and all will be well with you."

"I will do what I can," I answered him. "But if he slays me in the
meantime, at least I shall have the satisfaction of knowing that he will
not be long in following me."

"May God shield you," he said fervently.

"May God speed you," I answered him, with a still greater fervour.

That night, as you may well conceive, I slept but little, and that
little ill. The morning, instead of relieving the fears that in the
darkness had been with me, seemed to increase them. For now was the time
for Mariani to act, and I was fearful as to how he might succeed. I
was full of doubts lest some obstacle should have arisen to prevent his
departure from Cesena, and I spent my morning in wearisome speculation.

I took an almost childish satisfaction in the thought that since, being
a prisoner, I could no longer count myself the Fool of the Court
of Cesena, I was free to strip the motley and assume the more sober
garments in which I had been taken, and which--as you may recall--had
been placed in my chamber on the previous evening. It was the very
plainest raiment. For doublet I wore a buff brigandine, quilted and
dagger-proof, and caught at the waist by a girdle of hammered steel; my
wine-coloured hose was stout and serviceable, as were my long boots of
untanned leather. Yet prouder was I of this sober apparel than ever king
of his ermine.

It may have been an hour or so past noon when, at last, my solitude
was invaded by a soldier who came to order me into the presence of the
Governor. I had been sitting at the window, leaning against the bars and
looking out at the desolate white landscape, for there had been a heavy
fall of snow in the night, which reminded me--as snow ever did--of my
first meeting with Madonna Paola.

I rose upon the instant, and my fears rose with me. But I kept a bold
front as I went down into the hall, where Ramiro and the blackguards of
his Court were sitting, with three or four men-at-arms at attention by
the door. Close to the pulleys appertaining to the torture of the cord
stood two leather-clad ruffians--Ramiro's executioners.

At the head of the board, which was still strewn with fragments of
food-for they had but dined--sat Ramiro del' Orca. With him were half
a dozen of his officers, whose villainous appearance pronounced them
worthy of their brutal leader. The air was heavy with the pungent odour
of viands. I looked round for Mariani, and I took some comfort from the
fact that he was absent. Might heaven please that he was even then on
his way to Faenza.

Ramiro watched my advance with a smile in which mockery was blent with
satisfaction, for all that of the resumption of my proper raiment he
seemed to take no heed. No doubt he had dined well, and he was now
disposing himself to be amused.

"Messer Bocadaro," said he, when I had come to a standstill, "there was
last night a matter that was not cleared up between us and concerning
which I expressed an intention of questioning you to-day. I should
proceed to do so at once, were it not that there is yet another matter
on which I am, if possible, still more desirous you should tell us all
you know. Once already have you evaded my questions with answers which
at the time I half believed. Even now I do not say that I utterly
disbelieve them, but I wish to assure myself that you told the truth;
for if you lied, why then we may still be assisted by such information
the cord shall squeeze from you. I am referring to the mysterious
disappearance of Madonna Paola di Santafior--a disappearance of which
you have assured me that you knew nothing, being even in ignorance of
the fact that the lady was not really dead. I had confidently expected
that the party searching for Madonna Paola would have succeeded ere this
in finding her. But this morning my hopes suffered disappointment. My
men have returned empty-handed once more."

"For which mercy may Heaven be praised!" I burst out.

He scowled at me; then he laughed evilly.

"My men have returned--all save three. Captain Lucagnolo with two of
his followers, has undertaken to go beyond the area I appointed for the
search, and to proceed to the village of Cattolica. While he is pursuing
his inquiries there, I have resolved to pursue my own here. I now
call upon you, Boccadoro, to tell us what you know of Madonna Paola's
whereabouts."

"I know nothing," I answered stoutly. "I am prepared to take oath that I
know nothing of her whereabouts."

"Tell me, then, at least," said he, "where you bestowed her."

I shook my head, pressing my lips tight.

"Do you think that I would tell you if I had the knowledge?" was the
scornful question with which I answered him. "You may pursue your
inquiries as you will and where you will, but I pray God they may all
prove as futile as must those that you would pursue here and upon my own
person."

This was how I fenced with him, this was the manner in which I followed
Mariani's sound advice that I should temporise! Oh! I know that my words
were the words of a fool, yet no fear that Ramiro would inspire me could
have restrained them.

There was a murmur at the table, and his fellows turned their eyes on
Ramiro to see how he would receive this bearding. He smiled quietly, and
raising his hand he made a sign to the executioners.

Rude hands seized me from behind, and the doublet was torn from my back
by fingers that never paused to untruss my points.

They turned me about, and hurried me along until I stood under the
pulleys of the torture, and one of the men held me securely whilst
the other passed the cords about my wrists. Then both the executioners
stepped back, to be ready to hoist me at the Governor's signal.

He delayed it, much as an epicure delays the consumption of a delectable
morsel, heightening by suspense the keen desire of his palate. He
watched me closely, and had my lips quivered or my eyelids fluttered, he
would have hailed with joy such signs of weakness. But I take pride in
truthfully writing that I stood bold and impassively before him, and if
I was pale I thank Heaven that pallor was the habit of my countenance,
so that from that he could gather no satisfaction. And standing there, I
gave him back look for look, and waited.

"For the last time, Boccadoro," he said slowly, attempting by words
to shake a demeanour that was proof against the impending facts of
the cord, "I ask you to remember what must be the consequences of this
stubbornness. If not at the first hoist, why then at the second or the
third, the torture will compel you to disclose what you may know. Would
you not be better advised to speak at once, while your limbs are soundly
planted in their sockets, rather than let yourself be maimed, perhaps
for life, ere you will do so?"

There was a stir of hoofs without. They thundered on the planks of the
drawbridge and clattered on the stones of the courtyard. The thought of
Cesare Borgia rose to my mind. But never did drowning man clutch at
a more illusory straw. Cold reason quenched my hope at once. If the
greatest imaginable success attended Mariani's journey, the Duke could
not reach Cesena before midnight, and to that it wanted some ten hours
at least. Moreover, the company that came was small to judge by the
sound--a half-dozen horses at the most.

But Ramiro's attention had been diverted from me by the noise.
Half-turning in his chair, he called to one of the men-at-arms to
ascertain who came. Before the fellow could do his bidding, the door was
thrust open and Lucagnolo appeared on the threshold, jaded and worn with
hard riding.

A certain excitement arose in me at sight of him, despite my confidence
that he must be returning empty-handed.

Ramiro rose, pushed back his chair and advanced towards the new-comer.

"Well?" he demanded. "What news?"

"Excellency, the girl is here."

That answer seemed to turn me into stone, so great was the shock of this
sudden shattering of the confidence that had sustained me.

"My search in the country failing," pursued the captain, as he came
forward, "I made bold to exceed your orders by pushing my inquiries as
far as the village of Cattolica. There I found her after some little
labour."

Surely I dreamt. Surely, I told myself, this was not possible. There was
some mistake. Lucagnolo had drought some wench whom he believed to be
Madonna Paola.

But even as I was assuring myself of this, the door opened again, and
between two men-at-arms, white as death, her garments stained with mud
and all but reduced to rags, and her eyes wild with a great fear, came
my beloved Paola.

With a sound that was as a grunt of satisfaction, Ramiro strode forward
to meet her. But her eyes travelled past him and rested upon me,
standing there between the leather-clad executioners with the cords of
the torture pinioning my wrists, and I saw the anguish deepen in their
blue depths.




CHAPTER XIX. DOOMED

Across the length of that hall our eyes met--hers and mine--and held
each other's glances. To me the room and all within it formed an
indistinct and misty picture, from out of which there clearly gleamed my
Paola's sweet, white face.

All at the table had risen with Ramiro, and now, copying their leader,
they bared their heads in outward token of such respect as certainly
would have been felt by any men less abandoned than were they before so
much saintly beauty and distress.

Lucagnolo had stepped aside, and Ramiro was now bowing low and
ceremoniously before Madonna. His face I could not see, since his back
was towards me, but his tones, as they floated across the hall to where
I stood, came laden with subservience.

"Madonna, I give praise and thanks to Heaven for this," said he. "I was
afflicted by the gravest misgivings for your safety, and I am more than
thankful to behold you safe and sound."

There was a hypocritical flavour of courtliness about his words, and
a mincing of his tones that suggested the efforts of a bull-calf to
imitate the warbling of a throstle.

Madonna paid him no heed; indeed, she appeared not to have heard him,
for her eyes continued to look past him and at me. At last her lips
parted, and although she scarcely seemed to raise her voice above a
whisper, the word uttered reached my ears across the stillness of the
great room, and the word was "Lazzaro!"

At mention of my name, and at the tone in which it was uttered--a tone
that betrayed same measure of what was in her heart--Ramiro wheeled
sharply in my direction, his brows wrinkling. A certain craftiness he
had, for all that I ever accounted him the dullest-witted clod that ever
rose to his degree of honour. He must have realised how expedient it was
that in all he did he should present himself to Madonna in a favourite
light.

"Release him," he bade the executioners that held me, and in an instant
I was set free. The order given, he turned again to Madonna.

"You have been torturing him," she cried, and her words were hard and
fierce, her eyes blazing. "You shall repent it, Ser Ramiro. The Lord
Cesare Borgia shall hear of it."

Her anger betrayed her more and more, and however hidden it may have
been to her, to me it was exceeding clear that she was encompassing my
destruction. Ramiro laughed easily.

"Madonna, you are at fault. We have not been torturing him, though I
confess that we were on the point of putting him to the question. But
your timely arrival has saved his limbs, for the question we were asking
him concerned your whereabouts!"

I would have shouted to her to be wary how she answered him, for some
premonition how he was about to trick her entered my mind. But realising
the futility of such a course, I held my peace and waited agonisedly.

"You had tortured him in vain then," she answered scornfully. "For
Lazzaro Biancomonte would never have betrayed me. Nor could he have
betrayed me if he would, for after your men had searched the hut in
which I was hidden, I walked to Cattolica thinking foolishly that I
should be safer there."

Lackaday! She had told him the very thing he had sought to know. Yet to
make doubly sure he pursued the scent a little farther.

"Indeed it seems to me that had I tortured him I had given him no
more than he deserved for having abandoned you in that hut. Madonna, I
tremble to think of the harm that might have come to you through that
knave's desertion." And he scowled across at me, much as the Pharisee
might have scowled upon the publican.

"He is no knave," she answered, and I could have groaned to hear her
working my undoing, though not by so much as a sign might I inspire her
with caution, for that sign must have been seen by others. "Nor did he
abandon me. He left me only to go in quest of the necessaries for our
journey. If harm has come to me the blame of it must not rest on him."

"Of what harm do you speak, Madonna?" he cried, in a voice laden with
concern.

"Of what harm," she echoed, eyeing him with a scorn that would have
slain him had he any manhood left. "Of what harm? Mother of Mercy,
defend me! Do you ask the question? What greater harm could have come
to me than to have fallen into the hands of Ramiro del' Orca and his
brigands?"

He stood looking at her, and I doubt not that his face was a very
picture of simulated consternation.

"Surely, Madonna, you do not understand that we are your friends, that
you can so abuse us. But you will be faint, Madonna," he cried, with
a fresh and deep solicitude. "A cup of wine." And he waved his hand
towards the table.

"It would poison me, I think," she answered coldly.

"You are cruel, and--alas!--mistrustful," said he. "Can you guess
nothing of the anxiety that has been mine these two days, of the fears
that have haunted me as I thought of you and your wanderings?"

Her lip curled, and her face took on some slight vestige of colour. Her
spirit was a thing for which I might then have come to love her had it
not been that already I loved her to distraction.

"Yes," said she, "I can guess something of your dismay when you found
your schemes frustrated; when you found that you had come too late to
San Domenico."

"Will you not forgive me that shift to which my adoration drove me?" he
implored, in a honeyed voice--and a more fearful thing than Ramiro the
butcher was Ramiro the lover.

At that scarcely covert avowal of his passion she recoiled a step as she
might before a thing unclean. The little colour faded from her cheek,
the scorn departed from her lip, and a sickly, deadly fear overspread
her lovely face. God! that I should stand there and witness this insult
to the woman I adored and worshipped with a fervour that the Church
seeks to instil into us for those about the throne of Heaven. It might
not be. A blind access of fury took me. Of the consequences I thought
nothing. Reason left me utterly, and the slight hope that might lie in
temporising was disregarded.

Before those about me could guess my purpose, or those others, too
engrossed in the scene at the far end of the hall, could intervene, I
had sprung from between the executioners and dashed across the space
that separated me from the Governor of Cesena. One well-aimed blow, and
there should be an end to Messer Ramiro. That was the only thought that
found room in my disordered mind.

One or two there were who cried out as I sped past them, swift as the
hound when it speeds after the fleeing hare. But I was upon Ramiro ere
any could have sufficiently mastered his surprise to interfere.

By the nape of his great neck I caught him from behind, and setting my
knee at his spine I wrenched him backward, and so flung him over on
the floor. Down I went with him, my hand reaching for the dagger at his
jewelled girdle, and I had found and drawn it in that swift action of
mine ere he had bethought him of his hands. Up it flashed and down. I
sank it through the crimson velvet of his rich doublets straight at the
spot where his heart should be--if he were so human as to have a heart.
The next instant I turned cold and sick. My desperate effort had been
all for nothing. In my hand I was left with the bronze hilt of his great
poniard; the blade had broken off against the mesh of steel the coward
wore beneath his finery.

There was a rush of feet about us, a piercing scream from Madonna Paola,
and it was to her that I owed my life in that grim moment. A dozen
blades were naked and would have transfixed me as I lay, but that she
covered my body with her own and bade them strike at me through her.

A moment later and the powerful hands of the Governor of Cesena were at
my throat. I was lifted and tossed aside, as though I had been a hound
and he the bull I had beset. And as he swung me over and crushed me
to the ground, he knelt above me and grinned horribly into my purpling
face.

A second we stayed so, and I thought indeed that my hour was come, when
suddenly I felt the blood in my head released once more. He had taken
his hands from my throat. He seized me now by the collar and dragged me
rudely to my feet.

"Take this knave and lock him in his chamber," he bade a couple of his
bravi. "I may have need of him ere he dies."

"Messer Ramiro," came the interceding voice of Madonna Paola, "what he
did, he did for me. You will not let him die for it?"

There was a pause during which he looked at her, whilst the men were
roughly dragging me across the hall.

"Who knows, Madonna?" he said, with a bow and an infernal smile. "If you
were to beg his life, it might even come to pass that I might spare it."

He did not wait for her answer, but stepping after me he called to the
men that led me. In obedience they halted, and he came forward. We were
now at the foot of the staircase.

"Boccadoro," said he, planting himself before me, and eyeing me with
eyes that were very full of malice, "you will recall the punishment I
promised you if I came to discover it was you had thwarted me in Pesaro.
It is the second time you have fooled Ramiro del' Orca. There does not
live the man who can boast that he did it thrice, nor will I risk it
that you be that man. Make your peace with Heaven, for at sunset--in
an hour's time--you hang. There is one little thing that might save you
even yet, and if you find life sweet, you would do well to pray that
that little thing may come to pass."

I answered him nothing, but I bowed my head in token that I had heard
and he signed to the men to proceed with me, whilst turning on his heel
he stepped down the hall again to where Madonna Paola, overcome with
weakness, had sunk upon a stool.

As I was leaving the gallery I had a last glimpse of her, sitting there
with drawn face and haggard eyes that followed me as I passed from her
sight, whilst Ramiro del' Orca stood beside her murmuring words that did
not reach me. His so-called courtiers and his men-at-arms were trooping
out of the room, no doubt in obedience to his dismissal.




CHAPTER XX. THE SUNSET


I have heard tell of the calm that comes upon brave men when hope is
dead and their doom has been pronounced. Uncertainty may have tortured
and made cowards of them; but once that uncertainty is dissolved and
suspense is at an end, resignation enters their soul, and, possessing
it, gives to their bearing a noble and dignified peace. By the mercy of
Heaven they are made, maybe, to see how poor and evanescent a thing is
life; and they come to realise that since to die is a necessity there is
no avoiding, as well might it betide to-day as ten years hence.

Such a mood, however, came not to soothe that last hour of mine, and yet
I account myself no coward. It was an hour of such torture and anguish
as never before I had experienced--much though I had undergone--and the
source of all my suffering lay in the fact that Madonna Paola was in
the hands of the ogre of Cesena. Had it not been for that most untoward
circumstance I almost believe that while I waited for the sun to set on
that December afternoon, my mood had not only been calm but even in some
measure joyous, for it must have comforted my last moments to reflect
that for all that Messer Ramiro was about to hang me, yet had I sown the
seeds of his own destruction ere he had brought me to this pass.

I did, indeed, reflect upon it, and it may even be that, in spite of
all, I culled some grain of comfort from the reflection. But let that
be. My narrative would drag wearily were I to digress that I might tell
you at length the ugly course of my thoughts whilst the sands of my last
hour were running swiftly out. For, after all, my concern and yours is
with the story of Lazzaro Biancomonte, sometime known as Boccadoro the
Fool, and not with his philosophies--philosophies so unprofitable that
it can benefit no man that I should set them down.

My windows faced west, and so I was able to watch the fall of the sun,
and measure by its shortening distance from the horizon the ebbing of
my poor life. At last the nether rim of that round, fiery orb was on
the point of touching the line of distant hills, and it was casting a
crimson glow along the white, snow-sheeted landscape that was singularly
suggestive of a tide of blood--a very fitting tide to flow and ebb about
the walls of the Castle of Cesena.

One little thing there was might save me, Ramiro had said. But I had
shut the thought out of my mind to keep me from utter distraction. The
only little thing in which I held that my salvation could lie would be
in the miraculous arrival of Cesare Borgia, and of that not the faintest
hope existed. If the greatest luck attended Mariani's errand and the
greatest speed were made by the Duke once he received the letter, he
could not reach Cesena in less than another eight hours. And another
eight minutes, to reckon by the swift sinking of the sun would see the
time appointed for my hanging. I thought of Joshua in that grim hour,
and in a mood that approached the whimsical I envied him his gift. If I
could have stayed the setting of the sun, and held it where it was till
midnight, all might yet be well if Mariani had been diligent and Cesare
swift.

The key grating in the lock put an end to my vague musings, and reminded
me of the fact that I had neglected to employ that last hour as would
have become a good son of Mother Church. For an instant I believe that
my heart turned me to thoughts of God, and sent up a prayer for mercy
for my poor sinful soul. Then the door swung wide. Two halberdiers and
a carnifex in his odious leathern apron stood before me. Clearly Ramiro
sought to be exact, and to have me hanging the instant the sun should
vanish.

"It is time," said one of the soldiers, whilst the executioner, stepping
into my chamber, pinioned my wrists behind me, and retaining hold of the
cord bade me march. He followed, holding that slender cord, and so, like
a beast to the shambles, went I.

Once more they led me into the hall, where the shadows were lengthening
in dark contrast to the splashes of sunlight that lingered on the floor,
and whose blood-red hue was deepened by the gules of the windows through
which it was filtered.

Ramiro was waiting for me, and six of his officers were in attendance.
But, for once, there were no men-at-arms at hand. On a chair, the one
usually occupied by Ramiro, himself, sat Madonna Paola, still in her
torn and bedraggled raiment, her face white, her eyes wild as they had
been when first she had been haled into Ramiro's presence, some two
hours ago, and her features so rigidly composed that it told the tale of
the awful self-control she must be exerting--a self-control that might
end with a sudden snap that would plunge her into madness.

A wild rage possessed me at sight of her. Let Ramiro be ruthless and
cruel where men were concerned; that was a thing for which forgiveness
might be found him. But that he should submit a lady, delicately
nurtured as was Madonna, to such horrors as she had undergone since she
had awakened from his sleeping-potion in the Church of San Domenico, was
something for which no Hell could punish him condignly.

Ramiro met me with a countenance through the assumed gravity of which I
could espy his wicked, infernal mockery peeping forth.

"I deplore your end, Lazzaro Biancomonte," said he slowly, "for you are
a brave man, and brave men are rare. You were worthy of better things,
but you chose to cross swords with Ramiro del' Orca, and you have got
your death-blow. May God have mercy on your soul."

"I am praying," said I, "for just so much mercy as you shall have
justice. If my prayer is heard, I should be well-content."

He changed countenance a little. So, too, I thought, did Madonna Paola.
My firmness may have yielded her some grain of comfort. Ramiro set his
hands on his hips, and eyed me squarely.

"You are a dauntless rogue," he confessed.

I laughed for answer, and in that moment it entered my mind that I might
yet enjoy some measure of revenge in this life. More than that, I might
benefit Madonna. For were the seed I was about to sow to take root in
the craven heart of Ramiro del' Orca, it would so fully occupy his mind
that he would have little time to bestow on Paola in the few hours that
were left him. But before I could bethink me of words, he was speaking
again.

"I held out to you a slender hope," said he. "I told you that there
was one little thing might save you. That hope has borne no fruit; the
little thing, I spoke of has not come to pass. It rested with Madonna
Paola, here. She had it in her hands to effect your salvation, but she
has refused. Your blood rests on her head."

She shuddered at the words, and a low moan escaped her. She covered her
face with her hands. A moment I stood looking at her; then I shifted my
glance to Ramiro.

"Will it please you, Illustrious, to allow me a few moments'
conversation with Madonna Paola di Santafior?"

I invested my tones with a weight of meaning that did not escape him.
His face suddenly lightened; whilst one of his officers--a fellow very
fitly named Lupone--laughed outright.

"Your hero seems none so heroic after all," he said derisively to the
Governor. "The imminence of death makes him amenable."

Ramiro scowled on him for answer. Then, turning to me--"Do you think you
could bend her stubbornness?" quoth he.

"I might attempt it," answered I.

His eyes flashed with evil hope; his lips parted in a smile. He shot
a glance at Madonna, who had withdrawn her hands from her face and
was regarding me now with a strange expression of horror and
incredulity--marvelling, no doubt, to find me such a craven as I must
have seemed.

Ramiro looked at the diminishing sunlight on the floor.

"In some five minutes the sun will have completely set," said he. "Those
five minutes you shall have to seek to enlist Madonna's aid on your
behalf. If you succeed--and she may tell you on what terms you are to
have your life--you shall depart from Cesena to-night a free man."

He paused a moment, and his eyes, lighted by an odious smile, rested
once more on Madonna Paula. Then he bade all withdraw, and went with
them into an adjoining chamber, fondly nurturing the hopes that were
begotten of his belief that Lazzaro Biancomonte was a villain.

When we were alone, she and I, I stood a moment where they had left me,
my hands pinioned behind me, and the cord which the executioner had
held trailing the ground like a lambent tail. Then I went slowly forward
until I stood close before her. Her eyes were on my face, still with
that same look of unbelief.

"Madonna mia," said I, "do not for an instant think that it is my
purpose to ask of you any sacrifice that might save my worthless
life. Rather was my purpose in seeking these few moments with you, to
strengthen and encourage you by such news as it is mine to bring."

She looked now as if she scarcely understood.

"If I will wed him to-night, he has promised that you shall go free,"
she said in a whisper. "He says that he can bring a priest from the
neighbourhood at a moment's notice."

"Do not heed him," I cried sternly.

"I do not heed him," said she, more composedly. "If he seeks to force
me, I shall find a way of setting myself free. Dear Mother of Heaven!
death were a sweet and restful thing after all that I have suffered in
these days."

Then she fell suddenly to weeping.

"Think me not an utter coward, Lazzaro. Willingly would I do this thing
to save so noble a life as yours, did I not think that you must hate
me for it. I was stout and firm in my refusal, confident that you would
have had me so. Was I not right, my poor, poor Lazzaro?"

"Madonna, you were right," I answered firmly and calmly.

"And you are to die, amor mio," she murmured passionately. "You are to
die when the promise of happiness seemed held out to us. And yet, were
you to live at the price at which life is offered you, would your life
be endurable? Tell me the truth, Lazzaro; swear it to me. For if life is
the dearer thing to you, why then, you shall have your life."

"Need you ask me, Paola?" questioned I. "Does not your heart tell
you how much easier is death than would be such life as I must lead
hereafter, even if we could trust Ramiro, which we cannot. Be brave,
Madonna, and help me to be brave and to bear thyself with a becoming
fortitude. Now listen to what I have to tell you. Ramiro del' Orca is a
traitor who is plotting the death of his overlord. Proofs of it are by
now in the hands of Cesare Borgia, and in some seven or eight hours the
Duke himself should be here to put this monster to the question touching
these matters. I will say a word in his ear ere I depart that will fill
his mind with a very wholesome fear, and you will find that during
the few hours left him he will have little leisure to think of you and
afflict you with his odious wooing. Be strong, then, for a little while,
for Cesare is coming to set you free."

She looked at me now with eyes that were wide open. Suddenly--

"Could we not gain time?" she cried, and in her eagerness she rose and
set her hands upon my shoulders. "Could I not pretend to acquiesce to
his wishes, and so delay your end?"

"I have thought of it," I answered gloomily, "but the thought has
brought me no hope. Ramiro is not to be trusted. He might tell you
that he sets me free, but he dare not do so; he fears that I may have
knowledge of his dealings with Vitelli, and assuredly he would break
faith with us. Again the coming of the Duke might be delayed. Alas!"
I ended in despair, "there is nothing to be done but to let things run
their course."

There was even more in my mind than I expressed. My mistrust of Ramiro
went further than I had explained, and concerning Madonna more closely
than it did me.

"Nay, Lazzaro mine," she still protested, "I will attempt it. It is, at
least, well worth the risk.

"You forget," said I, "that even when Cesare comes we cannot say how he
will bear himself towards you. You were to have been betrothed to his
cousin, Ignacio. It is a matter upon which he may insist."

She looked at me for a moment with anguish in her eyes that turned my
misery into torture.

"Lazzaro," she moaned, "was ever woman so beset! I think that Heaven
must have laid some curse upon me."

Her face was close to mine. I stooped forward and kissed her on her
brow.

"May God have you in His keeping, Madonna mia," I murmured. "The sun is
gone."

"Lazzaro!" It was the cry of a breaking heart. Her arms went round my
neck, and in a passion of grief her kisses burned on my lips.

Then the door of the anteroom opened--and I thanked God for the mercy
of that interruption. I whispered a word to her, and in obedience she
sprang back, and sank limp and broken on the chair once again.

Ramiro entered, his men behind him, his face alit with eagerness. There
and then I swamped his hopes.

"The sun is gone, Magnificent," said I. "You had best get me hanged."

His brow darkened, for there was a note of mockery and triumph in my
voice.

"You have fooled me, animal," he cried. His jaw set, and his eyes
continued to regard me with an evil glow. Then he laughed terribly,
shrugged his shoulders, and spoke again. "After all, it shall avail you
little." He turned to the carnifex. "Federigo, do your work," said
he, whereupon the fellow stepped behind me, and the halberdiers ranged
themselves one on either side of me again.

"A word ere I go, Messer del' Orca," I demanded insolently.

He looked at me sharply, wondering, maybe, at the fresh tone I took.

"Say it and begone," he sullenly permitted me.

I paused a moment to choose fitting words for that portentous death-song
of mine. At length--

"You boasted to me a little while ago," said I, smiling grimly, "that
the man did not live who had thrice fooled you. That man does live, for
that man am I."

"Bah!" he returned contemptuously, thinking, no doubt, that I referred
to my interview with Madonna Paola. "You may take what pride you will
from such a thought. You are upon the threshold of death."

"True, but the thought is one that affords me more comfort and joy than
pride. As much comfort and joy as you shall take horror when I tell you
in what manner I have fooled you." I paused to heighten the sensation of
my words.

"To such good purpose have I used my wits that ere another sun shall
rise and set you will have followed me along the black road that I am
now treading--the road whose bourne is the gallows. Bethink you of the
charred paper that last night you brushed from this table when you awoke
to find a candle fallen on the treacherous letter Vitellozzo Vitelli
sent you in the lining of a hat."

His jaw fell, his face flamed redder than ever for a second, then it
went grey as ashes.

"Of what do you prate, fool?" he questioned huskily, seeking to bluster
it before the startled glances of his officers.

"I speak," said I, "of that charred paper. It was I who laid the candle
across it; but it was a virgin sheet I burned. Vitelli's letter I had
first abstracted."

"You lie!" he almost screamed.

"To prove that I do not, I will tell you what it contained. It held
proof that bribed by the Tyrant of Citta di Castello you had undertaken
to pose an arbalister to slay the Duke on the occasion of his coming
visit to Cesena."

He glared at me a moment in furious amazement. Then he turned to his
officers.

"Do not heed him," he bade them. "The dog lies to sow doubts in your
minds ere he goes out to hang. It is a puerile revenge."

I laughed with amused confidence. There was one among them had heard
Lampugnani's words touching the messenger's hat--words that had cost
the fellow his life. But my concern was little with the effect my words
might produce upon his followers.

"By to-morrow you will know whether I have lied or not. Nay, before then
shall you know it, for by midnight Cesare Borgia should be at Cesena.
Vitellozzo Vitelli's letter is in his hands by now."

At that Ramiro burst into a laugh. So convinced was he of the
impossibility of my having got the letter to the Duke, even if what I
had said of its abstraction were true, that he gathered assurance from
what seemed to him so monstrous an exaggeration.

"By your own words are you confounded," said he. "Out of your own mouth
have you proven your lies. Assuming that all you say were true, how
could you, who since last night have been a prisoner, have got a
messenger to bear anything from you to Cesare Borgia?"

I looked at him with a contemptuous amusement that daunted him.

"Where is Mariani?" I asked quietly. "Where is the father of the lad you
so brutally and wantonly slew yesternight? Seek him throughout Cesena,
and when you find him not, perhaps you will realise that one who had
seen his own son suffer such an outrageous and cruel death at your
brigand's hands would be a willing and ready instrument in an act that
should avenge him."

Vergine santa! What a consternation was his. He must have missed Mariani
early in the day, for he took no measure, asked no questions that might
confirm or refute the thing I announced. His face grew livid, and his
knees loosened. He sank on to a chair and mopped the cold sweat from his
brow with his great brown hand. No thought had he now for the eyes of
his officers or their opinions. Fear, icy and horrid, such fear as in
his time he had inspired in a thousand hearts was now possessed of his.
Sweet indeed was the flavour of my vengeance.

His officers instinctively drew away from him before the guilt so
clearly written on his face, and their eyes were full of doubt as to
how they should proceed and of some fear--for it must have been passing
through their minds that they stood, themselves, in danger of being
involved with him in the Duke's punishment of his disloyalty.

This was more than had ever entered into my calculations or found room
in my hopes. By a brisk appeal to them, it almost seemed that I might
work my salvation in this eleventh hour.

Madonna watched the scene with eyes that suggested to me that the same
hope had arisen in her own mind. My halberdiers and the carnifex alone
stood stolidly indifferent. Ramiro was to them the man that hired them;
with his intriguing they had no concern.

For a moment or two there was a silence, and Ramiro sat staring before
him, his white face glistening with the sweat of fear. A very coward at
heart was this overbearing ogre of Cesena, who for years had been the
terror and scourge of the countryside. At last he mastered his emotion
and sprang to his feet.

"You have had the laugh of me," he snarled, fury now ringing in his
voice. "But ere you die you may regret it that you mocked me."

He turned to the executioner.

"Strip him," he commanded fiercely. "He shall not hang as I intended--at
least not before we have torn every bone of his body from its socket.
To the cord with him!" And he pointed to the torture at the end of the
hall.

The executioner made shift to obey him when suddenly Madonna Paola
leapt to her feet, her cheeks flushed and her eyes bright with a new
excitement.

"Is there none here," he cried, appealing to Ramiro's officers, "that
will draw his sword in the service of his overlord, the Duca Valentino?
There stands a traitor, and there one who has proven his loyalty to
Cesare Borgia. The Duke is likely to demand a heavy price for the
life of that faithful one to whose warning he owes his escape of
assassination. Will none of you side now with the right that anon you
may stand well with Cesare Borgia when he comes? Or, by idly allowing
this traitor to have his way, will you participate in the punishment
that must be his?"

It was the very spur they needed. And scarce was that final question of
hers flung at those knaves, when the answer came from one of them. It
was that same sturdy Lupone.

"I, for one, am for the Duke," said he, and his sword leapt from its
scabbard. "I draw my iron for Valentino. Let every loyal man do likewise
and seize this traitor." And with his sword he pointed at Ramiro.

In an instant three others bared their weapons and ranged themselves
beside him. The remaining two--of whom was Lucagnolo--folded their
hands, manifesting by that impassivity that they were minded to take
neither one side nor the other.

The carnifex paused in his labours of undressing me, and the affair
promised to grow interesting. But Ramiro did not stand his ground. Fury
swelling his veins and crimsoning his huge face, he sprang to the door
and bellowed to his guards. Six men trooped in almost at once, and
reinforced by the halberdiers that had been guarding me, they made short
work of the resistance of those four officers. In as little time as it
takes me to record it, they were disarmed and ranged against the wall
behind those guards and others that had come to their support--to be
dealt with by Ramiro after he had dealt with me.

His fear of Cesare's coming was put by for the moment in his fierce
lust to be avenged upon me who had betrayed him and the officers who
had turned against him. Madonna sank back once more in her despair. The
little spark that she had so bravely fanned to life had been quenched
almost as soon as it had shown itself.

"Now, Federigo," said Ramiro grimly, "I am waiting."

The executioner resumed his work, and in an instant I stood stripped of
my brigandine. As the fellow led me, unresisting, to the torture--for
what resistance could have availed me now?--I tried to pray for strength
to endure what was to come. I was done with life; for some portion of
an hour I must go through the cruellest of agonies; and then, when it
pleased God in His mercy that I should swoon, it would be to wake no
more in this world. For they would bear out my unconscious body, and
hang it by the neck from that black beam they called Ramiro del' Orca's
flagstaff.

I cast a last glance at Madonna. She had fallen on her knees, and with
folded hands was praying intently, none heeding her.

Federigo halted me beneath the pulleys, and his horrid hands grew busy
adjusting the ropes to my wrists.

And then, when the last ray of hope had faded, but before the
executioner had completed his hideous task, a trumpet-blast, winding a
challenge to the gates of the Castle of Cesena, suddenly rang out upon
the evening air, and startled us all by its sudden and imperious note.




CHAPTER XXI. AVE CAESAR!


For just an instant I allowed myself to be tortured by the hope that a
miracle had happened, and here was Cesare Borgia come a good eight hours
before it was possible for Mariani to have fetched him from Faenza. The
same doubt may have crossed Ramiro's mind, for he changed colour and
sprang to the door to bawl an order forbidding his men to lower the
bridge.

But he was too late. Before he was answered by his followers, we heard
the creaking of the hinges and the rattle of the running chains, ending
in a thud that told us the drawbridge had dropped across the moat.
Then came the loud continuous thunder of many hoofs upon its timbers.
Paralysed by fear Ramiro stood where he had halted, turning his eyes
wildly in this direction and in that, but never moving one way or the
other.

It must be Cesare, I swore to myself. Who else could ride to Cessna with
such numbers? But then, if it was Cesare, it could not be that he had
seen Mariani, for he could not have ridden from Faenza. Madonna had
risen too, and with a white face and straining eyes she was looking
towards the door.

And then our doubts were at last ended. There was a jangle of spurs and
the fall of feet, and through the open door stepped a straight, martial
figure in a doublet of deep crimson velvet, trimmed with costly lynx
furs and slashed with satin in the sleeves and shoulder-puffs; jewels
gleamed in the massive chain across his breast and at the marroquin
girdle that carried his bronze-hilted sword; his hose was of red silk,
and his great black boots were armed with golden spurs. But to crown all
this very regal splendour was the beautiful, pale, cold face of Cesare
Borgia, from out of which two black eyes flashed and played like
sword-points on the company.

Behind him surged a press of mercenaries, in steel, their weapons naked
in their hands, so that no doubt was left of the character of this
visit.

Collecting himself, and bethinking him that after all, he had best
dissemble a good countenance; Ramiro advanced respectfully to meet his
overlord. But ere he had taken three steps the Duke stayed him.

"Stand where you are, traitor," was the imperious command. "I'll trust
you no nearer to my person." And to emphasise his words he raised his
gloved left hand, which had been resting on his sword-hilt, and in which
I now observed that he held a paper.

Whether Ramiro recognised it, or whether it was that the mere sight of
a paper reminded him of the letter which on my testimony should be in
Cesare's keeping, or whether again the word "traitor" with which Cesare
branded him drove the iron deeper into his soul, I cannot say; but to
this I can testify: that he turned a livid green, and stood there before
his formidable master in an attitude so stricken as to have aroused pity
for any man less a villain than was he.

And now Cesare's eye, travelling round, alighted on Madonna Paola,
standing back in the shadows to which she had instinctively withdrawn at
his coming. At sight of her he recoiled a pace, deeming, no doubt, that
it was an apparition stood before him. Then he looked again, and being a
man whose mind was above puerile superstitions, he assured himself that
by what miracle the thing was wrought, the figure before him was the
living body of Madonna Paola Sforza di Santafior. He swept the velvet
cap with its jewelled plume from off his auburn locks, and bowed low
before her.

"In God's name, Madonna, how are you come to life again, and how do I
find you here of all places?"

She made no ado about enlightening him.

"That villain," said she, and her finger pointed straight and firmly
at Ramiro, "put a sleeping-potion in my wine on the last night he dined
with us at Pesaro, and when all thought me dead he came to the Church of
San Domenico with his men to carry off my sleeping body. He would have
succeeded in his fell design but that Lazzaro Biancomonte there, whom
you have stayed him in the act of torturing to death, was beforehand
and saved me from his clutches for a time. This morning at Cattolica his
searching sbirri discovered me and brought me hither, where I have been
for the past three hours, and where, but for your Excellency's timely
arrival, I shudder to think of the indignities I might have suffered."

"I thank you, Madonna, for this clear succinctness," answered Cesare
coldly, as was his habit. They say he was a passionate man, and such
indeed I do believe him to have been; but even in the hottest frenzy of
rage, outwardly he was ever the same--icily cold and tranquil. And this,
no doubt, was the thing that made him terrible.

"Presently, Madonna," he pursued, "I shall ask you to tell me how it
chanced that, having saved you, Messer Biancomonte did not bear you
to your brother's house. But first I have business with my Governor of
Cesena--a score which is rendered, if possible, heavier than it already
stood by this thing that you have told me."

"My lord," cried out Ramiro, finding his tongue at last, "Madonna has
misinformed you. I know nothing of who administered the sleeping-potion.
Certainly it was not I. I heard a rumour that her body had been stolen,
and--"

"Silence!" Cesare commanded sternly. "Did I question you, dog?"

His beautiful, terrible eyes fastened upon Ramiro in a glance that
defied the man to answer him. Cowed, like a hound at sight of the whip,
Ramiro whimpered into silence.

Cesare waved his hand in his direction, half-turning to the men-at-arms
behind him.

"Take and disarm him," was his passionless command. And while they were
doing his bidding, he turned to me and ordered the executioner beside me
to unbind my hands and set me at liberty.

"I owe you a heavy debt, Messer Biancomonte," he said, without any
warmth, even now that his voice was laden with a message of gratitude.
"It shall be discharged. It is thanks to your daring and resource that
the seneschal Mariani was able to bring me this letter, this piece of
culminating proof against Ramiro del' Orca. It is fortunate for you that
Mariani was not put to it to ride to Faenza to find me, or else I am
afraid we had not reached Cesena in time to save your life. I met him
some leagues this side of Faenza, as I was on my way to Sinigaglia."

He turned abruptly to Ramiro.

"In this letter which Vitelli wrote you," said he, "it is suggested that
there are others in the conspiracy. Tell me now, who are those others?
See that you answer me with truth, for I shall compel proofs from you of
such accusations as you may make."

Ramiro looked at him with eyes rendered dull by agony. He moistened his
lips with his tongue, and turning his head towards his men--

"Wine," he gasped, from very force of habit. "A cup of wine!"

"Let it be supplied him," said Cesare coldly, and we all stood waiting
while a servant filled him a cup. Ramiro gulped the wine avidly, never
pausing until the goblet was empty.

"Now," said Cesare, who had been watching him, "will it please you to
answer my question?"

"My lord," said Ramiro, revived and strengthened in spirit by the
draught, "I must ask your Excellency to be a little plainer with me.
To what conspiracy is it that you refer? I know of none. What is this
letter which you say Vitelli wrote me? I take it you refer to the Lord
of Citta di Castello. But I can recall no letters passing between us. My
acquaintance with him is of the slightest."

Cesare looked at him a second.

"Approach," he curtly bade him, and Ramiro came forward, one of the
Borgia halberdiers on either side of him, each holding him by an arm.
The Duke thrust the letter under his eyes. "Have you never seen that
before?"

Ramiro looked at it a moment, and his attempt at dissembling
bewilderment was a ludicrous thing to witness.

"Never," he said brazenly at last.

Cesare folded the letter and slipped it into the breast of his doublet.
From his girdle he took a second paper. He turned from Ramiro.

"Don Miguel," he called.

From behind his men-at-arms a tall man, all dressed in black, stood
forward. It was Cesare's Spanish captain, one whose name was as well
known and as well-dreaded in Italy as Cesare's own. The Duke held out to
him the paper that he had produced.

"You heard the question that I asked Messer del' Orca?" he inquired.

"I heard, Illustrious," answered Miguel, with a bow.

"See that you obtain me an answer to it, as well as an account of
the other matters that I have noted on this list--concerning the
misappropriation of stores, the retention of taxes illicitly levied, and
the wanton cruelty towards my good citizens of Cesena. Put him to the
question without delay, and record me his replies. The implements are
yonder."

And with the same calm indifference which characterised his every word
and action Cesare pointed to the torture, and turned to Madonna Paola,
as though he gave the matter of Ramiro del' Orca and his misdeeds not
another thought.

"Mercy, my lord," rang now the voice of Ramiro, laden with horrid fear.
"I will speak."

"Then do so--to Don Miguel. He will question you in my name." Again he
turned to Madonna. "Madonna Paola, may I conduct you hence? Things may
perhaps occur which it is not seemly your gentle eyes should witness.
Messer Biancomonte, attend us."

Now, in spite of all that Ramiro had made me suffer, I should have been
loath to have remained and witnessed his examination. That they would
torture him was now inevitable. His chance of answering freely was
gone. Even if he returned meek replies to Don Miguel's questions,
that gentleman would, no doubt, still submit him to the cord by way of
assuring himself that such replies were true ones.

Gladly, then, did I turn to follow the Duke and Madonna Paola into the
adjoining chamber to which Cesare led the way, even as Don Miguel's
voice was raised to command his men to clear the hall, to the end that
he might conduct his examination in private.

The three of us stood in the anteroom. A servant had lighted the tapers
and closed the doors, and the Duke turned to me.

"First, Messer Biancomonte, to discharge my debt. You are, if I am not
misinformed, the lord by right of birth of certain lands that bear
your name, which suffered sequestration during the reign of the late
Costanzo, Tyrant of Pesaro, whose son Giovanni upheld that confiscation.
Am I right?"

"Your Excellency is very well informed. The Lord of Pesaro did make me
tardy restitution--so tardy, indeed, that the lands which he restored to
me had already virtually passed from his possession."

Cesare smiled.

"In recompense for the service you have rendered me this day," said he,
and my heart thrilled at the words and at the thought of the joy which
I was about to bear to my old mother, "I reinvest you in your lands
of Biancomonte for so long as you are content to recognise in me your
overlord, and to be loyal, true and faithful to my rule."

I bowed, murmuring something of the joy I felt and the devotion I should
entertain.

"Then that is done with. You shall have the deed from my hand by
morning. And now, Madonna, will you grant me some explanation of your
conduct in leaving Pesaro in this man's company, instead of repairing to
your brother's house, when you awakened from the effects of the
potion Ramiro gave you, or must I seek the explanation from Messer
Biancomonte?"

Her eyes fell before the scrutiny of his, and when they were raised
again it was to meet my glance, and if Cesare could not, for himself,
read the message of those eyes, why then, his penetration was by no
means what the world accounted it.

"My lord," I cried, "let me explain. I love Madonna Paola. It was love
of her that led me to the church and kept me there that night. It was
love of her and the overmastering passion of my grief at her so sudden
death that led me, in a madness, to desire once more to look upon her
face ere they delivered it to earth's keeping. Thus was it that I came
to discover that she lived; thus was it that I anticipated Ramiro del'
Orca. He came upon us almost before I had raised her from the coffin,
yet love lent me strength and craft to delude him. We hid awhile in the
sacristy, and it was there, after Madonna had revived, that the pent-up
passion of years burst the bond with which reason had bidden me restrain
it."

"By the Host!" cried Cesare, his brows drawn down in a frown. "You are a
bold man to tell me this. And you, Madonna," he cried, turning suddenly
to her, "what have you to say?"

"Only, my lord, that I have suffered more I think in these past few days
than has ever fallen to the life-time's share of another woman. I think,
my lord, that I have suffered enough to have earned me a little peace
and a little happiness for the remainder of my days. All my life have
men plagued me with marriages that were hateful to me, and this has
culminated in the brutal act of Ramiro del' Orca. Do you not think that
I have endured enough?"

He stared at her for a moment.

"Then you love this fellow?" he gasped. "You, Madonna Paola Sforza di
Santafior, one of the noblest ladies in all Italy, confess to love this
lordling of a few barren acres?"

"I loved him, Illustrious, when he was less, much less, than that.
I loved him when he was little better than the Fool of the Court of
Pesaro, and not even the shame of the motley that disgraced him could
stay the impulse of my affections."

He laughed curiously.

"By my faith," said he, "I have gone through life complaining of the
want of frankness in the men and women I have met. But you two seem
to deal in it liberally enough to satisfy the most ardent seeker after
truth. I would that Pontius Pilate could have known you." Then he grew
sterner. "But what account of this evening's adventure am I to bear to
my cousin Ignacio?"

She hung her head in silence, whilst my own spirit trembled. Then
suddenly I spoke.

"My lord," said I, "if you take her back to Pesaro, you may keep the
deed of Biancomonte. For unless Madonna Paola goes thither with me, your
gift is a barren one, your reward of no account or value to me."

"I would not have it so," said he, his head on one side and his fingers
toying with his auburn beard. "You saved my life, and you must be
rewarded fittingly."

"Then, Illustrious, in payment for my preservation of your life, do you
render happy mine, and we shall thus be quits."

"My lord," cried Paola, putting forth her hands in supplication, "if you
have ever loved, befriend us now."

A shadow darkened his face for an instant, then it was gone, and his
expression was as inscrutable as ever. Yet he took her hands in his and
looked down into her eyes.

"They say that I am hard, bloodthirsty and unfeeling," he said in tones
that were almost of complaint. "But I am not proof against so much
appeal. Ignacio must find him a bride in Spain; and if he is wise and
would taste the sweets of life, he will see to it that he finds him a
willing one."

"As for you two, Cesare Borgia shalt stand your friend. He owes you no
less. I will be godfather to your nuptials. Thus shall the blame and
consequences rest on me. Paola Sforza di Santafior is dead, men think.
We will leave them thinking it. Filippo must know the truth. But you can
trust me to make your brother take a reasonable view of what has come
to pass. After all, there may be a disparity in your ranks. But it is
purely adventitious, for noble though you may be, Madonna Paola, you are
wedding one who seems no less noble at heart, whatever the parts he may
have played in life." He smiled inscrutably, as he added: "I have in
mind that you once sought service with me Messer Biancomonte, and if a
martial life allures you still, I'll make you lord of something better
far than Biancomonte."

I thanked him, and Madonna joined me in that expression of gratitude--an
expression that fell very short of all that was in our hearts. But
touching that offer of his that I should follow his fortunes, I begged
him not to insist.

"The possession of Biancomonte has from my cradle been the goal of all
my hopes. It is patrimony enough for me, and there, with Madonna
Paola, I'll take a long farewell of ambition, which is but the seed of
discontent."

"Why, as you will," he sighed. And then, before more could be said,
there came from the adjoining room a piercing scream.

Cesare raised his head, and his lips parted in the faintest vestige of a
smile.

"They are exacting the truth from the Governor of Cesena," said he. "I
think, Madonna, that we had better move a little farther off. Ramiro's
voice makes indifferent music for a lady's ear."

She was white as death at the horrid noise and all the things of which
it may have reminded her, and so we passed from the antechamber and
sought the more distant places of the castle.

Here let me pause. We were married on the morrow which was Christmas
eve, and in the grey dawn of the Christmas morning we set out for
Biancomonte with the escort which Cesare Borgia placed at our disposal.

As we rode out from the Citadel of Cesena, we saw the last of Ramiro
del' Orca. Beyond the gates, in the centre of the public square, a block
stood planted in the snow. On the side nearer the castle there was a
dark mass over which a rich mantle had been thrown; it was of purple
colour, and in the uncertain light it was not easy to tell where the
cloak ended, and the stain that embrued the snow began. On the other
side of the block a decapitated head stood mounted on an upright pike,
and the sightless eyes of Ramiro del' Orca looked from his grinning face
upon the town of Cesena, which he had so wantonly misruled.

Madonna shuddered and turned her head aside as we rode past that dread
emblem of the Borgia justice.

To efface from her mind the memory of such a thing on such a day, I
talked to her, as we cantered out into the country, of the life to come,
of the mother that waited to welcome us, and of the glad tidings with
which we were to rejoice her on that Christmas day.

There is no moral to my story. I may not end with one of those graceful
admonitions beloved of Messer Boccacci to whom in my jester's days
I owed so much. Not mine is it to say with him "Wherefore, gentle
ladies"--or "noble sirs--beware of this, avoid that other thing."

Mine is a plain tale, written in the belief that some account of
those old happenings that befell me may offer you some measure of
entertainment, and written, too, in the support of certain truths which
my contemporaries have been shamefully inclined and simoniacally induced
to suppress. Many chroniclers set forth how the Lord Vitellozzo Vitelli
and his associates were barbarously strangled by Cesare's orders at
Sinigaglia, and wilfully--for I cannot believe that it results from
ignorance--are they silent touching the reason, leaving you to imagine
that it was done in obedience to a ruthlessness of character beyond
parallel, so that you may come to consider Cesare Borgia as black as
they were paid to paint him.

To confute them do I set down these facts of which my knowledge cannot
be called in question, and also that you may know the true story of
Paola di Santafior--and more particularly that part of it which lies
beyond the death she did not die.

The sun of that Christmas day was setting as we drew near to Biancomonte
and the humble dwelling of my old mother. We fell into talk of her once
more. Suddenly Paola turned in her saddle to confront me.

"Tell me, Lord of Biancomonte, will she love me a little, think you?"
she asked, to plague me.

"Who would not love you, Lady of Biancomonte?" counter-questioned I.



