
THE HISTORICAL NIGHTS' ENTERTAINMENT, SECOND SERIES

By Rafael Sabatini



To David Whitelaw

My Dear David,

Since the narratives collected here as well as in the preceding volume
under the title of the Historical Nights Entertainment--narratives
originally published in The Premier Magazine, which you so ably
edit--owe their being to your suggestion, it is fitting that some
acknowledgment of the fact should be made. To what is hardly less than
a duty, allow me to add the pleasure of dedicating to you, in earnest of
my friendship and esteem, not merely this volume, but the work of which
this volume is the second.

Sincerely yours,

Rafael Sabatini

London, June, 1919.




Preface

The kindly reception accorded to the first volume of the Historical
Nights Entertainment, issued in December of 1917, has encouraged me to
prepare the second series here assembled.

As in the case of the narratives that made up the first volume, I set
out again with the same ambitious aim of adhering scrupulously in every
instance to actual, recorded facts; and once again I find it desirable
at the outset to reveal how far the achievement may have fallen short of
the admitted aim.

On the whole, I have to confess to having allowed myself perhaps a wider
latitude, and to having taken greater liberties than was the case with
the essays constituting the previous collection. This, however, applies,
where applicable, to the parts rather than to the whole.

The only entirely apocryphal narrative here included is the first--"The
Absolution." This is one of those stories which, if resting upon no
sufficient authority to compel its acceptance, will, nevertheless,
resist all attempts at final refutation, having its roots at least
in the soil of fact. It is given in the rather discredited Portuguese
chronicles of Acenheiro, and finds place, more or less as related here,
in Duarte Galvao's "Chronicle of Affonso Henriques," whence it was taken
by the Portuguese historical writer, Alexandre Herculano, to be included
in his "Lendas e Narrativas." If it is to be relegated to the Limbo of
the ben trovato, at least I esteem it to afford us a precious glimpse
of the naive spirit of the age in which it is set, and find in that my
justification for including it.

The next to require apology is "His Insolence of Buckingham," but
only in so far as the incident of the diamond studs is concerned. The
remainder of the narrative, the character of Buckingham, the details of
his embassy to Paris, and the particulars of his audacious courtship of
Anne of Austria, rest upon unassailable evidence. I would have omitted
the very apocryphal incident of the studs, but that I considered it of
peculiar interest as revealing the source of the main theme of one
of the most famous historical romances ever written--"The Three
Musketeers." I give the story as related by La Rochefoucauld in his
"Memoirs," whence Alexandre Dumas culled it that he might turn it to
such excellent romantic account. In La Rochefoucauld's narrative it is
the painter Gerbier who, in a far less heroic manner, plays the part
assigned by Dumas to d'Artagnan, and it is the Countess of Carlisle who
carries out the political theft which Dumas attributes to Milady. For
the rest, I do not invite you to attach undue credit to it, which is
not, however, to say that I account it wholly false.

In the case of "The _Hermosa Fembra_" I confess to having blended
together into one single narrative two historical episodes closely
connected in time and place. Susan's daughter was, in fact, herself the
betrayer of her father, and it was in penitence for that unnatural act
that she desired her skull to be exhibited as I describe. Into the story
of Susan's daughter I have woven that of another New-Christian girl,
who, like the Hermosa Fembra, her taken a Castilian lover--in this case
a youth of the house of Guzman. This youth was driven into concealment
in circumstances more or less as I describe them. He overheard the
judaizing of several New-Christians there assembled, and bore word of it
at once to Ojeda. The two episodes were separated in fact by an interval
of three years, and the first afforded Ojeda a strong argument for the
institution of the Holy Office in Seville. Between the two there are
many points of contact, and each supplies what the other lacks to make
an interesting narrative having for background the introduction of the
Inquisition to Castile. The denouement I supply is entirely fictitious,
and the introduction of Torquemada is quite arbitrary. Ojeda was the
inquisitor who dealt with both cases. But if there I stray into fiction,
at least I claim to have sketched a faithful portrait of the Grand
Inquisitor as I know him from fairly exhaustive researches into his life
and times.

The story of the False Demetrius is here related from the point of view
of my adopted solution of what is generally regarded as a historical
mystery. The mystery lies, of course, in the man's identity. He has
been held by some to have been the unfrocked monk, Grishka Otropiev, by
others to have been a son of Stephen Bathory, King of Poland. I am not
aware that the theory that he was both at one and the same time has ever
been put forward, and whilst admitting that it is speculative, yet I
claim that no other would appear so aptly to fit all the known facts of
his career or to shed light upon its mysteries.

Undoubtedly I have allowed myself a good deal of licence and speculation
in treating certain unwitnessed scenes in "The Barren Wooing." But
the theory that I develop in it to account for the miscarriage of the
matrimonial plans of Queen Elizabeth and Robert Dudley seems to me to
be not only very fully warranted by de Quadra's correspondence, but the
only theory that will convincingly explain the events. Elizabeth, as
I show, was widely believed to be an accessory to the murder of Amy
Robsart. But in carefully following her words and actions at that
critical time, as reported by de Quadra, my reading of the transaction
is as given here. The most damning fact against Elizabeth was held to be
her own statement to de Quadra on the eve of Lady Robert Dudley's murder
to the effect that Lady Robert was "already dead, or very nearly
so." This foreknowledge of the fate of that unfortunate lady has been
accepted as positive evidence that the Queen was a party to the crime at
Cumnor, which was to set her lover free to marry again. Far from that,
however, I account it positive proof of Elizabeth's innocence of any
such part in the deed. Elizabeth was far too crafty and clear-sighted
not to realize how her words must incriminate her afterwards if she knew
that the murder of Lady Robert was projected. She must have been merely
repeating what Dudley himself had told her; and what he must have told
her--and she believed--was that his wife was at the point of a natural
death. Similarly, Dudley would not have told her this, unless his aim
had been to procure his wife's removal by means which would admit of
a natural interpretation. Difficulties encountered, much as I relate
them--and for which there is abundant evidence--drove his too-zealous
agents to rather desperate lengths, and thus brought suspicion, not only
upon the guilty Dudley, but also upon the innocent Queen. The manner
of Amy's murder is pure conjecture; but it should not be far from what
actually took place. The possibility of an accident--extraordinarily and
suspiciously opportune for Dudley as it would have been--could not be
altogether ruled out but for the further circumstance that Lady
Robert had removed everybody from Cumnor on that day. To what can
this point--unless we accept an altogether incredible chain of
coincidence--but to some such plotting as I here suggest?

In the remaining six essays in this volume the liberties taken with the
absolute facts are so slight as to require no apology or comment.

R. S.

London, June, 1919.





CONTENTS



  I. THE ABSOLUTION
       Affonso Henriques, First King of Portugal
  II. THE FALSE DEMETRIUS
       Boris Godunov and the Pretended Son of Ivan the Terrible
  III. THE HERMOSA FEMBRA
       An Episode of the Inquisition in Seville
  IV. THE PASTRY-COOK OF MADRIGAL
       The Story of the False Sebastian of Portugal
  V. THE END OF THE VERT GALANT
       The Assassination of Henry IV
  VI. THE BARREN WOOING
       The Murder of Amy Robsart
  VII. SIR JUDAS
       The Betrayal of Sir Walter Ralegh
  VIII. HIS INSOLENCE OF BUCKINGHAM
       George Villiers' Courtship of Anne of Austria
  IX. THE PATH OF EXILE
       The Fall of Lord Clarendon
  X. THE TRAGEDY OF HERRENHAUSEN
       Count Philip KÃ¶nigsmark and the Princess Sophia Dorothea
  XI. THE TYRANNICIDE
       Charlotte Corday and Jean Paul Marat





I. THE ABSOLUTION

Aftonso Henriques, first King of Portugal



In 1093 the Moors of the Almoravide dynasty, under the Caliph Yusuf,
swept irresistibly upwards into the Iberian Peninsula, recapturing
Lisbon and Santarem in the west, and pushing their conquest as far as
the river Mondego.

To meet this revival of Mohammedan power, Alfonso VI. Of Castile
summoned the chivalry of Christendom to his aid. Among the knights who
answered the call was Count Henry of Burgundy (grandson of Robert, first
Duke of Burgundy) to whom Alfonso gave his natural daughter Theresa in
marriage, together with the Counties of Oporto and Coimbra, with the
title of Count of Portugal.

That is the first chapter of the history of Portugal.

Count Henry fought hard to defend his southern frontiers from the
incursion of the Moors until his death in 1114. Thereafter his widow
Theresa became Regent of Portugal during the minority of their son,
Affonso Henriques. A woman of great energy, resource and ambition, she
successfully waged war against the Moors, and in other ways laid the
foundations upon which her son was to build the Kingdom of Portugal. But
her passionate infatuation for one of her knights--Don Fernando Peres de
Trava--and the excessive honours she bestowed upon him, made enemies for
her in the new state, and estranged her from her son.

In 1127 Alfonso VII. of Castile invaded Portugal, compelling Theresa
to recognize him as her suzerain. But Affonso Henriques, now aged
seventeen--and declared by the citizens of the capital to be of age and
competent to reign--incontinently refused to recognize the submission
made by his mother, and in the following year assembled an army for the
purpose of expelling her and her lover from the country. The warlike
Theresa resisted until defeated in the battle of San Mamede and taken
prisoner.

                     *   *   *   *   *

He was little more than a boy, although four years were sped already
since, as a mere lad of fourteen, he had kept vigil throughout the night
over his arms in the Cathedral of Zamora, preparatory to receiving
the honour of knighthood at the hands of his cousin, Alfonso VII. of
Castile. Yet already he was looked upon as the very pattern of what a
Christian knight should be, worthy son of the father who had devoted his
life to doing battle against the Infidel, wheresoever he might be found.
He was well-grown and tall, and of a bodily strength that is almost a
byword to this day in that Portugal of which he was the real founder
and first king. He was skilled beyond the common wont in all knightly
exercises of arms and horsemanship, and equipped with far more
learning--though much of it was ill-digested, as this story will serve
to show--than the twelfth century considered useful or even proper in
a knight. And he was at least true to his time in that he combined a
fervid piety with a weakness of the flesh and an impetuous arrogance
that was to bring him under the ban of greater excommunication at the
very outset of his reign.

It happened that his imprisonment of his mother was not at all pleasing
in the sight of Rome. Dona Theresa had powerful friends, who so
used their influence at the Vatican on her behalf that the Holy
Father--conveniently ignoring the provocation she had given and the
scandalous, unmotherly conduct of which she had been guilty--came to
consider the behaviour of the Infante of Portugal as reprehensibly
unfilial, and commanded him to deliver Dona Theresa at once from duress.

This Papal order, backed by a threat of excommunication in the event of
disobedience, was brought to the young prince by the Bishop of Coimbra,
whom he counted among his friends.

Affonso Henriques, ever impetuous and quick to anger, flushed scarlet
when he heard that uncompromising message. His dark eyes smouldered as
they considered the aged prelate.

"You come here to bid me let loose again upon this land of Portugal that
author of strife, to deliver over the people once more to the oppression
of the Lord of Trava?" he asked. "And you tell me that unless by obeying
this command I am false to the duty I owe this country, you will launch
the curse of Rome against me? You tell me this?"

The bishop, deeply stirred, torn between his duty to the Holy See and
his affection for his prince, bowed his head and wrung his hands. "What
choice have I?" he asked, on a quavering note.

"I raised you from the dust." Thunder was rumbling in the prince's
voice. "Myself I placed the episcopal ring upon your finger."

"My lord, my lord! Could I forget? All that I have I owe to you--save
only my soul, which I owe to God; my faith, which I owe to Christ; and
my obedience, which I owe to our Holy Father the Pope."

The prince considered him in silence, mastering his passionate,
impetuous nature. "Go," he growled at last.

The prelate bowed his head, his eyes not daring to meet his prince's.

"God keep you, lord," he almost sobbed, and so went out.

But though stirred by his affection for the prince to whom he owed so
much, though knowing in his inmost heart that Affonso Henriques was in
the right, the Bishop of Coimbra did not swerve from his duty to Rome,
which was as plain as it was unpalatable. Betimes next morning word was
brought to Affonso Henriques in the Alcazar of Coimbra that a
parchment was nailed to the door of the Cathedral, setting forth his
excommunication, and that the Bishop--either out of fear or out of
sorrow--had left the city, journeying northward towards Oporto.

Affonso Henriques passed swiftly from incredulity to anger; then almost
as swiftly came to a resolve, which was as mad and harebrained as could
have been expected from a lad in his eighteenth year who held the reins
of power. Yet by its very directness and its superb ignoring of all
obstacles, legal and canonical, it was invested with a certain wild
sanity.

In full armour, a white cloak simply embroidered in gold at the edge
and knotted at the shoulder, he rode to the Cathedral, attended by his
half-brother Pedro Affonso, and two of his knights, Emigio Moniz and
Sancho Nunes. There on the great iron-studded doors he found, as he had
been warned, the Roman parchment pronouncing him accursed, its sonorous
Latin periods set forth in a fine round clerkly hand.

He swung down from his great horse and clanked up the Cathedral steps,
his attendants following. He had for witnesses no more than a few
loiterers, who had paused at sight of their prince.

The interdict had so far attracted no attention, for in the twelfth
century the art of letters was a mystery to which there were few
initiates.

Affonso Henriques tore the sheepskin from its nails, and crumpled it
in his hand; then he passed into the Cathedral, and thence came out
presently into the cloisters. Overhead a bell was clanging by his
orders, summoning the chapter.

To the Infante, waiting there in the sun-drenched close, came presently
the canons, austere, aloof, majestic in their unhurried progress through
the fretted cloisters, with flowing garments and hands tucked into
their wide sleeves before them. In a semi-circle they arrayed themselves
before him, and waited impassively to learn his will. Overhead the bell
had ceased.

Affonso Henriques wasted no words.

"I have summoned you," he announced, "to command that you proceed to the
election of a bishop."

A rustle stirred through the priestly throng. The canons looked askance
at the prince and at one another. Then one of them spoke.

"Habemus episcopum," he said gravely, and several instantly made chorus:
"We have a bishop."

The eyes of the young sovereign kindled. "You are wrong," he told them.
"You had a bishop, but he is here no longer. He has deserted his see,
after publishing this shameful thing." And he held aloft the crumpled
interdict. "As I am a God-fearing, Christian knight, I will not live
under this ban. Since the bishop who excommunicated me is gone, you will
at once elect another in his place who shall absolve me."

They stood before him, silent and impassive, in their priestly dignity,
and in their assurance that the law was on their side.

"Well?" the boy growled at them.

"Habemus episcopum," droned a voice again.

"Amen," boomed in chorus through the cloisters.

"I tell you that your bishop is gone," he insisted, his voice quivering
now with anger, "and I tell you that he shall not return, that he shall
never set foot again within my city of Coimbra. Proceed you therefore at
once to the election of his successor."

"Lord," he was answered coldly by one of them, "no such election is
possible or lawful."

"Do you dare stand before my face, and tell me this?" he roared,
infuriated by their cold resistance. He flung out an arm in a gesture
of terrible dismissal. "Out of my sight, you proud and evil men! Back to
your cells, to await my pleasure. Since in your arrogant, stiff-necked
pride you refuse to do my will, you shall receive the bishop I shall
myself select."

He was so terrific in his rage that they dared not tell him that he had
no power, prince though he might be, to make such an election, bowed to
him, ever impassively, and with their hands still folded, unhurried as
they had come, they now turned and filed past him in departure.

He watched them with scowling brows and tightened lips, Moniz and Nunes
silent behind him. Suddenly those dark, watchful eyes of his were held
by the last figure of all in that austere procession--a tall, gaunt
young man, whose copper-coloured skin and hawk-featured face proclaimed
his Moorish blood. Instantly, maliciously, it flashed through the
prince's boyish mind how he might make of this man an instrument to
humble the pride of that insolent clergy. He raised his hand, and
beckoned the cleric to him.

"What is your name?" he asked him.

"I am called Zuleyman, lord," he was answered, and the name
confirmed--where, indeed, no confirmation was necessary--the fellow's
Moorish origin.

Affonso Henriques laughed. It would be an excellent jest to thrust upon
these arrogant priests, who refused to appoint a bishop of their choice,
a bishop who was little better than a blackamoor.

"Don Zuleyman," said the prince, "I name you Bishop of Coimbra in the
room of the rebel who has fled. You will prepare to celebrate High Mass
this morning, and to pronounce my absolution."

The Christianized Moor fell back a step, his face paling under its
copper skin to a sickly grey. In the background, the hindmost members of
the retreating clerical procession turned and stood at gaze, angered and
scandalized by what they heard, which was indeed a thing beyond belief.

"Ah no, my lord! Ah no!" Don Zuleyman was faltering. "Not that!"

The prospect terrified him, and in his agitation he had recourse to
Latin. "Domine, non sum dignus," he cried, and beat his breast.

But the uncompromising Affonso Henriques gave him back Latin for Latin.

"Dixi--I have spoken!" he answered sternly. "Do not fail me in
obedience, on your life." And on that he clanked out again with his
attendants, well-pleased with his morning's work.

As he had disposed with boyish, almost irresponsible rashness, and in
flagrant contravention of all canon law, so it fell out. Don Zuleyman,
wearing the bishop's robes and the bishop's mitre, intoned the Kyrie
Eleison before noon that day in the Cathedral of Coimbra, and pronounced
the absolution of the Infante of Portugal, who knelt so submissively and
devoutly before him.

Affonso Henriques was very pleased with himself. He made a jest of the
affair, and invited his intimates to laugh with him. But Emigio Moniz
and the elder members of his council refused to laugh. They looked with
awe upon a deed that went perilously near to sacrilege, and implored him
to take their own sober view of the thing he had done.

"By the bones of St. James!" he cried. "A prince is not to be
brow-beaten by a priest."

Such a view in the twelfth century was little short of revolutionary.
The chapter of the Cathedral of Coimbra held the converse opinion that
priests were not to be browbeaten by a prince, and set themselves to
make Affonso Henriques realize this to his bitter cost. They dispatched
to Rome an account of his unconscionable, high-handed, incredible
sacrilege, and invited Rome to administer condign spiritual flagellation
upon this errant child of Mother Church. Rome made haste to vindicate
her authority, and dispatched a legate to the recalcitrant, audacious
boy who ruled in Portugal. But the distance being considerable, and
means of travel inadequate and slow, it was not until Don Zuleyman had
presided in the See of Coimbra for a full two months that the Papal
Legate made his appearance in Affonso Henriques' capital.

A very splendid Prince of the Church was Cardinal Corrado, the envoy
dispatched by Pope Honorius II., full armed with apostolic weapons to
reduce the rebellious Infante of Portugal into proper subjection.

His approach was heralded by the voice of rumour. Affonso Henriques
heard of it without perturbation. His conscience at ease in the
absolution which he had wrung from Mother Church after his own fashion,
he was entirely absorbed in preparations for a campaign against the
Moors which was to widen his dominions. Therefore when at length the
thunderbolt descended, it fell--so far as he was concerned--from a sky
entirely clear.

It was towards dusk of a summer evening when the legate, in a litter
slung in line between two mules, entered Coimbra. He was attended by two
nephews, Giannino and Pierluigi da Corrado, both patricians of Rome,
and a little knot of servants. Empanoplied in his sacred office, the
cardinal had no need of the protection of men-at-arms upon a journey
through god-fearing lands.

He was borne straight to the old Moorish palace where the Infante
resided, and came upon him there amid a numerous company in the great
pillared hall. Against a background of battle trophies, livid weapons,
implements of war, and suits of mail both Saracen and Christian, with
which the bare walls were hung, moved a gaily-clad, courtly gathering of
nobles and their women-folk, when the great cardinal, clad from head to
foot in scarlet, entered unannounced.

Laughter rippled into silence. A hush descended upon the company, which
stood now at gaze, considering the imposing and unbidden guest. Slowly
the legate, followed by the two Roman youths, advanced down the hall,
the soft pad of his slippered feet and the rustle of his silken robes
being at first the only sound. On he came, until he stood before the
shallow dais, where in a massively carved chair sat the Infante of
Portugal, mistrustfully observing him. Affonso Henriques scented here
an enemy, an ally of his mother's, the bearer of a fresh declaration of
hostilities. Therefore of deliberate purpose he kept his seat, as if to
stress the fact that here he was the master.

"Lord Cardinal," he greeted the legate, "be welcome to my land of
Portugal."

The cardinal bowed stiffly, resentful of this reception. In his long
journey across the Spains, princes and nobles had flocked to kiss his
hand, and bend the knee before him, seeking his blessing. Yet this
mere boy, beardless save for a silky down about his firm young cheeks,
retained his seat and greeted him with no more submissiveness than if he
had been the envoy of some temporal prince.

"I am the representative of our Holy Father," he announced, in a voice
of stern reproof. "I am from Rome, with these my well-beloved nephews."

"From Rome?" quoth Affonso Henriques. For all his length of limb and
massive thews he could be impish upon occasion. He was impish now.
"Although no good has ever yet come to me from Rome, you make me
hopeful. His Holiness will have heard of the preparations I am making
for a war against the Infidel that shall carry the Cross where new
stands the Crescent, and sends me perhaps, a gift of gold or assist me
in this holy work."

The mockery of it stung the legate sharply. His sallow, ascetic face
empurpled.

"It is not gold I bring you," he answered, "but a lesson in the faith
which you would seem to have forgotten. I am come to teach you your
Christian duty, and to require of you immediate reparation of the
sacrilegious wrongs you have done. The Holy Father demands of you the
instant re-instatement of the Bishop of Coimbra, whom you have driven
out with threats of violence, and the degradation of the cleric you
blasphemously appointed Bishop in his stead."

"And is that all?" quoth the boy, in a voice dangerously quiet.

"No." Fearless in his sense of right, the legate towered before him.
"It is demanded of you further that you instantly release the lady, your
mother, from the unjust confinement in which you hold her."

"That confinement is not unjust, as all here can witness," the Infante
answered. "Rome may believe it, because lies have been carried to
Rome. Dona Theresa's life was a scandal, her regency an injustice to my
people. She and the infamous Lord of Trava lighted the torch of civil
war in these dominions. Learn here the truth, and carry it to Rome. Thus
shall you do worthy service."

But the prelate was obstinate and proud.

"That is not the answer that our Holy Father awaits."

"It is the answer that I send."

"Rash, rebellious youth, beware!" The cardinal's anger flamed up, and
his voice swelled. "I come armed with spiritual weapons of destruction.
Do not abuse the patience of Mother Church, or you shall feel the full
weight of her wrath released against you."

Exasperated, Affonso Henriques bounded to his feet, his face livid now
with passion, his eyes ablaze.

"Out! Away!" he cried. "Go, my lord, and go quickly, or as God watches
us I will add here and now yet another sacrilege to those of which you
accuse me."

The prelate gathered his ample robes about him. If pale, he was entirely
calm once more. With stern dignity, he bowed to the angry youth, and
so departed, but with such outward impassivity that it would have been
difficult to say with whom lay the victory. If Affonso Henriques thought
that night that he had conquered, morning was to shatter the illusion.

He was awakened early by a chamberlain at the urgent instances of Emigio
Moniz, who was demanding immediate audience. Affonso Henriques sat up in
bed, and bade him to be admitted.

The elderly knight and faithful counsellor came in, treading heavily.
His swarthy face was overcast, his mouth set in stern lines under its
grizzled beard.

"God keep you, lord," was his greeting, so lugubriously delivered as to
sound like a pious, but rather hopeless, wish.

"And you, Emigio," answered him the Infante. "You are early astir. What
is the cause?"

"III tidings, lord." He crossed the room, unlatched and flung wide a
window. "Listen," he bade the prince.

On the still morning air arose a sound like the drone of some gigantic
hive, or of the sea when the tide is making. Affonso Henriques
recognized it for the murmur of the multitude.

"What does it mean?" he asked, and thrust a sinewy leg from the bed.

"It means that the Papal Legate has done all that he threatened, and
something more. He has placed your city of Coimbra under a ban of
excommunication. The churches are closed, and until the ban is lifted
no priest Will be found to baptize, marry, shrive or perform any other
Sacrament of Holy Church. The people are stricken with terror, knowing
that they share the curse with you. They are massing below at the gates
of the alcazar, demanding to see you that they may implore you to lift
from them the horror of this excommunication."

Affonso Henriques had come to his feet by now, and he stood there
staring at the old knight, his face blenched, his stout heart clutched
by fear of these impalpable, blasting weapons that were being used
against him.

"My God!" he groaned, and asked: "What must I do?"

Moniz was preternaturally grave. "It is of the first importance that the
people should be pacified."

"But how?"

"There is one way only--by a promise that you will submit to the will
of the Holy Father, and by penance seek absolution for yourself and your
city."

A red flush swept into the young cheeks that had been so pale.

"What?" he cried, his voice a roar. "Release my mother, depose Zuleyman,
recall that fugitive recreant who cursed me, and humble myself to seek
pardon at the hands of this insolent Italian cleric? May my bones rot,
may I roast for ever in hell-fire if I show myself such a craven! And
do you counsel it, Emigio--do you really counsel that?" He was in a
towering rage.

"Listen to that voice," Emigio answered him, and waved a hand to the
open window. "How else will you silence it?"

Affonso Henriques sat down on the edge of the bed, and took his head in
his hands. He was checkmated--and yet....

He rose and beat his hands together, summoning chamberlain and pages to
help him dress and arm.

"Where is the legate lodged?" he asked Moniz.

"He is gone," the knight answered him. "He left at cock-crow, taking the
road to Spain along the Mondego--so I learnt from the watch at the River
Gate."

"How came they to open for him?"

"His office, lord, is a key that opens all doors at any hour of day or
night. They dared not detain or delay him."

"Ha!" grunted the Infante. "We will go after him, then." And he made
haste to complete his dressing. Then he buckled on his great sword, and
they departed.

In the courtyard of the alcazar, he summoned Sancho Nunes and a
half-dozen men-at-arms to attend him, mounted a charger and with Emigio
Moniz at his side and the others following, he rode out across the
draw-bridge into the open space that was thronged with the clamant
inhabitants of the stricken city.

A great cry went up when he showed himself--a mighty appeal to him for
mercy and the remission of the curse. Then silence fell, a silence that
invited him to answer and give comfort.

He reined in his horse, and standing in his stirrups very tall and
virile, he addressed them.

"People of Coimbra," he announced, "I go to obtain this city's
absolution from the ban that has been laid upon it. I shall return
before sunset. Till then do you keep the peace."

The voice of the multitude was raised again, this time to hail him as
the father and protector of the Portuguese, and to invoke the blessing
of Heaven upon his handsome head.

Riding between Moniz and Nunes, and followed by his glittering
men-at-arms, he crossed the city and took the road along the river by
which it was known that the legate had departed. All that morning
they rode briskly amain, the Infante fasting, as he had risen, yet
unconscious of hunger and of all else but the purpose that was consuming
him. He rode in utter silence, his face set, his brows stern; and Moniz,
watching him furtively the while, wondered what thoughts were stirring
in that rash, impetuous young brain, and was afraid.

Towards noon at last they overtook the legate's party. They espied his
mule-litter at the door of an inn in a little village some ten miles
beyond the foothills of the Bussaco range. The Infante reined up
sharply, a hoarse, fierce cry escaping him, akin to that of some
creature of the wild when it espies its prey.

Moniz put forth a hand to seize his arm.

"My lord, my lord," he cried, fearfully. "What is your purpose?"

The prince looked him between the eyes, and his lips curled in a smile
that was not altogether sweet.

"I am going to beg Cardinal Corrado to have compassion on me," he
answered, subtly mocking, and on that he swung down from his horse, and
tossed the reins to a man-at-arms.

Into the inn he clanked, Moniz and Nunes following closely. He thrust
aside the vinter who, not knowing him, would have hindered him, great
lord though he seemed, from disturbing the holy guest who was honouring
the house. He strode on, and into the room where the Cardinal with his
noble nephews sat at dinner.

At sight of him, fearing violence, Giannino and Pierluigi came instantly
to their feet, their hands upon their daggers. But Cardinal da Corrado
sat unmoved. He looked up, a smile of ineffable gentleness upon his
ascetic face.

"I had hoped that you would come after me, my son," he said. "If you
come a penitent, then has my prayer been heard."

"A penitent!" cried Affonso Henriques. He laughed wickedly, and plucked
his dagger from its sheath.

Sancho Nunes, in terror, set a detaining hand upon his prince's arm.

"My lord," he cried in a voice that shook, "you will not strike the
Lord's anointed--that were to destroy yourself for ever."

"A curse," said Affonso Henriques, "perishes with him that uttered it."
He could reason loosely, you see, this hot-blooded, impetuous young
cutter of Gordian knots. "And it imports above all else that the curse
should be lifted from my city of Coimbra."

"It shall be, my son, as soon as you show penitence and a Christian
submission to the Holy Father's will," said the undaunted Cardinal.

"God give me patience with you," Affonso Henriques answered him. "Listen
to me now, lord Cardinal." And he leaned forward on his dagger, burying
the point of it some inches into the deal table. "That you should punish
me with the weapons of the Faith for the sins that you allege against me
I can understand and suffer. There is reason in that, perhaps. But will
you tell me what reasons there can be in punishing a whole city for an
offence which, if it exists at all, is mine alone?--and in punishing it
by a curse so terrible that all the consolations of religion are denied
those true children of Mother Church, that no priestly office may be
performed within the city, that men and women may not approach the
altars of the Faith, that they must die unshriven with their sins upon
them, and so be damned through all eternity? Where is the reason that
urges this?"

The cardinal's smile had changed from one of benignity to one of guile.

"Why, I will answer you. Out of their terror they will be moved to
revolt against you, unless you relieve them of the ban. Thus, Lord
Prince, I hold you in check. You make submission or else you are
destroyed."

Affonso Henriques considered him a moment. "You answer me indeed,"
said he, and then his voice swelled up in denunciation. "But this is
statecraft, not religion. And when a prince has no statecraft to match
that which is opposed to him, do you know what follows? He has recourse
to force, Lord Cardinal. You compel me to it; upon your own head the
consequences."

The legate almost sneered. "What is the force of your poor lethal
weapons compared with the spiritual power I wield? Do you threaten me
with death? Do you think I fear it?" He rose in a surge of sudden wrath,
and tore open his scarlet robe. "Strike here with your poniard. I
wear no mail. Strike if you dare, and by the sacrilegious blow destroy
yourself in this world and the next."

The Infante considered him. Slowly he sheathed his dagger, smiling a
little. Then he beat his hands together. His men-at-arms came in.

"Seize me those two Roman whelps," he commanded, and pointed to Giannino
and Pierlulgi. "Seize them, and make them fast. About it!"

"Lord Prince!" cried the legate in a voice of appeal, wherein fear and
anger trembled.

It was the note of fear that heartened Affonso Henriques. "About it!"
he cried again, though needlessly, for already his men-at-arms were
at grips with the Cardinal's nephews. In a trice the kicking, biting,
swearing pair were overpowered, deprived of arms, and pinioned. The men
looked to their prince for further orders. In the background Moniz and
Nunes witnessed all with troubled countenances, whilst the Cardinal,
beyond the table, white to the lips, demanded in a quavering voice to
know what violence was intended, implored the Infante to consider,
and in the same breath threatened him with dread consequences of this
affront.

Affonso Henriques, unmoved, pointed through the window to a stalwart oak
that stood before the inn.

"Take them out there, and hang them unshriven," he commanded.

The Cardinal swayed, and almost fell forward. He clutched the table,
speechless with terror for those lads who were as the very apple of his
eye, he who so fearlessly had bared his own breast to the steel.

The two comely Italian youths were dragged out writhing in their
captors' hands.

At last the half-swooning legate found his voice. "Lord Prince," he
gasped. "Lord Prince... you cannot do this infamy! You cannot! I warn
you that... that..." The threat perished unuttered, slain by mounting
terror. "Mercy! Have mercy, lord! as you hope for mercy!"

"What mercy do you practice, you who preach a gospel of mercy in the
world, and cry for mercy now?" the Infante asked him.

"But this is an infamy! What harm have those poor children done? What
concern is it of theirs that I have offended you in performing my sacred
duty?"

Swift into that opening flashed the home-thrust of the Infante's answer.

"What harm have my people of Coimbra done? What concern is it of theirs
that I have offended you? Yet to master me you did not hesitate to
strike at them with the spiritual weapons that are yours. To master you
I do not hesitate to strike at your nephews with the lethal weapons that
are mine. When you shall have seen them hang you will understand the
things that argument could not make clear to you. In the vileness of my
act you will see a reflection of the vileness of your own, and perhaps
your heart will be touched, your monstrous pride abated."

Outside, under the tree, the figures of the men-at-arms were moving.
Expeditiously, and with indifference, they went about the preparations
for the task entrusted to them.

The Cardinal writhed, and fought for breath. "Lord Prince, this must
not be!" He stretched forth supplicating hands. "Lord Prince, you must
release my nephews."

"Lord Cardinal, you must absolve my people."

"If... if you will first make submission. My duty... to the Holy See...
Oh God! Will nothing move you?"

"When they have been hanged you will understand, and out of your own
affliction learn compassion." The Infante's voice was so cold, his
mien so resolute that the legate despaired of conquering his purpose.
Abruptly he capitulated, even as the halters went about the necks of his
two cherished lads.

"Stop!" he screamed. "Bid them stop! The curse shall be lifted."

Affonso Henriques opened the window with a leisureliness which to the
legate seemed to belong to the realm of nightmare.

"Wait yet a moment," the Infante called to those outside, about whom by
now a little knot of awe-stricken villagers had gathered. Then he
turned again to Cardinal Corrado, who had sunk to his chair like a man
exhausted, and sat now panting, his elbows on the table, his head in his
hands. "Here," said the prince, "are the terms upon which you may have
their lives: Complete absolution, and Apostolic benediction for my
people and myself this very night, I on my side making submission to
the Holy Father's will to the extent of releasing my mother from duress,
with the condition that she leaves Portugal at once and does not return.
As for the banished bishop and his successor, matters must remain as
they are; but you can satisfy your conscience on that score by yourself
confirming the appointment of Don Zuleyman. Come, my lord, I am being
generous, I think. In the enlargement of my mother I afford you the
means of satisfying Rome. If you have learnt your lesson from what I
here proposed, your conscience should satisfy you of the rest."

"Be it so," the Cardinal answered hoarsely. "I will return with you to
Coimbra and do your will."

Thereupon, without any tinge of mockery, but in completest sincerity
in token that the feud between them was now completely healed, Affonso
Henriques went down upon his knees, like the true and humble son of Holy
Church he accounted himself, to ask a blessing at the Cardinal's hands.





II. THE FALSE DEMETRIUS

Boris Godunov and the Pretended Son of Ivan the Terrible



The news of it first reached him whilst he sat at supper in the great
hall of his palace in the Kremlin. It came at a time when already there
was enough to distract his mind; for although the table before him was
spread and equipped as became an emperor's, the gaunt spectre of famine
stalked outside in the streets of Moscow, and men and women were so
reduced by it that cannibalism was alleged to be breaking out amongst
them.

Alone, save for the ministering pages, sat Boris Godunov under the iron
lamps that made of the table, with its white napery and vessels of
gold and silver plate, an island of light in the gloom of that vast
apartment. The air was fragrant with the scent of burning pine, for
although the time of year was May, the nights were chill, and a great
log-fire was blazing on the distant hearth. To him, as he sat there,
came his trusted Basmanov with those tidings which startled him at
first, seeming to herald that at last the sword of Nemesis was swung
above his sinful head.

Basmanov, a flush tinting the prominent cheek-bones of his sallow face,
an excited glitter in his long eyes, began by ordering the pages out of
earshot, then leaning forward quickly muttered forth his news.

At the first words of it, the Tsar's knife clashed into his golden
platter, and his short, powerful hands clutched the carved arms of
his great gilded chair. Quickly he controlled himself, and then as he
continued to listen he was moved to scorn, and a faint smile began to
stir under his grizzled beard.

A man had appeared in Poland--such was the burden of Basmanov's
story--coming none knew exactly whence, who claimed to be Demetrius, the
son of Ivan Vassielivitch, and lawful Tsar of Russia--Demetrius, who
was believed to have died at Uglich ten years ago, and whose remains
lay buried in Moscow, in the Church of St. Michael. This man had found
shelter in Lithuania, in the house of Prince Wisniowiecki, and thither
the nobles of Poland were now flocking to do him homage, acknowledging
him the son of Ivan the Terrible. He was said to be the living image
of the dead Tsar, save that he was swarthy and black-haired, like the
dowager Tsarina, and there were two warts on his face, such as it was
remembered had disfigured the countenance of the boy Demetrius.

Thus Basmanov, adding that he had dispatched a messenger into Lithuania
to obtain more precise confirmation of the story. That messenger--chosen
in consequence of something else that Basmanov had been told--was
Smirnoy Otrepiev.

The Tsar Boris sat back in his chair, his eyes on the gem encrusted
goblet, the stem of which his fingers were mechanically turning. There
was now no vestige of the smile on his round white face. It had grown
set and thoughtful.

"Find Prince Shuiski," he said presently, "and send him to me here."

Upon the tale the boyar had brought him he offered now no comment.

"We will talk of this again, Basmanov," was all he said in
acknowledgment that he had heard, and in dismissal.

But when the boyar had gone, Boris Godunov heaved himself to his feet,
and strode over to the fire, his great head sunk between his massive
shoulders. He was a short, thick-set, bow-legged man, inclining to
corpulence. He set a foot, shod in red leather reversed with ermine,
upon an andiron, and, leaning an elbow on the carved overmantel, rested
his brow against his hand. His eyes stared into the very heart of the
fire, as if they beheld there the pageant of the past, upon which his
mind was bent.

Nineteen years were sped since Ivan the Terrible had passed away,
leaving two sons, Feodor Ivanovitch, who had succeeded him, and the
infant Demetrius. Feodor, a weakling who was almost imbecile, had
married Irene, the daughter of Boris Godunov, whereby it had fallen out
that Boris became the real ruler of Russia, the power behind the throne.
But his insatiable ambition coveted still more. He must wear the crown
as well as wield the sceptre; and this could not be until the Ruric
dynasty which had ruled Russia for nearly seven centuries should be
stamped out. Between himself and the throne stood his daughter's husband
and their child, and the boy Demetrius, who had been dispatched with his
mother, the dowager Tsarina, to Uglich. The three must be removed.

Boris began with the last, and sought at first to drive him out of
the succession without bloodshed. He attempted to have him pronounced
illegitimate, on the ground that he was the son of Ivan's seventh
wife (the orthodox Church recognizing no wife as legitimate beyond the
third). But in this he failed. The memory of the terrible Tsar, the
fear of him, was still alive in superstitious Russia, and none dared to
dishonour his son. So Boris had recourse to other and surer means. He
dispatched his agents to Uglich, and presently there came thence a story
that the boy, whilst playing with a knife, had been taken with a fit of
epilepsy, and had fallen, running the blade into his throat. But it was
not a story that could carry conviction to the Muscovites, since with it
came the news that the town of Uglich had risen against the emissaries
of Boris, charging them with the murder of the boy, and killing them out
of hand.

Terrible had been the vengeance which Boris had exacted. Of the luckless
inhabitants of the town two hundred were put to death by his orders,
and the rest sent into banishment beyond the Ural Mountains, whilst
the Tsarina Maria, Demetrius's mother, for having said that her boy was
murdered at the instigation of Boris, was packed off to a convent, and
had remained there ever since in close confinement.

That had been in 1591. The next to go was Feodor's infant son, and
lastly--in 1598--Feodor himself, succumbing to a mysterious illness, and
leaving Boris a clear path to the throne. But he ascended it under the
burden of his daughter's curse. Feodor's widow had boldly faced her
father, boldly accused him of poisoning her husband to gratify his
remorseless ambitions, and on a passionate appeal to God to let it be
done by him as he had done by others she had departed to a convent,
swearing never to set eyes upon him again.

The thought of her was with him now, as he stood there looking into
the heart of the fire; and perhaps it was the memory of her curse that
turned his stout heart to water, and made him afraid where there could
surely be no cause for fear. For five years now had he been Tsar of
Russia, and in these five years he had taken such a grip of power as was
not lightly to be loosened.

Long he stood there, and there he was found by the magnificent Prince
Shuiski, whom he had bidden Basmanov to summon.

"You went to Uglich when the Tsarevitch Demetrius was slain," said
Boris. His voice and mien were calm and normal. "Yourself you saw the
body. There is no possibility that you could have been mistaken in it?"

"Mistaken?" The boyar was taken aback by the question. He was a tall
man, considerably younger than Boris, who was in his fiftieth year. His
face was lean and saturnine, and there was something sinister in the
dark, close-set eyes under a single, heavy line of eyebrow.

Boris explained his question, telling him what he had learnt from
Basmanov. Basil Shuiski laughed. The story was an absurd one. Demetrius
was dead. Himself he had held the body in his arms, and no mistake was
possible.

Despite himself, a sigh of relief fluttered from the lips of Boris.
Shuiski was right. It was an absurd story, this. There was nothing to
fear. He had been a fool to have trembled for a moment.

Nevertheless, in the weeks that followed, he brooded more and more over
all that Basmanov had said. It was in the thought that the nobility of
Poland was flocking to the house of Wisniowiecki to do honour to this
false son of Ivan the Terrible, that Boris found the chief cause of
uneasiness. There was famine in Moscow, and empty bellies do not make
for loyalty. Then, too, the Muscovite nobles did not love him. He had
ruled too sternly, and had curbed their power. There were men like Basil
Shuiski who knew too much--greedy, ambitious men, who might turn
their knowledge to evil account. The moment might be propitious to
the pretender, however false his claim. Therefore Boris dispatched a
messenger to Wisniowiecki with the offer of a heavy bribe if he would
yield up the person of this false Demetrius.

But that messenger returned empty-handed. He had reached Bragin too
late. The pretender had already left the place, and was safely lodged
in the castle of George Mniszek, the Palatine of Sandomir, to whose
daughter Maryna he was betrothed. If these were ill tidings for Boris,
there were worse to follow soon. Within a few months he learned from
Sandomir that Demetrius had removed to Cracow, and that there he had
been publicly acknowledged by Sigismund III. of Poland as the son of
Ivan Vassielivitch, the rightful heir to the crown of Russia. He
heard, too, the story upon which this belief was founded. Demetrius had
declared that one of the agents employed by Boris Godunov to procure
his murder at Uglich had bribed his physician Simon to perform the deed.
Simon had pretended to agree as the only means of saving him. He had
dressed the son of a serf, who slightly resembled Demetrius, in garments
similar to those worn by the young prince, and thereafter cut the lad's
throat, leaving those who had found the body to presume it to be
the prince's. Meanwhile, Demetrius himself had been concealed by the
physician, and very shortly thereafter carried away from Uglich, to be
placed in safety in a monastery, where he had been educated.

Such, in brief, was the story with which Demetrius convinced the court
of Poland, and not a few who had known the boy at Uglich came forward
now to identify with him the grown man, who carried in his face so
strong a resemblance to Ivan the Terrible. That story which Boris now
heard was soon heard by all Russia, and Boris realized that something
must be done to refute it.

But something more than assurances--his own assurances--were necessary
if the Muscovites were to believe him. And so at last Boris bethought
him of the Tsarina Maria, the mother of the murdered boy. He had her
fetched to Moscow from her convent, and told her of this pretender who
was setting up a claim to the throne of Russia, supported by the King of
Poland.

She listened impassively, standing before him in the black robes and
conventual coif which his tyranny had imposed upon her. When he had
done, a faint smile swept over the face that had grown so hard in these
last twelve years since that day when her boy had been slain almost
under her very eyes.

"It is a circumstantial tale," she said. "It is perhaps true. It is
probably true."

"True!" He bounded from his seat. "True? What are you saying, woman?
Yourself you saw the boy dead."

"I did, and I know who killed him."

"But you saw him. You recognized him for your own, since you set the
people on to kill those whom you believed had slain him."

"Yes," she answered. And added the question: "What do you want of me
now?"

"What do I want?" He was amazed that she should ask, exasperated. Had
the conventual confinement turned her head? "I want your testimony. I
want you to denounce this fellow for the impostor that he is. The people
will believe you."

"You think they will?" Interest had kindled in her glance.

"What else? Are you not the mother of Demetrius, and shall not a mother
know her own son?"

"You forget. He was ten years of age then--a child. Now he is a grown
man of three-and-twenty. How can I be sure? How can I be sure of
anything?"

He swore a full round oath at her. "Because you saw him dead."

"Yet I may have been mistaken. I thought I knew the agents of yours
who killed him. Yet you made me swear--as the price of my brothers'
lives--that I was mistaken. Perhaps I was more mistaken than we thought.
Perhaps my little Demetrius was not slain at all. Perhaps this man's
tale is true."

"Perhaps..." He broke off to stare at her, mistrustfully, searchingly.
"What do you mean?" he asked her sharply.

Again that wan smile crossed the hard, sharp-featured face that once had
been so lovely. "I mean that if the devil came out of hell and called
himself my son, I should acknowledge him to your undoing."

Thus the pent-up hate and bitterness of years of brooding upon her
wrongs broke forth. Taken aback, he quailed before it. His jaw dropped
foolishly, and he stared at her with wide, unblinking eyes.

"The people will believe me, you say--they will believe that a mother
should know her own son. Then are your hours of usurpation numbered."

If for a moment it appalled him, yet in the end, forewarned, he was
forearmed. It was foolish of her to let him look upon the weapon with
which she could destroy him. The result of it was that she went back to
her convent under close guard, and was thereafter confined with greater
rigour than hitherto.

Desperately Boris heard how the belief in Demetrius was gaining ground
in Russia with the people. The nobles might still be sceptical, but
Boris knew that he could not trust them, since they had no cause to love
him. He began perhaps to realize that it is not good to rule by fear.

And then at last came Smirnoy Otrepiev back from Cracow, where he had
been sent by Basmanov to obtain with his own eyes confirmation of the
rumour which had reached the boyar on the score of the pretender's real
identity.

The rumour, he declared, was right. The false Demetrius was none other
than his own nephew, Grishka Otrepiev, who had once been a monk, but,
unfrocked, had embraced the Roman heresy, and had abandoned himself to
licentious ways. You realize now why Smirnoy had been chosen by Basmanov
for this particular mission.

The news heartened Boris. At last he could denounce the impostor in
proper terms, and denounce him he did. He sent an envoy to Sigismund
III. to proclaim the fellow's true identity, and to demand his expulsion
from the Kingdom of Poland; and his denunciation was supported by a
solemn excommunication pronounced by the Patriarch of Moscow against
the unfrocked monk, Grishka Otrepiev, who now falsely called himself
Demetrius Ivanovitch.

But the denunciation did not carry the conviction that Boris expected.
It was reported that the Tsarevitch was a courtly, accomplished man,
speaking Polish and Latin, as well as Russian, skilled in horsemanship
and in the use of arms, and it was asked how an unfrocked monk had come
by these accomplishments. Moreover, although Boris, fore-warned, had
prevented the Tsarina Maria from supporting the pretender out of motives
of revenge, he had forgotten her two brothers; he had not foreseen that,
actuated by the same motives, they might do that which he had prevented
her from doing. This was what occurred. The brothers Nagoy repaired
to Cracow publicly to acknowledge Demetrius their nephew, and to enrol
themselves under his banner.

Against this Boris realized that mere words were useless. The sword of
Nemesis was drawn indeed. His sins had found him out. Nothing remained
him but to arm and go forth to meet the impostor, who was advancing upon
Moscow with a great host of Poles and Cossacks.

He appraised the support of the Nagoys at its right value. They, too,
had been at Uglich, and had seen the dead boy, almost seen him slain.
Vengeance upon himself was their sole motive. But was it possible that
Sigismund of Poland was really deceived, as well as the Palatine of
Sandomir, whose daughter was betrothed to the adventurer, Prince Adam
Wisniowiecki, in whose house the false Demetrius had first made his
appearance, and all those Polish nobles who flocked to his banner? Or
were they, too, moved by some ulterior motive which he could not fathom?

That was the riddle that plagued Boris Godunov what time--in the winter
of 1604--he sent his armies to meet the invader. He sent them because,
crippled now by gout, even the satisfaction of leading them was denied
him. He was forced to stay at home in the gloomy apartments of the
Kremlin, fretted by care, with the ghosts of his evil past to keep him
company, and assure him that the hour of judgment was at hand.

With deepening rage he heard how town after town capitulated to the
adventurer, and mistrusting Basmanov, who was in command, he sent
Shuiski to replace him. In January of 1605 the armies met at Dobrinichi,
and Demetrius suffered a severe defeat, which compelled him to fall back
on Putioli. He lost all his infantry, and every Russian taken in arms on
the pretender's side was remorselessly hanged as Boris had directed.

Hope began to revive in the heart of Boris; but as months passed and
no decision came, those hopes faded again, and the canker of the past
gnawed at his vitals and sapped his strength. And then there was ever
present to his mind the nightmare riddle of the pretender's identity. At
last, one evening in April, he sent for Smirnoy Otrepiev to question him
again concerning that nephew of his. Otrepiev came in fear this time. It
is not good to be the uncle of a man who is giving so much trouble to a
great prince.

Boris glared at him from blood-injected eyes. His round, white face
was haggard, his cheeks sagged, and his fleshly body had lost all its
erstwhile firm vigour.

"I have sent for you to question you again," he said, "touching this
lewd nephew of yours, this Grishka Otrepiev, this unfrocked monk, who
claims to be Tsar of Muscovy. Are you sure, man, that you have made no
mistake--are you sure?"

Otrepiev was shaken by the Tsar's manner, by the ferocity of his mien.
But he made answer: "Alas, Highness! I could not be mistaken. I am
sure."

Boris grunted, and moved his body irritably in his chair. His terrible
eyes watched Otrepiev mistrustfully. He had reached the mental stage in
which he mistrusted everything and everybody.

"You lie, you dog," he snarled savagely.

"Highness, I swear..."

"Lies!" Boris roared him down. "And here's the proof. Would Sigismund of
Poland have acknowledged him had he been what you say? When I denounced
him the unfrocked monk Grishka Otrepiev, would not Sigismund have
verified the statement had it been true?"

"The brothers Nagoy, the uncles of the dead Demetrius..." Otrepiev was
beginning, when again Boris interrupted him.

"Their acknowledgment of him came after Sigismund's, after--long
after--my denunciation." He broke into oaths. "I say you lie. Will you
stand there and pelter with me, man? Will you wait until the rack pulls
you joint from joint before you speak the truth?"

"Highness!" cried Otrepiev, "I have served you faithfully these years."

"The truth, man; as you hope for life," thundered the Tsar, "the whole
truth of this foul nephew of yours, if so be he is your nephew."

And Otrepiev spoke the whole truth at last in his great dread. "He is
not my nephew."

"Not?" It was a roar of rage. "You dared lie to me?"

Otrepiev's knees were loosened by terror, and he went down upon them
before the irate Tsar.

"I did not lie--not altogether. I told you a half-truth, Highness. His
name is Grishka Otrepiev; it is the name by which he always has been
known, and he is an unfrocked monk, all as I said, and the son of my
brother's wife."

"Then... then..." Boris was bewildered. Suddenly he understood. "And his
father?"

"Was Stephen Bathory, King of Poland. Grishka Otrepiev is King Stephen's
natural son."

Boris seemed to fight for breath for a moment.

"This is true?" he asked, and himself answered the question. "Of course
it is true. It is the light at last... at last. You may go."

Otrepiev stumbled out, thankful, surprised to escape so lightly. He
could not know of how little account to Boris was the deception he had
practiced in comparison with the truth he had now revealed, a truth
that shed a fearful, dazzling light upon the dark mystery of the false
Demetrius. The problem that so long had plagued the Tsar was solved at
last.

This pretended Demetrius, this unfrocked monk, was a natural son of
Stephen Bathory, and a Roman Catholic. Such men as Sigismund of Poland
and the Voyvode of Sandomir were not deceived on the score of his
identity. They, and no doubt other of the leading nobles of Poland,
knew the man for what he was, and because of it supported him, using the
fiction of his being Demetrius Ivanovitch to impose upon the masses, and
facilitate the pretenders occupation of the throne of Russia. And the
object of it was to set up in Muscovy a ruler who should be a Pole and
a Roman Catholic. Boris knew the bigotry of Sigismund, who already had
sacrificed a throne--that of Sweden--to his devout conscience, and he
saw clearly to the heart of this intrigue. Had he not heard that a
Papal Nuncio had been at Cracow, and that this Nuncio had been a stout
supporter of the pretender's claim? What could be the Pope's concern in
the Muscovite succession? Why should a Roman priest support the claim of
a prince to the throne of a country devoted to the Greek faith?

At last all was clear indeed to Boris. Rome was at the bottom of this
business, whose true aim was the Romanization of Russia; and Sigismund
had fetched Rome into it, had set Rome on. Himself an elected King of
Poland, Sigismund may have seen in the ambitious son of Stephen Bathory
one who might perhaps supplant him on the Polish throne. To divert
his ambition into another channel he had fathered--if he had not
invented--this fiction that the pretender was the dead Demetrius.

Had that fool Smirnoy Otrepiev but dealt frankly with him from the
first, what months of annoyance might he not have been spared; how easy
it might have been to prick this bubble of imposture. But better late
than never. To-morrow he would publish the true facts, and all the world
should know the truth; and it was a truth that must give pause to those
fools in this superstitious Russia, so devoted to the Orthodox Greek
Church, who favoured the pretender. They should see the trap that was
being baited for them.

There was a banquet in the Kremlin that night to certain foreign envoys,
and Boris came to table in better spirits than he had been for many
a day. He was heartened by the thought of what was now to do, by the
conviction that he held the false Demetrius in the hollow of his hand.
There to those envoys he would announce to-night what to-morrow he would
announce to all Russia--tell them of the discovery he had made, and
reveal to his subjects the peril in which they stood. Towards the close
of the banquet he rose to address his guests, announcing that he had
an important communication for them. In silence they waited for him to
speak. And then, abruptly, with no word yet spoken, he sank back into
his chair, fighting for breath, clawing the air, his face empurpling
until suddenly the blood gushed copiously from his mouth and nostrils.

He was vouchsafed time in which to strip off his splendid apparel and
wrap himself in a monk's robe, thus symbolizing the putting aside of
earthly vanities, and then he expired.

It has been now and then suggested that he was poisoned. His death
was certainly most opportune to Demetrius. But there is nothing in the
manner of it to justify the opinion that it resulted from anything other
than an apoplexy.

His death brought the sinister opportunist Shuiski back to Moscow to
place Boris's son Feodor on the throne. But the reign of this lad of
sixteen was very brief. Basmanov, who had gone back to the army, being
now inspired by jealousy and fear of the ambitious Shuiski, went over
at once to the pretender, and proclaimed him Tsar of Russia. Thereafter
events moved swiftly. Basmanov marched on Moscow, entered it in triumph,
and again proclaimed Demetrius, whereupon the people rose in revolt
against the son of the usurper Boris, stormed the Kremlin, and strangled
the boy and his mother.

Basil Shuiski would have shared their fate had he not bought his life at
the price of betrayal. Publicly he declared to the Muscovites that the
boy whose body he had seen at Uglich was not that of Demetrius, but of a
peasant's son, who had been murdered in his stead.

That statement cleared the last obstacle from the pretender's path, and
he advanced now to take possession of his throne. Yet before he occupied
it, he showed the real principles that actuated him, proved how true had
been Boris's conclusion. He ordered the arrest and degradation of the
Patriarch who had denounced and excommunicated him, and in his place
appointed Ignatius, Bishop of Riazan, a man suspected of belonging to
the Roman communion.

On the 30th of June of that year 1605, Demetrius made his triumphal
entry into Moscow. He went to prostrate himself before the tomb of Ivan
the Terrible, and then to visit the Tsarina Maria, who, after a brief
communion with him in private, came forth publicly to acknowledge him as
her son.

Just as Shuiski had purchased his life by a falsehood, so did she
purchase her enlargement from that convent where so long she had been
a prisoner, and restoration to the rank that was her proper due. After
all, she had cause for gratitude to Demetrius, who, in addition to
restoring her these things, had avenged her upon the hated Boris
Godunov.

His coronation followed in due season, and at last this amazing
adventurer found himself firmly seated upon the throne of Russia, with
Basmanov at his right hand to help and guide him. And at first all went
well, and the young Tsar earned a certain measure of popularity. If his
swarthy face was coarse-featured, yet his bearing was so courtly and
gracious that he won his way quickly to the hearts of his people. For
the rest he was of a tall, graceful figure, a fine horseman, and of a
knightly address at arms.

But he soon found himself in the impossible position of having to serve
two masters. On the one hand there was Russia, and the orthodox Russians
whose tsar he was, and on the other there were the Poles, who had made
him so at a price, and who now demanded payment. Because he saw that
this payment would be difficult and fraught with peril to himself
he would--after the common wont of princes who have attained their
objects--have repudiated the debt. And so he was disposed to ignore, or
at least to evade, the persistent reminders that reached him from the
Papal Nuncio, to whom he had promised the introduction into Russia of
the Roman faith.

But presently came a letter from Sigismund couched in different terms.
The King of Poland wrote to Demetrius that word had reached him that
Boris Godunov was still alive, and that he had taken refuge in England,
adding that he might be tempted to restore the fugitive to the throne of
Muscovy.

The threat contained in that bitter piece of sarcasm aroused Demetrius
to a sense of the responsibilities he had undertaken, which were
precisely as Boris Godunov had surmised. As a beginning he granted the
Jesuits permission to build a church within the sacred walls of the
Kremlin, whereby he gave great scandal. Soon followed other signs that
he was not a true son of the Orthodox Greek Church; he gave offence by
his indifference to public worship, by his neglect of Russian customs,
and by surrounding himself with Roman Catholic Poles, upon whom he
conferred high offices and dignities.

And there were those at hand ready to stir up public feeling against
him, resentful boyars quick to suspect that perhaps they had been
swindled. Foremost among these was the sinister turncoat Shuiski,
who had not derived from his perjury all the profit he expected,
who resented, above all, to see Basmanov--who had ever been his
rival--invested with a power second only to that of the Tsar himself.
Shuiski, skilled in intrigue, went to work in his underground, burrowing
fashion. He wrought upon the clergy, who in their turn wrought upon the
populace, and presently all was seething disaffection under a surface
apparently calm.

The eruption came in the following May, when Maryna, the daughter of
the Palatine of Sandomir, made her splendid entry into Moscow, the
bride-elect of the young Tsar. The dazzling procession and the feasting
that followed found little favour in the eyes of the Muscovites, who now
beheld their city aswarm with heretic Poles.

The marriage was magnificently solemnized on the 18th of May, 1606.
And now Shuiski applied a match to the train he had so skilfully laid.
Demetrius had caused a timber fort to be built before the walls
of Moscow for a martial spectacle which he had planned for the
entertainment of his bride. Shuiski put it abroad that the fort was
intended to serve as an engine of destruction, and that the martial
spectacle was a pretence, the real object being that from the fort the
Poles were to cast firebrands into the city, and then proceed to the
slaughter of the inhabitants.

No more was necessary to infuriate an already exasperated populace.
They flew to arms, and on the night of the 29th of May they stormed
the Kremlin, led on by the arch-traitor Shuiski himself, to the cry of
"Death to the heretic! Death to the impostor!"

They broke into the palace, and swarmed up the stairs into the Tsar's
bedchamber, slaying the faithful Basmanov, who stood sword in hand to
bar the way and give his master time to escape. The Tsar leapt from
a balcony thirty feet to the ground, broke his leg, and lay there
helpless, to be dispatched by his enemies, who presently discovered him.

He died firmly and fearlessly protesting that he was Demetrius
Ivanovitch. Nevertheless, he was Grishka Otrepiev, the unfrocked monk.

It has been said that he was no more than an instrument in the hands of
priestcraft, and that because he played his part badly he met his
doom. But something more he was. He was an instrument indeed, not of
priestcraft, but of Fate, to bring home to Boris Godunov the hideous
sins that stained his soul, and to avenge his victims by personating one
of them. In that personation he had haunted Boris as effectively as if
he had been the very ghost of the boy murdered at Uglich, haunted and
tortured, and finally broken him so that he died.

That was the part assigned him by Fate in the mysterious scheme of human
things. And that part being played, the rest mattered little. In the
nature of him and of his position it was impossible that his imposture
should be other than ephemeral.





III. THE HERMOSA FEMBRA

An Episode of the Inquisition in Seville



Apprehension hung like a thundercloud over the city of Seville in those
early days of the year 1481. It had been growing since the previous
October, when the Cardinal of Spain and Frey Tomas de Torquemada,
acting jointly on behalf of the Sovereigns--Ferdinand and Isabella--had
appointed the first inquisitors for Castile, ordering them to set up a
Tribunal of the Faith in Seville, to deal with the apostatizing said to
be rampant among the New-Christians, or baptized Jews, who made up so
large a proportion of the population.

Among the many oppressive Spanish enactments against the Children
of Israel, it was prescribed that all should wear the distinguishing
circlet of red cloth on the shoulder of their gabardines; that they
should reside within the walled confines of their ghettos and never be
found beyond them after nightfall, and that they should not practice as
doctors, surgeons, apothecaries, or innkeepers. The desire to emancipate
themselves from these and other restrictions upon their commerce with
Christians and from the generally intolerable conditions of bondage
and ignominy imposed upon them, had driven many to accept baptism and
embrace Christianity.

But even such New-Christians as were sincere in their professions of
faith failed to find in this baptism the peace they sought. Bitter
racial hostility, though sometimes tempered, was never extinguished by
their conversion.

Hence the alarm with which they viewed the gloomy, funereal, sinister
pageant--the white-robed, black-mantled and hooded inquisitors, with
their attendant familiars and barefoot friars--headed by a Dominican
bearing the white Cross, which invaded the city of Seville one day
towards the end of December and took its way to the Convent of St. Paul,
there to establish the Holy Office of the Inquisition. The fear of the
New-Christians that they were to be the object of the attentions of this
dread tribunal had sufficed to drive some thousands of them out of the
city, to seek refuge in such feudal lordships as those of the Duke of
Medina Sidonia, the Marquis of Cadiz, and the Count of Arcos.

This exodus had led to the publication by the newly appointed
inquisitors of the edict of 2nd January, in which they set forth
that inasmuch as it had come to their knowledge that many persons had
departed out of Seville in fear of prosecution upon grounds of heretical
pravity, they commanded the nobles of the Kingdom of Castile that within
fifteen days they should make an exact return of the persons of both
sexes who had sought refuge in their lordships or jurisdictions; that
they arrest all these and lodge them in the prison of the Inquisition in
Seville, confiscating their property, and holding it at the disposal
of the inquisitors; that none should shelter any fugitive under pain
of greater excommunication and of other penalties by law established
against abettors of heretics.

The harsh injustice that lay in this call to arrest men and women merely
because they had departed from Seville before departure was in any way
forbidden, revealed the severity with which the inquisitors intended to
proceed. It completed the consternation of the New-Christians who had
remained behind, and how numerous these were may be gathered from the
fact that in the district of Seville alone they numbered a hundred
thousand, many of them occupying, thanks to the industry and talent
characteristic of their race, positions of great eminence. It even
disquieted the well-favoured young Don Rodrigo de Cardona, who in all
his vain, empty, pampered and rather vicious life had never yet known
perturbation. Not that he was a New-Christian. He was of a lineage that
went back to the Visigoths, of purest red Castilian blood, untainted by
any strain of that dark-hued, unclean fluid alleged to flow in Hebrew
veins. But it happened that he was in love with the daughter of the
millionaire Diego de Susan, a girl whose beauty was so extraordinary
that she was known throughout Seville and for many a mile around as
la Hermosa Fembra; and he knew that such commerce--licit or illicitly
conducted--was disapproved by the holy fathers. His relations with the
girl had been perforce clandestine, because the disapproval of the holy
fathers was matched in thoroughness by that of Diego de Susan. It had
been vexatious enough on that account not to be able to boast himself
the favoured of the beautiful and opulent Isabella de Susan; it was
exasperating to discover now a new and more imperative reason for this
odious secrecy.

Never sped a lover to his mistress in a frame of mind more aggrieved
than that which afflicted Don Rodrigo as, tight-wrapped in his black
cloak, he gained the Calle de Ataud on that January night.

Anon, however, when by way of a garden gate and an easily escaladed
balcony he found himself in the presence of Isabella, the delight of her
effaced all other considerations. Her father was from home, as she had
told him in the note that summoned him; he was away at Palacios on some
merchant's errand, and would not return until the morrow. The servants
were all abed, and so Don Rodrigo might put off his cloak and hat, and
lounge at his ease upon the low Moorish divan, what time she waited upon
him with a Saracen goblet filled with sweet wine of Malaga. The room in
which she received him was one set apart for her own use, her bower, a
long, low ceilinged chamber, furnished with luxury and taste. The walls
were hung with tapestries, the floor spread with costly Eastern rugs;
on an inlaid Moorish table a tall, three-beaked lamp of beaten copper
charged with aromatic oil shed light and perfume through the apartment.

Don Rodrigo sipped his wine, and his dark, hungry eyes followed her as
she moved about him with vaguely voluptuous, almost feline grace. The
wine, the heavy perfume of the lamp, and the beauty of her played
havoc among them with his senses, so that he forgot for the moment his
Castilian lineage and clean Christian blood, forgot that she derived
from the accursed race of the Crucifiers. All that he remembered was
that she was the loveliest woman in Seville, daughter to the wealthiest
man, and in that hour of weakness he decided to convert into reality
that which had hitherto been no more than an infamous presence. He would
loyally fulfil the false, disloyal promises he had made. He would take
her to wife. It was a sacrifice which her beauty and her wealth should
make worth while. Upon that impulse he spoke now, abruptly:

"Isabella, when will you marry me?"

She stood before him, looking down into his weak, handsome face, her
fingers interlacing his own. She merely smiled. The question did
not greatly move her. Not knowing him for the scoundrel that he was,
guessing nothing of the present perturbation of his senses, she found it
very natural that he should ask her to appoint the day.

"It is a question you must ask my father," she answered him.

"I will," said he, "to-morrow, on his return." And he drew her down
beside him.

But that father was nearer than either of them dreamed. At that very
moment the soft thud of the closing housedoor sounded through the house.
It brought her sharply to her feet, and loose from his coiling arms,
with quickened breath and blanching face. A moment she hung there,
tense, then sped to the door of the room, set it ajar and listened.

Up the stairs came the sound of footsteps and of muttering voices. It
was her father, and others with him.

With ever-mounting fear she turned to Don Rodrigo, and breathed the
question: "If they should come here?"

The Castilian stood where he had risen by the divan, his face paler
now than its pale, aristocratic wont, his eyes reflecting the fear that
glittered in her own. He had no delusion as to what action Diego de
Susan would take upon discovering him. These Jewish dogs were quickly
stirred to passion, and as jealous as their betters of the honour of
their womenfolk. Already Don Rodrigo in imagination saw his clean red
Christian blood bespattering that Hebrew floor, for he had no weapon
save the heavy Toledo dagger at his girdle, and Diego de Susan was not
alone.

It was, he felt, a ridiculous position for a Hidalgo of Spain. But his
dignity was to suffer still greater damage. In another moment she had
bundled him into an alcove behind the arras at the chamber's end, a tiny
closet that was no better than a cupboard contrived for the storing of
household linen. She had-moved with a swift precision which at another
time might have provoked his admiration, snatching up his cloak and hat,
and other evidences of his presence, quenching the lamp, and dragging
him to that place of cramped concealment, which she remained to share
with him.

Came presently movements in the room beyond, and the voice of her
father:

"We shall be securest from intrusion here. It is my daughter's room.
If you will give me leave, I will go down again to admit our other
friends."

Those other friends, as Don Rodrigo gathered, continued to arrive for
the next half-hour, until in the end there must have been some twenty
of them assembled in that chamber. The mutter of voices had steadily
increased, but so confused that no more than odd words, affording no
clue to the reason of this gathering, had reached the hidden couple.

And then quite suddenly a silence fell, and on that silence beat the
sharp, clear voice of Diego de Susan addressing them.

"My friends," he said, "I have called you hither that we may concert
measures for the protection of ourselves and all New-Christians in
Seville from the fresh peril by which we are menaced. The edict of the
inquisitors reveals how much we have to fear. You may gather from it
that the court of the Holy Office is hardly likely to deal in justice,
and that the most innocent may find himself at any moment exposed to
its cruel mercies. Therefore it is for us now to consider how to protect
ourselves and our property from the unscrupulous activities of this
tribunal. You are the principal New Christian citizens of Seville;
you are wealthy, not only in property, but also in the goodwill of the
people, who trust and respect, and at need will follow, you. If nothing
less will serve, we must have recourse to arms; and so that we
are resolute and united, my friends, we shall prevail against the
inquisitors."

Within the alcove, Don Rodrigo felt his skin roughening with horror at
this speech, which breathed sedition not only against the Sovereigns,
but against the very Church. And with his horror was blent a certain
increase of fear. If his situation had been perilous before, it was
tenfold more dangerous now. Discovery, since he had overheard this
treason, must mean his certain death. And Isabella, realizing the same
to the exclusion of all else, clutched his arm and cowered against him
in the dark.

There was worse to follow. Susan's address was received with a murmur
of applause, and then others spoke, and several were named, and their
presence thus disclosed. There was the influential Manuel Sauli, who
next to Susan was the wealthiest man in Seville; there was Torralba, the
Governor of Triana; Juan Abolafio, the farmer of the royal customs, and
his brother Fernandez, the licentiate, and there were others--all of
them men of substance, some even holding office under the Crown. Not one
was there who dissented from anything that Susan had said; rather did
each contribute some spur to the general resolve. In the end it was
concerted that each of those present should engage himself to raise a
proportion of the men, arms and money that would be needed for their
enterprise. And upon that the meeting was dissolved, and they departed.
Susan himself went with them. He had work to do in the common cause, he
announced, and he would do it that very night in which it was supposed
that he was absent at Palacios.

At last, when all had gone, and the house was still again, Isabella and
her lover crept forth from their concealment, and in the light of the
lamp which Susan had left burning each looked into the other's white,
startled face. So shaken was Don Rodrigo with horror of what he had
overheard, and with the terror of discovery, that it was with difficulty
he kept his teeth from chattering.

"Heaven protect us!" he gasped. "What Judaizing was this?"

"Judaizing!" she echoed. It was the term applied to apostacy, to the
relapse of New-Christians to Judaism, an offense to be expiated at the
stake. "Here was no Judaizing. Are you mad, Rodrigo? You heard no single
word that sinned against the Faith."

"Did I not? I heard treason enough to."

"No, nor treason either. You heard honourable, upright men considering
measures of defence against oppression, injustice, and evil
acquisitiveness masquerading in the holy garments of religion."

He stared askance at her for a moment, then his full lips curled into a
sneer. "Of course you would seek to justify them," he said. "You are of
that foul brood yourself. But you cannot think to cozen me, who am of
clean Old-christian blood and a true son of Mother Church. These men
plot evil against the Holy Inquisition. Is that not Judaizing when it is
done by Jews?"

She was white to the lips, and a new horror stared at him from her
great dark eyes; her lovely bosom rose and fell in tumult. Yet still she
sought to reason with him.

"They are not Jews--not one of them. Why, Perez is himself in holy
orders. All of them are Christians, and..."

"Newly-baptized!" he broke in, sneering viciously. "A defilement of that
holy sacrament to gain them worldly advantages. That is revealed by what
passed here just now. Jews they were born, the sons of Jews, and Jews
they remain under their cloak of mock Christianity, to be damned as
Jews in the end." He was panting now with fiery indignation; a holy zeal
inflamed this profligate defiler. "God forgive me that ever I entered
here. Yet I do believe that it was His will that I should come to
overhear what is being plotted. Let me depart from hence."

With a passionate gesture of abhorrence he swung towards the door. Her
clutch upon his arm arrested him.

"Whither do you go?" she asked trim sharply. He looked now into her
eyes, and of all that they contained he saw only fear; he saw nothing of
the hatred into which her love had been transmuted in that moment by
his unsparing insults to herself, her race and her home, by the purpose
which she clearly read in him.

"Whither?" he echoed, and sought to shake her off.

"Whither my Christian duty bids me."

It was enough for her. Before he could prevent or suspect her purpose,
she had snatched the heavy Toledo blade from his girdle, and armed with
it stood between the door and him.

"A moment, Don Rodrigo. Do not attempt to advance, or, as Heaven watches
us, I strike, and it maybe that I shall kill you. We must talk awhile
before you go."

Amazed, chapfallen, half-palsied, he stood before her, his fine
religious zeal wiped out by fear of that knife in her weak woman's hand.
Rapidly to-night was she coming into real knowledge of this Castilian
gentleman, whom with pride she had taken for her lover. It was a
knowledge that was to sear her presently with self-loathing and
self-contempt. But for the moment her only consideration was that, as a
direct result of her own wantonness, her father stood in mortal peril.
If he should perish through the deletion of this creature, she would
account herself his slayer.

"You have not considered that the deletion you intend will destroy my
father," she said quietly.

"There is my Christian duty to consider," answered he, but without
boldness now.

"Perhaps. But there is something you must set against it. Have you no
duty as a lover--no duty to me?"

"No earthly duty can weigh against a spiritual obligation...."

"Ah, wait! Have patience. You have not well considered, that is plain.
In coming here in secret you wronged my father. You will not trouble to
deny it.

"Jointly we wronged him, you and I. Will you then take advantage of
something learnt whilst you were hiding there like a thief from the
consequences of what you did, and so do him yet this further wrong?"

"Must I wrong my conscience?" he asked her sullenly.

"Indeed, I fear you must."

"Imperil my immortal soul?" He almost laughed.

"You talk in vain."

"But I have something more than words for you." With her left hand she
drew upon the fine gold chain about her neck, and brought forth a tiny
jewelled cross. Passing the chain over her head, she held it out.

"Take this," she bade him. "Take it, I say. Now, with that sacred symbol
in your hand, make solemn oath to divulge no word of what you have
learnt here tonight, or else resign yourself to an unshriven death. For
either you take that oath, or I rouse the servants and have you dealt
with as one who has intruded here unbidden for an evil end." She backed
away from him as she spoke, and threw wide the door. Then, confronting
him from the threshold, she admonished him again, her voice no louder
than a whisper. "Quick now! Resolve yourself. Will you die here with all
your sins upon you, and so destroy for all eternity the immortal soul
that urges you to this betrayal, or will you take the oath that I
require?"

He began an argument that was like a sermon of the Faith. But she cut
him short. "For the last time!" she bade him. "Will you decide?"

He chose the coward's part, of course, and did violence tomb fine
conscience. With the cross in his hand he repeated after her the words
of the formidable oath that she administered an oath which it must damn
his immortal soul to break. Because of that, because she imagined that
she had taken the measure of his faith, she returned him his dagger,
and let him go at last. She imagined that she had bound him fast in
irrefragable spiritual bonds.

And even on the morrow, when her father and all those who had been
present at that meeting at Susan's house were arrested by order of the
Holy Office of the Inquisition, she still clung to that belief. Yet
presently a doubt crept in, a doubt that she must at all costs resolve.
And so presently she called for her litter, and had herself carried to
the Convent of St. Paul, where she asked to see Frey Alonso de Ojeda,
the Prior of the Dominicans of Seville.

She was left to wait in a square, cheerless, dimly-lighted room pervaded
by a musty smell, that had for only furniture a couple of chairs and
a praying-stool, and for only ornament a great, gaunt crucifix hanging
upon one of its whitewashed walls.

Thither came presently two Dominican friars. One of these was a
harsh-featured man of middle height and square build, the uncompromising
zealot Ojeda. The other was tall and lean, stooping slightly at the
shoulders, haggard and pale of countenance, with deep-set, luminous dark
eyes, and a tender, wistful mouth. This was the Queen's confessor, Frey
Tomas de Torquemada, Grand Inquisitor of Castile. He approached her,
leaving Ojeda in the background, and stood a moment regarding her with
eyes of infinite kindliness and compassion.

"You are the daughter of that misguided man, Diego de Susan," he said,
in a gentle voice. "God help and strengthen you, my child, against the
trials that may be in store for you. What do you seek at our poor hands?
Speak, child, without fear."

"Father," she faltered, "I come to implore your pity."

"No need to implore it, child. Should I withhold pity who stand myself
in need of pity, being a sinner--as are we all."

"It is for my father that I come to beg your mercy."

"So I supposed." A shade crossed the gentle, wistful face; the tender
melancholy deepened in the eyes that regarded her. "If your father is
innocent of what has been alleged against him, the benign tribunal of
the Holy Office will bring his innocence to light, and rejoice therein;
if he is guilty, if he has strayed--as we may all stray unless fortified
by heavenly grace--he shall be given the means of expiation, that his
salvation may be assured him."

She shivered at the words. She knew the mercy in which the inquisitors
dealt, a mercy so spiritual that it took no account of the temporal
agonies inflicted to ensure it.

"My father is innocent of any sin against the Faith," said she.

"Are you so sure?" croaked the harsh voice of Ojeda, breaking in.
"Consider well. Remember that your duty as a Christian is above your
duty as a daughter."

Almost had she bluntly demanded the name of her father's accuser, that
thus she might reach the object of her visit. Betimes she checked the
rash impulse, perceiving that subtlety was here required; that a direct
question would close the door to all information. Skilfully, then, she
chose her line of attack.

"I am sure," she exclaimed, "that he is a more fervent and pious
Christian--New-Christian though he be--than his accuser."

The wistfulness faded from Torquemada's eyes. They grew keen, as became
the eyes of an inquisitor, the eyes of a sleuth, quick to fasten on a
spoor. But he shook his head.

Ojeda advanced. "That I cannot believe," said he. "The deletion was
made from a sense of duty so pure that the delator did not hesitate to
confess the sin of his own commission through which he had discovered
the treachery of Don Diego and his associates."

She could have cried out in anguish at this answer to her unspoken
question. Yet she controlled herself, and that no single doubt should
linger, she thrust boldly home.

"He confessed it?" she cried, seemingly aghast. The friar slowly nodded.
"Don Rodrigo confessed?" she insisted, as will the incredulous.

Abruptly the friar nodded again; and as abruptly checked, recollecting
himself.

"Don Rodrigo?" he echoed, and asked: "Who mentioned Don Rodrigo?"

But it was too late. His assenting nod had betrayed the truth, had
confirmed her worst fear. She swayed a little; the room swam round
her, she felt as she would swoon. Then blind indignation against that
forsworn betrayer surged to revive her. If it was through her weakness
and undutifulness that her father had been destroyed, through her
strength should he be avenged, though in doing so she pulled down and
destroyed herself.

"And he confessed to his own sin?" she was repeating slowly, ever on
that musing, incredulous note. "He dared confess himself a Judaizer?"

"A Judaizer!" Sheer horror now overspread the friar's grim countenance.
"A Judaizer! Don Rodrigo? Oh, impossible!"

"But I thought you said he had confessed."

"Why, yes, but... but not to that." Her pale lips smiled, sadly
contemptuous.

"I see. He set limits of prudence upon his confession. He left out
his Judatting practices. He did not tell you, for instance, that this
deletion was an act of revenge against me who refused to marry him,
having discovered his unfaith, and fearing its consequences in this
world and the next."

Ojeda stared at her in sheer, incredulous amazement.

And then Torquemada spoke: "Do you say that Don Rodrigo de Cardona is a
Judaizer? Oh, it is unbelievable."

"Yet I could give you evidence that should convince you."

"Then so you shall. It is your sacred duty, lest you become an abettor
of heresy, and yourself liable to the extreme penalty."

It would be a half-hour later, perhaps, when she quitted the Convent
of St. Paul to return home, with Hell in her heart, knowing in life no
purpose but that of avenging the parent her folly had destroyed. As she
was being carried past the Alcazar, she espied across the open space
a tall, slim figure in black, in whom she recognized her lover, and
straightway she sent the page who paced beside her litter to call him to
her side. The summons surprised him after what had passed between them;
moreover, considering her father's present condition, he was reluctant
to be seen in attendance upon the beautiful, wealthy Isabella de Susan.
Nevertheless, urged on by curiosity, he went.

Her greeting increased his surprise.

"I am in deep distress, Rodrigo, as you may judge," she told him sadly.
"You will have heard what has befallen my father?"

He looked at her sharply, yet saw nothing but loveliness rendered more
appealing by sorrow. Clearly she did not suspect him of betrayal; did
not realize that an oath extorted by violence--and an oath, moreover, to
be false to a sacred duty--could not be accounted binding.

"I... I heard of it an hour ago," he lied a thought unsteadily. "I... I
commiserate you deeply."

"I deserve commiseration," answered she, "and so does my poor father,
and those others. It is plain that amongst those he trusted there was
a traitor, a spy, who went straight from that meeting to inform against
them. If I but had a list it were easy to discover the betrayer. One
need but ascertain who is the one of all who were present whose arrest
has been omitted." Her lovely sorrowful eyes turned full upon him. "What
is to become of me now, alone in the world?" she asked him. "My father
was my only friend."

The subtle appeal of her did its work swiftly. Besides, he saw here a
noble opportunity worth surely some little risk.

"Your only friend?" he asked her thickly. "Was there no one else? Is
there no one else, Isabella?"

"There was," she said, and sighed heavily. "But after what befell last
night, when... You know what is in my mind. I was distraught then,
mad with fear for this poor father of mine, so that I could not even
consider his sin in its full heinousness, nor see how righteous was your
intent to inform against him. Yet I am thankful that it was not by
your deletion that he was taken. The thought of that is to-day my only
consolation."

They had reached her house by now. Don Rodrigo put forth his arm to
assist her to alight from her litter, and begged leave to accompany her
within. But she denied him.

"Not now--though I am grateful to you, Rodrigo. Soon, if you will come
and comfort me, you may. I will send you word when I am more able to
receive you--that is, if I am forgiven for..."

"Not another word," he begged her. "I honour you for what you did. It is
I who should sue to you for forgiveness."

"You are very noble and generous, Don Rodrigo. God keep you!" And so she
left him.

She had found him--had she but known it--a dejected, miserable man in
the act of reckoning up all that he had lost. In betraying Susan he had
acted upon an impulse that sprang partly from rage, and partly from
a sense of religious duty. In counting later the cost to himself,
he cursed the folly of his rage, and began to wonder if such strict
observance of religious duty was really worth while to a man who had his
way to make in the world. In short, he was in the throes of reaction.
But now, in her unsuspicion, he found his hopes revive. She need never
know. The Holy Office preserved inviolate secrecy on the score of
deletions--since to do otherwise might be to discourage delators--and
there were no confrontations of accuser and accused, such as took place
in temporal courts. Don Rodrigo left the Calle de Ataud better pleased
with the world than he had been since morning.

On the morrow he went openly to visit her; but he was denied, a servant
announcing her indisposed. This fretted him, damped his hopes, and
thereby increased his longing. But on the next day he received from her
a letter which made him the most ample amends:

"Rodrigo,--There is a matter on which we must come early to an
understanding. Should my poor father be convicted of heresy and
sentenced, it follows that his property will be confiscated, since as
the daughter of a convicted heretic I may not inherit. For myself I care
little; but I am concerned for you, Rodrigo, since if in spite of what
has happened you would still wish to make me your wife, as you declared
on Monday, it would be my wish to come to you well cowered. Now the
inheritance which would be confiscated by the Holy Office from the
daughter of a heretic might not be so confiscated from the wife of a
gentleman of Castile. I say no more. Consider this well, and decide as
your heart dictates. I shall receive you to-morrow if you come to me.

"Isabella."

She bade him consider well. But the matter really needed little
consideration. Diego de Susan was sure to go to the fire. His fortune
was estimated at ten million maravedis. That fortune, it seemed, Rodrigo
was given the chance to make his own by marrying the beautiful Isabella
at once, before sentence came to be passed upon her father. The
Holy Office might impose a fine, but would not go further where the
inheritance of a Castilian nobleman of clean lineage was concerned. He
was swayed between admiration of her shrewdness and amazement at his own
good fortune. Also his vanity was immensely flattered.

He sent her three lines to protest his undying love, and his resolve
to marry her upon the morrow, and went next day in person, as she had
bidden him, to carry out the resolve.

She received him in the mansion's best room, a noble chamber furnished
with a richness such as no other house in Seville could have boasted.
She had arrayed herself for the interview with an almost wanton cunning
that should enhance her natural endowments. Her high-waisted gown,
low-cut and close-fitting in the bodice, was of cloth of gold, edged
with miniver at skirt and cuffs and neck. On her white bosom hung a
priceless carcanet of limpid diamonds, and through the heavy tresses of
her bronze-coloured hair was coiled a string of lustrous pearls. Never
had Don Rodrigo found her more desirable; never had he felt so secure
and glad in his possession of her. The quickening blood flushing now his
olive face, he gathered her slim shapeliness into his arms, kissing her
cheek, her lips, her neck.

"My pearl, my beautiful, my wife!" he murmured, rapturously. Then added
the impatient question: "The priest? Where is the priest that shall make
us one?"

Deep, unfathomable eyes looked up to meet his burning glance.
Languorously she lay against his breast, and her red lips parted in a
smile that maddened him.

"You love me, Rodrigo--in spite of all?"

"Love you!" It was a throbbing, strangled cry, an almost inarticulate
ejaculation. "Better than life--better than salvation."

She fetched a sigh, as of deep content, and nestled closer. "Oh, I am
glad--so glad--that your love for me is truly strong. I am about to put
it to the test, perhaps."

He held her very close. "What is this test, beloved?"

"It is that I want this marriage knot so tied that it shall be
indissoluble save by death."

"Why, so do I," quoth he, who had so much to gain.

"And, therefore, because after all, though I profess Christianity, there
is Jewish blood in my veins, I would have a marriage that must satisfy
even my father when he regains his freedom, as I believe he will--for,
after all, he is not charged with any sin against the faith."

She paused, and he was conscious of a premonitory chill upon his ardour.

"What do you mean?" he asked her, and his voice was strained.

"I mean--you'll not be angry with me?--I mean that I would have us
married not only by a Christian priest, and in the Christian manner,
but also and first of all by a Rabbi, and in accordance with the Jewish
rites."

Upon the words, she felt his encircling arms turn limp, and relax their
grip upon her, whereupon she clung to him the more tightly.

"Rodrigo! Rodrigo! If you truly love me, if you truly want me, you'll
not deny me this condition, for I swear to you that once I am your wife
you shall never hear anything again to remind you that I am of Jewish
blood."

His face turned ghastly pale, his lips writhed and twitched, and beads
of sweat stood out upon his brow.

"My God!" he groaned. "What do you ask? I... I can't. It were a
desecration, a defilement."

She thrust him from her in a passion. "You regard it so? You protest
love, and in the very hour when I propose to sacrifice all to you, you
will not make this little sacrifice for my sake, you even insult the
faith that was my forbears', if it is not wholly mine. I misjudged you,
else I had not bidden you here to-day. I think you had better leave me."

Trembling, appalled, a prey to an ineffable tangle of emotion, he sought
to plead, to extenuate his attitude, to move her from her own. He ranted
torrentially, but in vain. She stood as cold and aloof as earlier she
had been warm and clinging. He had proved the measure of his love. He
could go his ways.

The thing she proposed was to him, as he had truly said, a desecration,
a defilement. Yet to have dreamed yourself master of ten million
maravedis, and a matchless woman, is a dream not easily relinquished.
There was enough cupidity in his nature, enough neediness in his
condition, to make the realization of that dream worth the defilement of
the abominable marriage rites upon which she insisted. But fear remained
where Christian scruples were already half-effaced.

"You do not realize," he cried. "If it were known that I so much as
contemplated this, the Holy Office would account it clear proof of
apostasy, and send me to the fire."

"If that were your only objection it were easily overcome," she informed
him coldly. "For who should ever inform against you? The Rabbi who is
waiting above-stairs dare not for his own life's sake betray us, and who
else will ever know?"

"You can be sure of that?"

He was conquered. But she played him yet awhile, compelling him in his
turn to conquer the reluctance which his earlier hesitation had begotten
in her, until it was he who pleaded insistently for this Jewish marriage
that filled him with such repugnance.

And so at last she yielded, and led him up to that bower of hers in
which the conspirators had met.

"Where is the Rabbi?" he asked impatiently, looking round that empty
room.

"I will summon him if you are quite sure that you desire him."

"Sure? Have I not protested enough? Can you still doubt me?"

"No," she said. She stood apart, conning him steadily. "Yet I would not
have it supposed that you were in any way coerced to this." They were
odd words; but he heeded not their oddness. He was hardly master of the
wits which in themselves were never of the brightest. "I require you
to declare that it is your own desire that our marriage should be
solemnized in accordance with the Jewish rites and the law of Moses."

And he, fretted now by impatience, anxious to have this thing done and
ended, made answer hastily:

"Why, to be sure I do declare it to be my wish that we should be so
married--in the Jewish manner, and in accordance with the law of Moses.
And now, where is the Rabbi?" He caught a sound and saw a quiver in
the tapestries that masked the door of the alcove. "Ah! He is here, I
suppose...."

He checked abruptly, and recoiled as from a blow, throwing up his hands
in a convulsive gesture. The tapestry had been swept aside, and forth
stepped not the Rabbi he expected, but a tall, gaunt man, stooping
slightly at the shoulders, dressed in the white habit and black cloak of
the order of St. Dominic, his face lost in the shadows of a black cowl.
Behind him stood two lay brothers of the order, two armed familiars of
the Holy Office, displaying the white cross on their sable doublets.

Terrified by that apparition, evoked, as it seemed, by those terribly
damning words he had pronounced, Don Rodrigo stood blankly at gaze a
moment, not even seeking to understand how this dread thing had come to
pass.

The friar pushed back his cowl, as he advanced, and displayed the
tender, compassionate, infinitely wistful countenance of Frey Tomas de
Torquemada. And infinitely compassionate and wistful came the voice of
that deeply sincere and saintly man.

"My son, I was told this of you--that you were a Judaizer--yet before
I could bring myself to believe so incredible a thing in one of your
lineage, I required the evidence of my own senses. Oh, my poor child, by
what wicked counsels have you been led so far astray?" The sweet, tender
eyes of the inquisitor were luminous with unshed tears. Sorrowing pity
shook his gentle voice.

And then Don Rodrigo's terror changed to wrath, and this exploded. He
flung out an arm towards Isabella in passionate denunciation.

"It was that woman who bewitched and fooled and seduced me into this. It
was a trap she baited for my undoing."

"It was, indeed. She had my consent to do so, to test the faith which I
was told you lacked. Had your heart been free of heretical pravity the
trap had never caught you; had your faith been strong, my son, you could
not have been seduced from loyalty to your Redeemers."

"Father! Hear me, I implore you!" He flung down upon his knees, and held
out shaking, supplicating hands.

"You shall be heard, my son. The Holy Office does not condemn any man
unheard. But what hope can you put in protestations? I had been told
that your life was disorderly and vain, and I grieved that it should be
so, trembled for you when I heard how wide you opened the gates of your
soul to evil. But remembering that age and reason will often make good
and penitent amends for the follies of early life, I hoped and prayed
for you. Yet that you should Judaize--that you should be bound in
wedlock by the unclean ties of Judaism--Oh!" The melancholy voice
broke off upon a sob, and Torquemada covered his pale face with his
hands--long, white, emaciated, almost transparent hands. "Pray now,
my child, for grace and strength," he exhorted. "Offer up the little
temporal suffering that may yet be yours in atonement for your error,
and so that your heart be truly contrite and penitent, you shall deserve
salvation from that Divine Mercy which is boundless. You shall have my
prayers, my son. I can do no more. Take him hence."

On the 6th of February of that year 1481, Seville witnessed the first
Auto de Fe, the sufferers being Diego de Susan, his fellow-conspirators,
and Don Rodrigo de Cardona. The function presented but little of the
ghastly pomp that was soon to distinguish these proceedings. But the
essentials were already present.

In a procession headed by a Dominican bearing aloft the green Cross of
the Inquisition, swathed in a veil of crepe, behind whom walked two
by two the members of the Confraternity of St. Peter the Martyr, the
familiars of the Holy Office, came the condemned, candle in hand,
barefoot, in the ignominious yellow penitential sack. Hemmed about by
halberdiers, they were paraded through the streets to the Cathedral,
where Mass was said and a sermon of the faith preached to them by
the stern Ojeda. Thereafter they were conveyed beyond the city to the
meadows of Tablada, where the stake and faggots awaited them.

Thus the perjured accuser perished in the same holocaust with the
accused. Thus was Isabella de Susan, known as la Hermosa Fembra, avenged
by falseness upon the worthless lover who made her by falseness the
instrument of her father's ruin.

For herself, when all was over, she sought the refuge of a convent. But
she quitted it without professing. The past gave her no peace, and she
returned to the world to seek in excesses an oblivion which the cloister
denied her and only death could give. In her will she disposed that her
skull should be placed over the doorway of the house in the Calle de
Ataud, as a measure of posthumous atonement for her sins. And there the
fleshless, grinning skull of that once lovely head abode for close upon
four hundred years. It was still to be seen there when Buonaparte's
legions demolished the Holy Office of the Inquisition.






IV. THE PASTRY-COOK OF MADRIGAL

The Story of the False Sebastian of Portugal



There is not in all that bitter tragi-comic record of human frailty
which we call History a sadder story than this of the Princess Anne, the
natural daughter of the splendid Don John of Austria, natural son of the
Emperor Charles V. and, so, half-brother to the bowelless King Philip
II. of Spain. Never was woman born to royal or semi-royal state who was
more utterly the victim of the circumstances of her birth.

Of the natural sons of princes something could be made, as witness the
dazzling career of Anne's own father; but for natural daughters--and
especially for one who, like herself, bore a double load of
cadency--there was little use or hope. Their royal blood set them in a
class apart; their bastardy denied them the worldly advantages of that
spurious eminence. Their royal blood prescribed that they must mate with
princes; their bastardy raised obstacles to their doing so. Therefore,
since the world would seem to hold no worthy place for them, it
was expedient to withdraw them from the world before its vanities
beglamoured them, and to immure them in convents, where they might
aspire with confidence to the sterile dignity of abbesshood.

Thus it befell with Anne. At the early age of six she had been sent to
the Benedictine convent at Burgos, and in adolescence removed thence
to the Monastery of Santa Maria la Real at Madrigal, where it was
foreordained that she should take the veil. She went unwillingly. She
had youth, and youth's hunger of life, and not even the repressive
conditions in which she had been reared had succeeded in extinguishing
her high spirit or in concealing from her the fact that she was
beautiful. On the threshold of that convent which by her dread uncle's
will was to be her living tomb, above whose gates her spirit may have
beheld the inscription, "Lasciate ogni speranza, voi ch' entrate!" she
made her protest, called upon the bishop who accompanied her to bear
witness that she did not go of her own free will.

But what she willed was a matter of no account. King Philip's was,
under God's, the only will in Spain. Still, less perhaps to soften the
sacrifice imposed upon her than because of what he accounted due to one
of his own blood, his Catholic Majesty accorded her certain privileges
unusual to members of religious communities: he granted her a little
civil list--two ladies-in-waiting and two grooms--and conferred upon her
the title of Excellency, which she still retained even when after her
hurried novitiate of a single year she had taken the veil. She submitted
where to have striven would have been to have spent herself in vain;
but her resignation was only of the body, and this dejected body moved
mechanically through the tasks and recreations that go to make up the
grey monotone of conventual existence; in which one day is as another
day, one hour as another hour; in which the seasons of the year
lose their significance; in which time has no purpose save for its
subdivision into periods devoted to sleeping and waking, to eating and
fasting, to praying and contemplating, until life loses all purpose and
object, and sterilizes itself into preparation for death.

Though they might command and compel her body, her spirit remained
unfettered in rebellion. Anon the claustral apathy might encompass her;
in time and by slow degrees she might become absorbed into the grey
spirit of the place. But that time was not yet. For the present she must
nourish her caged and starving soul with memories of glimpses caught in
passing of the bright, active, stirring world without; and where memory
stopped she had now beside her a companion to regale her with tales of
high adventure and romantic deeds and knightly feats, which served but
to feed and swell her yearnings.

This companion, Frey Miguel de Souza, was a Portuguese friar of the
order of St. Augustine, a learned, courtly man who had moved in the
great world and spoke with the authority of an eye-witness. And above
all he loved to talk of that last romantic King of Portugal, with
whom he had been intimate, that high-spirited, headstrong, gallant,
fair-haired lad Sebastian, who at the age of four-and-twenty had led
the disastrous overseas expedition against the Infidel, which had been
shattered on the field of Alcacer-el-Kebir some fifteen years ago.

He loved to paint for her in words the dazzling knightly pageants he had
seen along the quays at Lisbon, when that expedition was embarking with
crusader ardour, the files of Portuguese knights and men-at-arms, the
array of German and Italian mercenaries, the young king in his bright
armour, bare of head--an incarnation of St. Michael--moving forward
exultantly amid flowers and acclamations to take ship for Africa. And
she would listen with parted lips and glistening eyes, her slim body
bending forward in her eagerness to miss no word of this great epic.
Anon when he came to tell of that disastrous day of Alcacer-el-Kebir,
her dark, eager eyes would fill with tears. His tale of it was hardly
truthful. He did not say that military incompetence and a presumptuous
vanity which would listen to no counsels had been the cause of a ruin
that had engulfed the chivalry of Portugal, and finally the very kingdom
itself. He represented the defeat as due to the overwhelming numbers
of the Infidel, and dwelt at length upon the closing scene, told her
in fullest detail how Sebastian had scornfully rejected the counsels of
those who urged him to fly when all was lost, how the young king, who
had fought with a lion-hearted courage, unwilling to survive the day's
defeat, had turned and ridden back alone into the Saracen host to fight
his last fight and find a knightly death. Thereafter he was seen no
more.

It was a tale she never tired of hearing, and it moved her more and more
deeply each time she listened to it. She would ply him with questions
touching this Sebastian, who had been her cousin, concerning his ways
of life, his boyhood, and his enactments when he came to the crown
of Portugal. And all that Frey Miguel de Souza told her served but
to engrave more deeply upon her virgin mind the adorable image of the
knightly king. Ever present in the daily thoughts of this ardent girl,
his empanoplied figure haunted now her sleep, so real and vivid that
her waking senses would dwell fondly upon the dream-figure as upon the
memory of someone seen in actual life; likewise she treasured up the
memory of the dream--words he had uttered, words it would seem begotten
of the longings of her starved and empty heart, words of a kind not
calculated to bring peace to the soul of a nun professed. She was
enamoured, deeply, fervently, and passionately enamoured of a myth, a
mental image of a man who had been dust these fifteen years. She mourned
him with a fond widow's mourning; prayed daily and nightly for the
repose of his soul, and in her exaltation waited now almost impatiently
for death that should unite her with him. Taking joy in the thought that
she should go to him a maid, she ceased at last to resent the maidenhood
that had been imposed upon her.

One day a sudden, wild thought filled her with a strange excitement.

"Is it so certain that he is dead?" she asked. "When all is said, none
actually saw him die, and you tell me that the body surrendered by
Mulai-Ahmed-ben-Mahomet was disfigured beyond recognition. Is it not
possible that he may have survived?"

The lean, swarthy face of Frey Miguel grew pensive. He did not
impatiently scorn the suggestion as she had half-feared he would.

"In Portugal," he answered slowly, "it is firmly believed that he lives,
and that one day he will come, like another Redeemer, to deliver his
country from the thrall of Spain."

"Then... then..."

Wistfully, he smiled. "A people will always believe what it wishes to
believe."

"But you, yourself?" she pressed him.

He did not answer her at once. The cloud of thought deepened on his
ascetic face. He half turned from her--they were standing in the shadow
of the fretted cloisters--and his pensive eyes roamed over the wide
quadrangle that was at once the convent garden and burial ground.
Out there in the sunshine amid the hum of invisible but ubiquitously
pulsating life, three nuns, young and vigorous, their arms bared to
the elbows, the skirts of their black habits shortened by a cincture of
rope, revealing feet roughly shod in wood, were at work with spade and
mattock, digging their own graves in memento mori. Amid the shadows of
the cloisters, within sight but beyond earshot, hovered Dona Maria de
Grado and Dona Luiza Nieto, the two nobly-born nuns appointed by King
Philip to an office as nearly akin to that of ladies-in-waiting as
claustral conditions would permit.

At length Frey Miguel seemed to resolve himself.

"Since you ask me, why should I not tell you? When I was on my way to
preach the funeral oration in the Cathedral at Lisbon, as befitted
one who had been Don Sebastian's preacher, I was warned by a person of
eminence to have a care of what I said of Don Sebastian, for not only
was he alive, but he would be secretly present at the Requiem."

He met her dilating glance, noted the quivering of her parted lips.

"But that," he added, "was fifteen years ago, and since then I have had
no sign. At first I thought it possible... there was a story afloat that
might have been true... But fifteen years!" He sighed, and shook his
head.

"What... what was the story?" She was trembling from head to foot.

"On the night after the battle three horsemen rode up to the gates of
the fortified coast-town of Arzilla. When the timid guard refused to
open to them, they announced that one of them was King Sebastian, and
so won admittance. One of the three was wrapped in a cloak, his
face concealed, and his two companions were observed to show him the
deference due to royalty."

"Why, then..." she was beginning.

"Ah, but afterwards," he interrupted her, "afterwards, when all
Portugal was thrown into commotion by that tale, it was denied that King
Sebastian had been among these horsemen. It was affirmed to have been no
more than a ruse of those men's to gain the shelter of the city."

She questioned and cross-questioned him upon that, seeking to draw from
him the admission that it was possible denial and explanation obeyed the
wishes of the hidden prince.

"Yes, it is possible," he admitted at length, "and it is believed by
many to be the fact. Don Sebastian was as sensitive as high-spirited.
The shame of his defeat may have hung so heavily upon him that he
preferred to remain in hiding, and to sacrifice a throne of which he
now felt himself unworthy. Half Portugal believes it so, and waits and
hopes."

When Frey Miguel parted from her that day, he took with him the clear
conviction that not in all Portugal was there a soul who hoped
more fervently than she that Don Sebastian lived, or yearned more
passionately to acclaim him should he show himself. And that was much to
think, for the yearning of Portugal was as the yearning of the slave for
freedom.

Sebastian's mother was King Philip's sister, whereby King Philip had
claimed the succession, and taken possession of the throne of Portugal.
Portugal writhed under the oppressive heel of that foreign rule, and
Frey Miguel de Sousa himself, a deeply, passionately patriotic man,
had been foremost among those who had sought to liberate her. When Don
Antonio, the sometime Prior of Crato, Sebastian's natural cousin, and
a bold, ambitious, enterprising man, had raised the standard of revolt,
the friar had been the most active of all his coadjutators. In those
days Frey Miguel, who was the Provincial of his order, a man widely
renowned for his learning and experience of affairs, who had been
preacher to Don Sebastian and confessor to Don Antonio, had wielded a
vast influence in Portugal. That influence he had unstintingly exerted
on behalf of the Pretender, to whom he was profoundly devoted. After Don
Antonio's army had been defeated on land by the Duke of Alba, and his
fleet shattered in the Azores in 1582 by the Marquis of Santa Cruz,
Frey Miguel found himself deeply compromised by his active share in the
rebellion. He was arrested and suffered a long imprisonment in Spain. In
the end, because he expressed repentance, and because Philip II.,
aware of the man's gifts and worth, desired to attach him to himself by
gratitude, he was enlarged, and appointed Vicar of Santa Maria la Real,
where he was now become confessor, counsellor and confidant of the
Princess Anne of Austria.

But his gratitude to King Philip was not of a kind to change his
nature, to extinguish his devotion to the Pretender, Don Antonio--who,
restlessly ambitious, continued ceaselessly to plot abroad--or yet to
abate the fervour of his patriotism. The dream of his life was ever
the independence of Portugal, with a native prince upon the throne.
And because of Anne's fervent hope, a hope that grew almost daily into
conviction, that Sebastian had survived and would return one day to
claim his kingdom, those two at Madrigal, in that quiet eddy of the
great stream of life, were drawn more closely to each other.

But as the years passed, and Anne's prayers remained unanswered and the
deliverer did not come, her hopes began to fade again. Gradually she
reverted to her earlier frame of mind in which all hopes were set upon a
reunion with the unknown beloved in the world to come.

One evening in the spring of 1594--four years after the name of
Sebastian had first passed between the priest and the princess--Frey
Miguel was walking down the main street of Madrigal, a village whose
every inhabitant was known to him, when he came suddenly face to face
with a stranger. A stranger would in any case have drawn his attention,
but there was about this man something familiar to the friar, something
that stirred in him vague memories of things long forgotten. His garb of
shabby black was that of a common townsman, but there was something in
his air and glance, his soldierly carriage, and the tilt of his bearded
chin, that belied his garb. He bore upon his person the stamp of
intrepidity and assurance.

Both halted, each staring at the other, a faint smile on the lips of
the stranger--who, in the fading light, might have been of any age from
thirty to fifty--a puzzled frown upon the brow of the friar. Then the
man swept off his broad-brimmed hat.

"God save your paternity," was his greeting.

"God save you, my son," replied Frey Miguel, still pondering him. "I
seem to know you. Do I?"

The stranger laughed. "Though all the world forget, your paternity
should remember me."

And then Frey Miguel sucked in his breath sharply. "My God!" he cried,
and set a hand upon the fellow's shoulder, looking deeply into those
bold, grey eyes. "What make you here?"

"I am a pastry-cook."

"A pastry-cook? You?"

"One must live, and it is a more honest trade than most. I was in
Valladolid, when I heard that your paternity was the Vicar of the
Convent here, and so for the sake of old times--of happier times--I
bethought me that I might claim your paternity's support." He spoke with
a careless arrogance, half-tinged with mockery.

"Assuredly..." began the priest, and then he checked. "Where is your
shop?"

"Just down the street. Will your paternity honour me?"

Frey Miguel bowed, and together they departed.

For three days thereafter the convent saw the friar only in the
celebration of the Mass. But on the morning of the fourth, he went
straight from the sacristy to the parlour, and, despite the early hour,
desired to see her Excellency.

"Lady," he told her, "I have great news; news that will rejoice your
heart." She looked at him, and saw the feverish glitter in his sunken
eyes, the hectic flush on his prominent cheek-bones. "Don Sebastian
lives. I have seen him."

A moment she stared at him as if she did not understand. Then she paled
until her face became as white as the nun's coil upon her brow; her
breath came in a faint moan, she stiffened, and swayed upon her feet,
and caught at the back of a prie-dieu to steady and save herself from
falling. He saw that he had blundered by his abruptness, that he had
failed to gauge the full depth of her feelings for the Hidden Prince,
and for a moment feared that she would swoon under the shock of the news
he had so recklessly delivered.

"What do you say? Oh, what do you say?" she moaned, her eyes
half-closed.

He repeated the news in more measured, careful terms, exerting all
the magnetism of his will to sustain her reeling senses. Gradually she
quelled the storm of her emotions.

"And you say that you have seen him? Oh!" Once more the colour suffused
her cheeks, and her eyes glowed, her expression became radiant. "Where
is he?"

"Here. Here in Madrigal."

"In Madrigal?" She was all amazement. "But why in Madrigal?"

"He was in Valladolid, and there heard that I--his sometime preacher and
counsellor--was Vicar here at Santa Maria la Real. He came to seek me.
He comes disguised, under the false name of Gabriel de Espinosa,
and setting up as a pastry-cook until his term of penance shall be
completed, and he shall be free to disclose himself once more to his
impatiently awaiting people."

It was bewildering, intoxicating news to her. It set her mind in
turmoil, made of her soul a battle-ground for mad hope and dreadful
fear. This dream-prince, who for four years had been the constant
companion of her thoughts, whom her exalted, ardent, imaginative,
starved Soul had come to love with a consuming passion, was a living
reality near at hand, to be seen in the flesh by the eyes of her body.
It was a thought that set her in an ecstasy of terror, so that she dared
not ask Frey Miguel to bring Don Sebastian to her. But she plied him
with questions, and so elicited from him a very circumstantial story.

Sebastian, after his defeat and escape, had made a vow upon the Holy
Sepulchre to lay aside the royal dignity of which he deemed that he
had proved himself unworthy, and to do penance for the pride that had
brought him down, by roaming the world in humble guise, earning his
bread by the labour of his hands and the sweat of his brow like any
common hind, until he should have purged his offense and rendered
himself worthy once more to resume the estate to which he had been born.

It was a tale that moved her pity to the point of tears. It exalted her
hero even beyond the eminence he had already held in her fond dreams,
particularly when to that general outline were added in the days that
followed details of the wanderings and sufferings of the Hidden Prince.
At last, some few weeks after that first startling announcement of his
presence, in the early days of August of that year 1594, Frey Miguel
proposed to her the thing she most desired, yet dared not beg.

"I have told His Majesty of your attachment to his memory in all these
years in which we thought him dead, and he is deeply touched. He desires
your leave to come and prostrate himself at your feet."

She crimsoned from brow to chin, then paled again; her bosom heaved in
tumult. Between dread and yearning she spoke a faint consent.

Next day he came, brought by Frey Miguel to the convent parlour,
where her Excellency waited, her two attendant nuns discreetly in the
background. Her eager, frightened eyes beheld a man of middle height,
dignified of mien and carriage, dressed with extreme simplicity, yet
without the shabbiness in which Frey Miguel had first discovered him.

His hair was of a light brown--the colour to which the golden locks of
the boy who had sailed for Africa some fifteen years ago might well have
faded--his beard of an auburn tint, and his eyes were grey. His face was
handsome, and save for the colour of his eyes and the high arch of his
nose presented none of the distinguishing and marring features peculiar
to the House of Austria, from which Don Sebastian derived through his
mother.

Hat in hand, he came forward, and went down on one knee before her.

"I am here to receive your Excellency's commands," he said.

She steadied her shuddering knees and trembling lips.

"Are you Gabriel de Espinosa, who has come to Madrigal to set up as a
pastry-cook?" she asked him.

"To serve your Excellency."

"Then be welcome, though I am sure that the trade you least understand
is that of a pastry-cook."

The kneeling man bowed his handsome head, and fetched a deep sigh.

"If in the past I had better understood another trade, I should not now
be reduced to following this one."

She urged him now to rise, hereafter the entertainment between them was
very brief on that first occasion. He departed upon a promise to come
soon again, and the undertaking on her side to procure for his shop the
patronage of the convent.

Thereafter it became his custom to attend the morning Mass celebrated
by Frey Miguel in the convent chapel--which was open to the public--and
afterwards to seek the friar in the sacristy and accompany him thence
to the convent parlour, where the Princess waited, usually with one
or another of her attendant nuns. These daily interviews were brief
at first, but gradually they lengthened until they came to consume
the hours to dinner-time, and presently even that did not suffice, and
Sebastian must come again later in the day.

And as the interviews increased and lengthened, so they grew also in
intimacy between the royal pair, and plans for Sebastian's future came
to be discussed. She urged him to proclaim himself. His penance had been
overlong already for what was really no fault at all, since it is the
heart rather than the deed that Heaven judges, and his heart had been
pure, his intention in making war upon the Infidel loftily pious.
Diffidently he admitted that it might be so, but both he and Frey Miguel
were of opinion that it would be wiser now to await the death of Philip
II., which, considering his years and infirmities, could not be long
delayed. Out of jealousy for his possessions, King Philip might oppose
Sebastian's claims.

Meanwhile these daily visits of Espinosa's, and the long hours he spent
in Anne's company gave, as was inevitable, rise to scandal, within and
without the convent. She was a nun professed, interdicted from seeing
any man but her confessor other than through the parlour grating,
and even then not at such length or with such constancy as this. The
intimacy between them--fostered and furthered by Frey Miguel--had so
ripened in a few weeks that Anne was justified in looking upon him as
her saviour from the living tomb to which she had been condemned, in
hoping that he would restore her to the life and liberty for which she
had ever yearned by taking her to Queen when his time came to claim his
own. What if she was a nun professed? Her profession had been against
her will, preceded by only one year of novitiate, and she was still
within the five probationary years prescribed. Therefore, in her view,
her vows were revocable.

But this was a matter beyond the general consideration or knowledge,
and so the scandal grew. Within the convent there was none bold
enough, considering Anne's royal rank, to offer remonstrance or advice,
particularly too, considering that her behaviour had the sanction of
Frey Miguel, the convent's spiritual adviser. But from without, from the
Provincial of the Order of St. Augustine, came at last a letter to Anne,
respectfully stern in tone, to inform her that the numerous visits she
received from a pastry-cook were giving rise to talk, for which it would
be wise to cease to give occasion. That recommendation scorched her
proud, sensitive soul with shame. She sent her servant Roderos at once
to fetch Frey Miguel, and placed the letter in his hands.

The friar's dark eyes scanned it and grew troubled.

"It was to have been feared," he said, and sighed.

"There is but one remedy, lest worse follow and all be ruined. Don
Sebastian must go."

"Go?" Fear robbed her of breath. "Go where?"

"Away from Madrigal--anywhere--and at once; tomorrow at latest." And
then, seeing the look of horror in her face, "What else, what else?"
he added, impatiently. "This meddlesome provincial may be stirring up
trouble already."

She fought down her emotion. "I... I shall see him before he goes?" she
begged.

"I don't know. It may not be wise. I must consider." He flung away in
deepest perturbation, leaving her with a sense that life was slipping
from her.

That late September evening, as she sat stricken in her room, hoping
against hope for at least another glimpse of him, Dona Maria de Grado
brought word that Espinosa was even then in the convent in Frey Miguel's
cell. Fearful lest he should be smuggled thence without her seeing
him, And careless of the impropriety of the hour--it was already eight
o'clock and dusk was falling--she at once dispatched Roderos to the
friar, bidding him bring Espinosa to her in the parlour.

The friar obeyed, and the lovers--they were no less by now--came face to
face in anguish.

"My lord, my lord," she cried, casting all prudence to the winds, "what
is decided?"

"That I leave in the morning," he answered.

"To go where?" She was distraught.

"Where?" He shrugged. "To Valladolid at first, and then... where God
pleases."

"And when shall I see you again?"

"When... when God pleases."

"Oh, I am terrified... if I should lose you... if I should never see you
more!" She was panting, distraught.

"Nay, lady, nay," he answered. "I shall come for you when the time is
ripe. I shall return by All Saints, or by Christmas at the latest, and I
shall bring with me one who will avouch me."

"What need any to avouch you to me?" she protested, on a note of
fierceness. "We belong to each other, you and I. But you are free to
roam the world, and I am caged here and helpless..."

"Ah, but I shall free you soon, and we'll go hence together. See."
He stepped to the table. There was an ink-horn, a box of pounce, some
quills, and a sheaf of paper there. He took up a quill, and wrote with
labour, for princes are notoriously poor scholars:

"I, Don Sebastian, by the Grace of God King of Portugal, take to wife
the most serene Dona ulna of Austria, daughter of the most serene
Prince, Don John of Austria, by virtue of the dispensation which I hold
from two pontiffs."

And he signed it--after the manner of the Kings of Portugal in all
ages--"El Rey"--the King.

"Will that content you, lady?" he pleaded, handing it to her.

"How shall this scrawl content me?"

"It is a bond I shall redeem as soon as Heaven will permit."

Thereafter she fell to weeping, and he to protesting, until Frey Miguel
urged him to depart, as it grew late. And then she forgot her own grief,
and became all solicitude for him, until naught would content her but
she must empty into his hands her little store of treasure--a hundred
ducats and such jewels as she possessed, including a gold watch set with
diamonds and a ring bearing a cameo portrait of King Philip, and last of
all a portrait of herself, of the size of a playing-card.

At last, as ten was striking, he was hurried away. Frey Miguel had gone
on his knees to him, and kissed his hand, what time he had passionately
urged him not to linger; and then Sebastian had done the same by the
Princess both weeping now. At last he was gone, and on the arm of Dona
Maria de Grado the forlorn Anne staggered back to her cell to weep and
pray.

In the days that followed she moved, pale and listless, oppressed by her
sense of loss and desolation, a desolation which at last she sought to
mitigate by writing to him to Valladolid, whither he had repaired. Of
all those letters only two survive.

"My king and lord," she wrote in one of these, "alas! How we suffer by
absence! I am so filled with the pain of it that if I did not seek
the relief of writing to your Majesty and thus spend some moments in
communion with you, there would be an end to me. What I feel to-day
is what I feel every day when I recall the happy moments sodeliciously
spent, which are no more. This privation is for me so severe a
punishment of heaven that I should call it unjust, for without cause I
find myself deprived of the happiness missed by me for so many years
and purchased at the price of suffering and tears. Ah, my lord,
how willingly, nevertheless, would I not suffer all over again the
misfortunes that have crushed me if thus I might spare your Majesty the
least of them. May He who rules the world grant my prayers and set a
term to so great an unhappiness, and to the intolerable torment I
suffer through being deprived of the presence of your Majesty. It were
impossible for long to suffer so much pain and live.

"I belong to you, my lord; you know it already. The troth I plighted to
you I shall keep in life and in death, for death itself could not
tear it from my soul, and this immortal soul will harbour it through
eternity..."

Thus and much more in the same manner wrote the niece of King Philip of
Spain to Gabriel Espinosa, the pastry-cook, in his Valladolid retreat.
How he filled his days we do not know, beyond the fact that he moved
freely abroad. For it was in the streets of that town that meddlesome
Fate brought him face to face one day with Gregorio Gonzales, under whom
Espinosa had been a scullion once in the service of the Count of Nyeba.

Gregorio hailed him, staring round-eyed; for although Espinosa's
garments were not in their first freshness they were far from being
those of a plebeian.

"In whose service may you be now?" quoth the intrigued Gregorio, so soon
as greetings had passed between them.

Espinosa shook off his momentary embarrassment, and took the hand of
his sometime comrade. "Times are changed, friend Gregorio. I am not in
anybody's service, rather do I require servants myself."

"Why, what is your present situation?"

Loftily Espinosa put him off. "No matter for that," he answered, with a
dignity that forbade further questions. He gathered his cloak about him
to proceed upon his way. "If there is anything you wish for I shall be
happy, for old times' sake, to oblige you."

But Gregorio was by no means disposed to part from him. We do not
readily part from an old friend whom we rediscover in an unsuspected
state of affluence. Espinosa must home with Gregorio. Gregorio's wife
would be charmed to renew his acquaintance, and to hear from his own
lips of his improved and prosperous state. Gregorio would take no
refusal, and in the end Espinosa, yielding to his insistence, went with
him to the sordid quarter where Gregorio had his dwelling.

About an unclean table of pine, in a squalid room, sat the
three--Espinosa, Gregorio, and Gregorio's wife; but the latter displayed
none of the signs of satisfaction at Espinosa's prosperity which
Gregorio had promised. Perhaps Espinosa observed her evil envy, and
it may have been to nourish it--which is the surest way to punish
envy--that he made Gregorio a magnificent offer of employment.

"Enter my service," said he, "and I will pay you fifty ducats down and
four ducats a month."

Obviously they were incredulous of his affluence. To convince them he
displayed a gold watch--most rare possession--set with diamonds, a ring
of price, and other costly jewels. The couple stared now with dazzled
eyes.

"But didn't you tell me when we were in Madrid together that you had
been a pastry-cook at Ocana?" burst from Gregorio.

Espinosa smiled. "How many kings and princes have been compelled to
conceal themselves under disguises?" he asked oracularly. And seeing
them stricken, he must play upon them further. Nothing, it seems, was
sacred to him--not even the portrait of that lovely, desolate royal lady
in her convent at Madrigal. Forth he plucked it, and thrust it to them
across the stains of wine and oil that befouled their table.

"Look at this beautiful lady, the most beautiful in Spain," he bade
them. "A prince could not have a lovelier bride."

"But she is dressed as a nun," the woman protested. "How, then, can she
marry?"

"For kings there are no laws," he told her with finality.

At last he departed, but bidding Gregorio to think of the offer he
had made him. He would come again for the cook's reply, leaving word
meanwhile of where he was lodged.

They deemed him mad, and were disposed to be derisive. Yet the woman's
disbelief was quickened into malevolence by the jealous fear that
what he had told them of himself might, after all, be true. Upon that
malevolence she acted forthwith, lodging an information with Don Rodrigo
de Santillan, the Alcalde of Valladolid.

Very late that night Espinosa was roused from his sleep to find his room
invaded by alguaziles--the police of the Alcalde. He was arrested and
dragged before Don Rodrigo to give an account of himself and of certain
objects of value found in his possession--more particularly of a ring,
on the cameo of which was carved a portrait of King Philip.

"I am Gabriel de Espinosa," he answered firmly, "a pastry-cook of
Madrigal."

"Then how come you by these jewels?"

"They were given me by Dona Ana of Austria to sell for her account. That
is the business that has brought me to Valladolid."

"Is this Dona Ana's portrait?"

"It is."

"And this lock of hair? Is that also Dona Ana's? And do you, then,
pretend that these were also given you to sell?"

"Why else should they be given me?"

Don Rodrigo wondered. They were useless things to steal, and as for the
lock of hair, where should the fellow find a buyer for that? The Alcalde
conned his man more closely, and noted that dignity of bearing, that
calm assurance which usually is founded upon birth and worth. He sent
him to wait in prison, what time he went to ransack the fellow's house
in Madrigal.

Don Rodrigo was prompt in acting; yet even so his prisoner mysteriously
found means to send a warning that enabled Frey Miguel to forestall the
Alcalde. Before Don Rodrigo's arrival, the friar had abstracted
from Espinosa's house a box of papers which he reduced to ashes.
Unfortunately Espinosa had been careless. Four letters not confided
to the box were discovered by the alguaziles. Two of them were from
Anne--one of which supplies the extract I have given; the other two from
Frey Miguel himself.

Those letters startled Don Rodrigo de Santillan. He was a shrewd
reasoner and well-informed. He knew how the justice of Castile was kept
on the alert by the persistent plottings of the Portuguese Pretender,
Don Antonio, sometime Prior of Crato. He was intimate with the past
life of Frey Miguel, knew his self-sacrificing patriotism and passionate
devotion to the cause of Don Antonio, remembered the firm dignity of
his prisoner, and leapt at a justifiable conclusion. The man in his
hands--the man whom the Princess Anne addressed in such passionate terms
by the title of Majesty--was the Prior of Crato. He conceived that he
had stumbled here upon something grave and dangerous. He ordered the
arrest of Frey Miguel, and then proceeded to visit Dona Ana at the
convent. His methods were crafty, and depended upon the effect of
surprise. He opened the interview by holding up before her one of the
letters he had found, asking her if she acknowledged it for her own.

She stared a moment panic-stricken; then snatched it from his hands,
tore it across, and would have torn again, but that he caught her wrists
in a grip of iron to prevent her, with little regard in that moment for
the blood royal in her veins. King Philip was a stern master, pitiless
to blunderers, and Don Rodrigo knew he never would be forgiven did he
suffer that precious letter to be destroyed.

Overpowered in body and in spirit, she surrendered the fragments and
confessed the letter her own.

"What is the real name of this man, who calls himself a pastry-cook, and
to whom you write in such terms as these?" quoth the magistrate.

"He is Don Sebastian, King of Portugal." And to that declaration
she added briefly the story of his escape from Alcacer-el-Kebir and
subsequent penitential wanderings.

Don Rodrigo departed, not knowing what to think or believe, but
convinced that it was time he laid the whole matter before King Philip.
His Catholic Majesty was deeply perturbed. He at once dispatched Don
Juan de Llano, the Apostolic Commissary of the Holy Office to Madrigal
to sift the matter, and ordered that Anne should be solitarily confined
in her cell, and her nuns-in-waiting and servants placed under arrest.

Espinosa, for greater security, was sent from Valladolid to the prison
of Medina del Campo. He was taken thither in a coach with an escort of
arquebusiers.

"Why convey a poor pastry-cook with so much honour?" he asked his
guards, half-mockingly.

Within the coach he was accompanied by a soldier named Cervatos, a
travelled man, who fell into talk with him, and discovered that he spoke
both French and German fluently. But when Cervatos addressed him in
Portuguese the prisoner seemed confused, and replied that although he
had been in Portugal, he could not speak the language.

Thereafter, throughout that winter, examinations of the three chief
prisoners--Espinosa, Frey Miguel, and the Princess Anne--succeeded one
another with a wearisome monotony of results. The Apostolic Commissary
interrogated the princess and Frey Miguel; Don Rodrigo conducted the
examinations of Espinosa. But nothing was elicited that took the matter
forward or tended to dispel its mystery.

The princess replied with a candour that became more and more
tinged with indignation under the persistent and at times insulting
interrogatories. She insisted that the prisoner was Don Sebastian, and
wrote passionate letters to Espinosa, begging him for her honour's sake
to proclaim himself what he really was, declaring to him that the time
had come to cast off all disguise.

Yet the prisoner, unmoved by these appeals, persisted that he was
Gabriel de Espinosa, a pastry-cook. But the man's bearing, and the
air of mystery cloaking him, seemed in themselves to belie that
asseveration. That he could not be the Prior of Crato, Don Rodrigo
had now assured himself. He fenced skilfully under exurnination, ever
evading the magistrate's practiced point when it sought to pin him, and
he was no less careful to say nothing that should incriminate either of
the other two prisoners. He denied that he had ever given himself out to
be Don Sebastian, though he admitted that Frey Miguel and the princess
had persuaded themselves that he was that lost prince.

He pleaded ignorance when asked who were his parents, stating that he
had never known either of them--an answer this which would have fitted
the case of Don Sebastian, who was born after his father's death, and
quitted in early infancy by his mother.

As for Frey Miguel, he stated boldly under examination the conviction
that Don Sebastian had survived the African expedition, and the belief
that Espinosa might well be the missing monarch. He protested that
he had acted in good faith throughout, and without any thought of
disloyalty to the King of Spain.

Late one night, after he had been some three months in prison, Espinosa
was roused from sleep by an unexpected visit from the Alcalde. At once
he would have risen and dressed.

"Nay," said Don Rodrigo, restraining him, "that is not necessary for
what is intended."

It was a dark phrase which the prisoner, sitting up in bed with tousled
hair, and blinking in the light of the torches, instantly interpreted
into a threat of torture. His face grew white.

"It is impossible," he protested. "The King cannot have ordered what you
suggest. His Majesty will take into account that I am a man of honour.
He may require my death, but in an honourable manner, and not upon the
rack. And as for its being used to make me speak, I have nothing to add
to what I have said already."

The stern, dark face of the Alcalde was overspread by a grim smile.

"I would have you remark that you fall into contradictions. Sometimes
you pretend to be of humble and lowly origin, and sometimes a person of
honourable degree. To hear you at this moment one might suppose that to
submit you to torture would be to outrage your dignity. What then..."

Don Rodrigo broke off suddenly to stare, then snatched a torch from the
hand of his alguaziles and held it close to the face of the prisoner,
who cowered now, knowing full well what it was the Alcalde had detected.
In that strong light Don Rodrigo saw that the prisoner's hair and beard
had turned grey at the roots, and so received the last proof that he had
to do with the basest of impostures. The fellow had been using dyes,
the supply of which had been cut short by his imprisonment. Don Rodrigo
departed well-satisfied with the results of that surprise visit.

Thereafter Espinosa immediately shaved himself. But it was too late, and
even so, before many weeks were past his hair had faded to its natural
grey, and he presented the appearance of what in fact he was--a man of
sixty, or thereabouts.

Yet the torture to which he was presently submitted drew nothing from
him that could explain all that yet remained obscure. It was from Frey
Miguel, after a thousand prevarications and tergiversations, that the
full truth--known to himself alone--was extracted by the rack.

He confessed that, inspired by the love of country and the ardent desire
to liberate Portugal from the Spanish yoke, he had never abandoned the
hope of achieving this, and of placing Don Antonio, the Prior of
Crato, on the throne of his ancestors. He had devised a plan, primarily
inspired by the ardent nature of the Princess Anne and her impatience of
the conventual life. It was while casting about for the chief instrument
that he fortuitously met Espinosa in the streets of Madrigal. Espinosa
had been a soldier, and had seen the world. During the war between Spain
and Portugal he had served in the armies of King Philip, had befriended
Frey Miguel when the friar's convent was on the point of being invaded
by soldiery, and had rescued him from the peril of it. Thus they had
become acquainted, and Frey Miguel had had an instance of the man's
resource and courage. Further, he was of the height of Don Sebastian and
of the build to which the king might have grown in the years that were
sped, and he presented other superficial resemblances to the late king.
The colour of his hair and beard could be corrected; and he might be
made to play the part of the Hidden Prince for whose return Portugal was
waiting so passionately and confidently. There had been other impostors
aforetime, but they had lacked the endowments of Espinosa, and their
origins could be traced without difficulty. In addition to these natural
endowments, Espinosa should be avouched by Frey Miguel than whom nobody
in the world was better qualified in such a matter--and by the niece of
King Philip, to whom he would be married when he raised his standard.
It was arranged that the three should go to Paris so soon as the
arrangements were complete, where the Pretender would be accredited by
the exiled friends of Don Antonio residing there--the Prior of Crato
being a party to the plot. From France Frey Miguel would have worked in
Portugal through his agents, and presently would have gone there
himself to stir up a national movement in favour of a pretender so
fully accredited. Thus he had every hope of restoring Portugal to her
independence. Once this should have been accomplished, Don Antonio would
appear in Lisbon, unmask the impostor, and himself assume the crown of
the kingdom which had been forcibly and definitely wrenched from Spain.

That was the crafty plan which the priest had laid with a singleness of
aim and a detachment from minor considerations that never hesitated
to sacrifice the princess, together with the chief instrument of the
intrigue. Was the liberation of a kingdom, the deliverance of a nation
from servitude, the happiness of a whole people, to weigh in the balance
against the fates of a natural daughter of Don John of Austria and a
soldier of fortune turned pastry-cook? Frey Miguel thought not, and his
plot might well have succeeded but for the base strain in Espinosa and
the man's overweening vanity, which had urged him to dazzle the Gonzales
at Valladolid. That vanity sustained him to the end, which he suffered
in October of 1595, a full year after his arrest. To the last he avoided
admissions that should throw light upon his obscure identity and origin.

"If it were known who I am..." he would say, and there break off.

He was hanged, drawn and quartered, and he endured his fate with calm
fortitude. Frey Miguel suffered in the same way with the like dignity,
after having undergone degradation from his priestly dignity.

As for the unfortunate Princess Anne, crushed under a load of shame and
humiliation, she had gone to her punishment in the previous July. The
Apostolic Commissary notified her of the sentence which King Philip
had confirmed. She was to be transferred to another convent, there to
undergo a term of four years' solitary confinement in her cell, and to
fast on bread and water every Friday. She was pronounced incapable of
ever holding any office, and was to be treated on the expiry of her term
as an ordinary nun, her civil list abolished, her title of Excellency
to be extinguished, together with all other honours and privileges
conferred upon her by King Philip.

The piteous letters of supplication that she addressed to the King, her
uncle, still exist. But they left the cold, implacable Philip of Spain
unmoved. Her only sin was that, yielding to the hunger of her starved
heart, and chafingunder the ascetic life imposed upon her, she had
allowed herself to be fascinated by the prospect of becoming the
protectress of one whom she believed to be an unfortunate and romantic
prince, and of exchanging her convent for a throne.

Her punishment--poor soul--endured for close upon forty years, but the
most terrible part of it was not that which lay within the prescription
of King Philip, but that which arose from her own broken and humiliated
spirit. She had been uplifted a moment by a glorious hope, to be cast
down again into the blackest despair, to which a shame unspeakable and a
tortured pride were added.

Than hers, as I have said, there is in history no sadder story.





V. THE END OF THE "VERT GALANT"

The Assassination of Henry IV



In the year 1609 died the last Duke of Cleves, and King Henry IV. of
France and Navarre fell in love with Charlotte de Montmorency.

In their conjunction these two events were to influence the destinies of
Europe. In themselves they were trivial enough, since it was as much
a commonplace that an old gentleman should die as that Henry of Bearn
should fall in love. Love had been the main relaxation of his otherwise
strenuous life, and neither the advancing years--he was fifty-six
at this date--nor the recriminations of Maria de' Medici, his
long-suffering Florentine wife, sufficed to curb his zest.

Possibly there may have been a husband more unfaithful than King Henry;
probably there was not. His gallantries were outrageous, his taste in
women catholic, and his illegitimate progeny outnumbered that of his
grandson, the English sultan Charles II. He differs, however, from
the latter in that he was not quite as Oriental in the manner of his
self-indulgence. Charles, by comparison, was a mere dullard who turned
Whitehall into a seraglio. Henry preferred the romantic manner, the high
adventure, and knew how to be gallant in two senses.

This gallantry of his is not, perhaps, seen to best advantage in the
affair of Charlotte de Montmorency To begin with he was, as I have said,
in his fifty-sixth year, an age at which it is difficult, without being
ridiculous, to unbridle a passion for a girl of twenty. Unfortunately
for him, Charlotte does not appear to have found him so. On the
contrary, her lovely, empty head was so turned by the flattery of his
addresses, that she came to reciprocate the passion she inspired.

Her family had proposed to marry her to the gay and witty Marshal de
Bassompierre; and although his heart was not at all engaged, the marshal
found the match extremely suitable, and was willing enough, until the
King declared himself. Henry used the most impudent frankness.

"Bassompierre, I will speak to you as a friend," said he. "I am in love,
and desperately in love, with Mademoiselle de Montmorency. If you should
marry her I should hate you. If she should love me you would hate me. A
breach of our friendship would desolate me, for I love you with sincere
affection."

That was enough for Bassompierre. He had no mind to go further with a
marriage of convenience which in the sequel would most probably give him
to choose between assuming the ridiculous role of a complacent husband
and being involved in a feud with his prince. He said as much, and
thanked the King for his frankness, whereupon Henry, liking him more
than ever for his good sense, further opened his mind to him.

"I am thinking of marrying her to my nephew, Conde. Thus I shall have
her in my family to be the comfort of my old age, which is coming on.
Conde, who thinks of nothing but hunting, shall have a hundred thousand
livres a year with which to amuse himself."

Bassompierre understood perfectly the kind of bargain that was in
Henry's mind. As for the Prince de Conde, he appears to have been less
acute, no doubt because his vision was dazzled by the prospect of a
hundred thousand livres a year. So desperately poor was he that for half
that sum he would have taken Lucifer's own daughter to wife, without
stopping to consider the disadvantages it might entail.

The marriage was quietly celebrated at Chantilly in February of 1609.
Trouble followed fast. Not only did Conde perceive at last precisely
what was expected of him, and indignantly rebel against it, but the
Queen, too, was carefully instructed in the matter by Concino Concini
and his wife Leonora Galigai, the ambitious adventurers who had come
from Florence in her train, and who saw in the King's weakness their own
opportunity.

The scandal that ensued was appalling. Never before had the relations
between Henry and his queen been strained so nearly to breaking-point.
And then, whilst the trouble of Henry's own making was growing about
him until it threatened to overwhelm him, he received a letter from
Vaucelas, his ambassador at Madrid, containing revelations that changed
his annoyance into stark apprehension.

When the last Duke of Cleves died a few months before, "leaving all the
world his heirs"--to use Henry's own phrase--the Emperor had stepped in,
and over-riding the rights of certain German princes had bestowed
the fief upon his own nephew, the Archduke Leopold. Now this was an
arrangement that did not suit Henry's policy at all, and being then--as
the result of a wise husbanding of resources--the most powerful prince
in Europe, Henry was not likely to submit tamely to arrangements that
did not suit him. His instructions to Vaucelas were to keep open the
difference between France and the House of Austria arising out of
this matter of Cleves. All Europe knew that Henry desired to marry the
Dauphin to the heiress of Lorraine, so that this State might one day be
united with France; and it was partly to support this claim that he was
now disposed to attach the German princes to his interests.

Yet what Vaucelas told him in that letter was that certain agents at the
court of Spain, chief among whom was the Florentine ambassador, acting
upon instructions from certain members of the household of the Queen of
France, and from others whom Vaucelas said he dared not mention, were
intriguing to blast Henry's designs against the house of Austria, and to
bring him willy-nilly into a union with Spain. These agents had gone so
far in their utter disregard of Henry's own intentions as to propose to
the Council of Madrid that the alliance should be cemented by a marriage
between the Dauphin and the Infanta.

That letter sent Henry early one morning hot-foot to the Arsenal, where
Sully, his Minister of State, had his residence. Maximilien de Bethune,
Duke of Sully, was not merely the King's servant, he was his closest
friend, the very keeper of his soul; and the King leaned upon him and
sought his guidance not only in State affairs, but in the most intimate
and domestic matters. Often already had it fallen to Sully to patch up
the differences created between husband and wife by Henry's persistent
infidelities.

The King, arriving like the whirlwind, turned everybody out of the
closet in which the duke--but newly risen--received him in bed-gown and
night-cap. Alone with his minister, Henry came abruptly to the matter.

"You have heard what is being said of me?" he burst out. He stood with
his back to the window, a sturdy, erect, soldierly figure, a little
above the middle height, dressed like a captain of fortune in jerkin and
long boots of grey leather, and a grey hat with a wine-coloured ostrich
plume. His countenance matched his raiment. Keeneyed, broad of brow,
with a high-bridged, pendulous nose, red lips, a tuft of beard and
a pair of grizzled, bristling moustachios, he looked half-hero,
half-satyr; half-Captain, half-Polichinelle.

Sully, tall and broad, the incarnation of respectability and dignity,
despite bed-gown and slippers and the nightcap covering his high, bald
crown, made no presence of misunderstanding him.

"Of you and the Princesse de Conde, you mean, sire?" quoth he, and
gravely he shook his head. "It is a matter that has filled me with
apprehension, for I foresee from it far greater trouble than from any
former attachment of yours."

"So they have convinced you, too, Grand-Master?" Henry's tone was almost
sorrowful. "Yet I swear that all is greatly exaggerated. It is the work
of that dog Concini. Ventre St. Gris! If he has no respect for me, at
least he might consider how he slanders a child of such grace and wit
and beauty, a lady of her high birth and noble lineage."

There was a dangerous quiver of emotion in his voice that was not missed
by the keen ears of Sully. Henry moved from the window, and flung into a
chair.

"Concini works to enrage the Queen against me, and to drive her to
take violent resolutions which might give colour to their pernicious
designs."

"Sire!" It was a cry of protest from Sully.

Henry laughed grimly at his minister's incredulity, and plucked forth
the letter from Vaucelas.

"Read that."

Sully read, and, aghast at what the letter told him, ejaculated: "They
must be mad!"

"Oh, no," said the King. "They are not mad. They are most wickedly sane,
which is why their designs fill me with apprehension. What do you infer,
Grand-Master, from such deliberate plots against resolutions from which
they know that nothing can turn me while I have life?"

"What can I infer?" quoth Sully, aghast.

"In acting thus--in daring to act thus," the King expounded, "they
proceed as if they knew that I can have but a short time to live."

"Sire!"

"What else? They plan events which cannot take place until I am dead."

Sully stared at his master for a long moment, in stupefied silence, his
loyal Huguenot soul refusing to discount by flattery the truth that he
perceived.

"Sire," he said at last, bowing his fine head, "you must take your
measures."

"Ay, but against whom? Who are these that Vaucelas says he dare not
name? Can you suggest another than..." He paused, shrinking in horror
from completing the utterance of his thought. Then, with an abrupt
gesture, he went on, "... than the Queen herself?"

Sully quietly placed the letter on the table, and sat down. He took his
chin in his hand and looked squarely across at Henry.

"Sire, you have brought this upon yourself. You have exasperated
her Majesty; you have driven her in despair to seek and act upon the
councils of this scoundrel Concini. There never was an attachment of
yours that did not beget trouble with the Queen, but never such trouble
as I have been foreseeing from your attachment to the Princess of Conde.
Sire, will you not consider where you stand?"

"They are lies, I tell you," Henry stormed. But Sully the uncompromising
gravely shook his head. "At least," Henry amended, "they are gross
exaggerations. Oh, I confess to you, my friend, that I am sick with love
of her. Day and night I see nothing but her gracious image. I sigh and
fret and fume like any callow lad of twenty. I suffer the tortures of
the damned. And yet... and yet, I swear to you, Sully, that I will curb
this passion though it kill me. I will stifle these fires, though they
consume my soul to ashes. No harm shall come to her from me. No harm
has come yet. I swear it. These stories that are put about are the
inventions of Concini to set my wife against me. Do you know how far
he and his wife have dared to go? They have persuaded the Queen to eat
nothing that is not prepared in the kitchen they have set up for her
in their own apartments. What can you conclude from that but that they
suggest that I desire to poison her?"

"Why suffer it, sire?" quoth Sully gravely. "Send the pair packing back
to Florence, and so be rid of them."

Henry rose in agitation. "I have a mind to. Ventre St. Gris! I have a
mind to. Yes, it is the only thing. You can manage it, Sully. Disabuse
her mind of her Suspicions regarding the Princess of Conde; make my
peace with her; convince her of my sincerity, of my firm intention
to have done with gallantry, so that she on her side will make me the
sacrifice of banishing the Concinis. You will do this, my friend?"

It was no less than Sully had been expecting from past experience,
and the task was one in which he was by now well-practiced; but the
situation had never before been quite so difficult. He rose.

"Why, surely, sire," said he. "But her Majesty on her side may require
something more to reconcile her to the sacrifice. She may reopen the
question of her coronation so long and--in her view--so unreasonably
postponed."

Henry's face grew overcast, his brows knit. "I have always had an
instinct against it, as you know, Grand Master," said he, "and this
instinct is strengthened by what that letter has taught me. If she will
dare so much, having so little real power, what might she not do if..."
He broke off, and fell to musing. "If she demands it we must yield,
I suppose," he said at length. "But give her to understand that if I
discover any more of her designs with Spain I shall be provoked to the
last degree against her. And as an antidote to these machinations at
Madrid you may publish my intention to uphold the claims of the German
Princes in the matter of Cleves, and let all the world know that we are
arming to that end."

He may have thought--as was long afterwards alleged--that the threat
itself should be sufficient, for there was at that time no power in
Europe that could have stood against his armies in the field.

On that they parted, with a final injunction from Sully that Henry
should see the Princesse de Conde no more.

"I swear to you, Grand Master, that I will use restraint and respect
the sacred tie I formed between my nephew and Charlotte solely so that I
might impose silence upon my own passion."

And the good Sully writes in comment upon this: "I should have relied
absolutely upon these assurances had I not known how easy it is for a
heart tender and passionate as was his to deceive itself"--which is
the most amiable conceivable way of saying that he attached not the
slightest faith to the King's promise.

Nevertheless he went about the task of making the peace between the
royal couple with all the skill and tact that experience had taught him;
and he might have driven a good bargain on his master's behalf but for
his master's own weakness in supporting him. Maria de' Medici would
not hear of the banishment of the Concinis, to whom she was so deeply
attached. She insisted with perfect justice that she was a bitterly
injured woman, and refused to entertain any idea of reconciliation save
with the condition that arrangements for her coronation as Queen of
France--which was no more than her due--should be made at once, and that
the King should give an undertaking not to make himself ridiculous any
longer by his pursuit of the Princess of Conde. Of the matters contained
in the letter of Vaucelas she denied all knowledge, nor would suffer any
further inquisition.

From Henry's point of view this was anything but satisfactory. But he
yielded. Conscience made a coward of him. He had wronged her so much
in one way that he must make some compensating concessions to her in
another. This weakness was part of his mental attitude towards her,
which swung constantly between confidence and diffidence, esteem and
indifference, affection and coldness; at times he inclined to put her
from him entirely; at others he opined that no one on his Council was
more capable of the administration of affairs. Even in the indignation
aroused by the proof he held of her disloyalty, he was too just not
to admit the provocation he had given her. So he submitted to a
reconciliation on her own terms, and pledged himself to renounce
Charlotte. We have no right to assume from the sequel that he was not
sincere in the intention.

By the following May events proved the accuracy of Sully's judgment. The
court was at Fontainebleau when the last bulwark of Henry's prudence was
battered down by the vanity of that lovely fool, Charlotte, who must be
encouraging her royal lover to resume his flattering homage. But both
appear to have reckoned without the lady's husband.

Henry presented Charlotte with jewels to the value of eighteen thousand
livres, purchased from Messier, the jeweller of the Pont au Change; and
you conceive what the charitable ladies of the Court had to say about
it. At the first hint of scandal Monsieur de Conde put himself into
a fine heat, and said things which pained and annoyed the King
exceedingly. Henry had amassed a considerable and varied experience
of jealous husbands in his time; but he had never met one quite so
intolerable as this nephew of his. He complained of it in a letter to
Sully.

"My friend,--Monsieur the Prince is here, but he acts like a man
possessed. You will be angry and ashamed at the things he says of me. I
shall end by losing all patience with him. In the meanwhile I am obliged
to taut to him with severity."

More severe than any talk was Henry's instruction to Sully to withhold
payment of the last quarter of the prince's allowance, and to give
refusals to his creditors and purveyors. Thus he intended also, no
doubt, to make it clear to Conde that he did not receive a pension of a
hundred thousand livres a year for nothing.

"If this does not keep him in bounds," Henry concluded, "we must think
of some other method, for he says the most injurious things of me."

So little did it keep the prince in bounds--as Henry understood the
phrase--that he immediately packed his belongings, and carried his wife
off to his country house. It was quite in vain that Henry wrote to him
representing that this conduct was dishonouring to them both, and that
the only place for a prince of the blood was the court of his sovereign.

The end of it all was that the reckless and romantic Henry took to
night-prowling about the grounds of Conde's chateau. In the disguise of
a peasant you see his Majesty of France and Navarre, whose will was
law in Europe, shivering behind damp hedges, ankle-deep in wet grass,
spending long hours in love-lore, ecstatic contemplation of her lighted
window, and all--so far as we can gather--for no other result than the
aggravation of certain rheumatic troubles which should have reminded him
that he was no longer of an age to pursue these amorous pernoctations.

But where his stiffening joints failed, the Queen succeeded. Henry had
been spied upon, of course, as he always was when he strayed from the
path of matrimonial rectitude. The Concinis saw to that. And when they
judged the season ripe, they put her Majesty in possession of the facts.
So inflamed was she by this fresh breach of trust that war was declared
anew between the royal couple, and the best that Sully's wit and labours
could now accomplish was a sort of armed truce.

And then at last in the following November the Prince de Conde took
the desperate resolve of quitting France with his wife, without
troubling--as was his duty--to obtain the King's consent. On the last
night of that month, as Henry was at cards in the Louvre, the Chevalier
du Guet brought him the news of the prince's flight.

"I never in my life," says Bassompierre, who was present, "saw a man so
distracted or in so violent a passion."

He flung down his cards, and rose, sending his chair crashing over
behind him. "I am undone!" was his cry. "Undone! This madman has carried
off his wife--perhaps to kill her." White and shaking, he turned to
Bassompierre. "Take care of my money," he bade him, "and go on with the
game."

He lurched out of the room, and dispatched a messenger to the Arsenal to
fetch M. de Sully. Sully obeyed the summons and came at once, but in an
extremely bad temper, for it was late at night, and he was overburdened
with work.

He found the King in the Queen's chamber, walking backward and forward,
his head sunk upon his breast, his hands clenched behind him. The Queen,
a squarely-built, square-faced woman, sat apart, attended by a few of
her ladies and one or two gentlemen of her train. Her countenance was
set and inscrutable, and her brooding eyes were fixed upon the King.

"Ha, Grand Master!" was Henry's greeting, his voice harsh and strained.
"What do you say to this? What is to be done now?"

"Nothing at all, sire," says Sully, as calm as his master was excited.

"Nothing! What sort of advice is that?"

"The best advice that you can follow, sire. This affair should be talked
of as little as possible, nor should it appear to be of any consequence
to you, or capable of giving you the least uneasiness."

The Queen cleared her throat huskily. "Good advice, Monsieur le Duc,"
she approved him. "He will be wise to follow it." Her voice strained,
almost threatening. "But in this matter I doubt wisdom and he have long
since become strangers."

That put him in a passion, and in a passion he left her to do the
maddest thing he had ever done. In the garb of a courier, and with a
patch over one eye to complete his disguise, he set out in pursuit of
the fugitives. He had learnt that they had taken the road to Landrecy,
which was enough for him. Stage by stage he followed them in that flight
to Flanders, picking up the trail as he went, and never pausing until he
had reached the frontier without overtaking them.

It was all most romantic, and the lady, when she learnt of it, shed
tears of mingled joy and rage, and wrote him impassioned letters in
which she addressed him as her knight, and implored him, as he loved
her, to come and deliver her from the detestable tyrant who held her in
thrall. Those perfervid appeals completed his undoing, drove him mad,
and blinded him to everything--even to the fact that his wife, too, was
shedding tears, and that these were of rage undiluted by any more tender
emotion.

He began by sending Praslin to require the Archduke to order the Prince
of Conde to leave his dominions. And when the Archduke declined with
dignity to be guilty of any such breach of the law of nations, Henry
dispatched Coeuvres secretly to Brussels to carry off thence the
princess. But Maria de' Medici was on the alert, anti frustrated the
design by sending a warning of what was intended to the Marquis Spinola,
as a result of which the Prince de Conde and his wife were housed for
greater security in the Archduke's own palace.

Checkmated at all points, yet goaded further by the letters which he
continued to receive from that most foolish of princesses, Henry took
the wild decision that to obtain her he would invade the Low Countries
as the first step in the execution of that design of a war with Spain
which hitherto had been little more than a presence. The matter of the
Duchy of Cleves was a pretext ready to his hand. To obtain the woman he
desired he would set Europe in a blaze.

He took that monstrous resolve at the very beginning of the new year,
and in the months that followed France rang with preparations. It rang,
too, with other things which should have given him pause. It rang with
the voice of preachers giving expression to the popular vied; that
Cleves was not worth fighting for, that the war was unrighteous--a war
undertaken by Catholic France to defend Protestant interests against the
very champions of Catholicism in Europe. And soon it began to ring, tool
with prophecies of the King's approaching end.

These prognostics rained upon him from every quarter. Thomassin, and the
astrologer La Brosse, warned him of a message from the stars that May
would be fraught with danger for him. From Rome--from the very pope
himself Came notice of a conspiracy against him in which he was told
that the very highest in the land were engaged. From Embrun, Bayonne,
and Douai came messages of like purport, and early in May a note was
found one morning on the altar of the church of Montargis announcing the
King's approaching death.

But that is to anticipate. Meanwhile, Henry had pursued his preparations
undeterred by either warnings or prognostications. There had been so
many conspiracies against his life already that he was become careless
and indifferent in such matters. Yet surely there never had been one
that was so abundantly heralded from every quarter, or ever one that
was hatched under conditions so propitious as those which he had himself
created now. In his soul he was not at ease, and the source of his
uneasiness was the coronation of the Queen, for which the preparations
were now going forward.

He must have known that if danger of assassination threatened him from
any quarter it was most to be feared from those whose influence with the
Queen was almost such as to give them a control over her--the Concinis
and their unavowed but obvious ally the Duke of Epernon. If he were
dead, and the Queen so left that she could be made absolute regent
during the Dauphin's minority, it was those adventurers who would become
through her the true rulers of France, and so enrich themselves and
gratify to the full their covetous ambitions. He saw clearly that his
safety lay in opposing this coronation--already fixed for the 13th
May--which Maria de' Medici was so insistent should take place before
his departure for the wars. The matter so preyed upon his mind that last
he unburdened himself to Sully one day at the Arsenal.

"Oh, my friend," he cried, "this coronation does not please me. My heart
tells me that some fatality will follow."

He sat down, grasping the case of his reading-glass, whilst Sully could
only stare at him amazed by this out-burst. Thus he remained awhile in
deep thought. Then he started up again.

"Pardieu!" he cried. "I shall be murdered in this city. It is their only
resource. I see it plainly. This cursed coronation will be the cause of
my death."

"What a thought, sir!"

"You think that I have been reading the almanach or paying heed to the
prophets, eh? But listen to me now, Grand Master." And wrinkles deepened
about the bold, piercing eyes. "It is four months and more since we
announced our intention of going to war, and France has resounded with
our preparations. We have made no secret of it. Yet in Spain not a
finger has been lifted in preparation to resist us, not a sword has been
sharpened. Upon what does Spain build? Whence her confidence that in
despite of my firm resolve and my abundant preparations, despite the
fact announced that I am to march on the lath of this month, despite the
fact that my troops are already in Champagne with a train of artillery
so complete and well-furnished that France has never seen the like of
it, and perhaps never will again--whence the confidence that despite all
this there is no need to prepare defences? Upon what do they build, I
say, when they assume, as assume they must, that there will be no war?
Resolve me that, Grand Master."

But Sully, overwhelmed, could only gasp and ejaculate.

"You had not thought of it, eh? Yet it is clear enough Spain builds on
my death. And who are the friends of Spain here in France? Who was it
intrigued with Spain in such a way and to such ends as in my lifetime
could never have been carried to an issue? Ha! You see."

"I cannot, sire. It is too horrible. It is impossible!" cried that
loyal, honest gentleman. "And yet if you are convinced of it, you should
break off this coronation, your journey, and your war. If you wish it
so, it is not difficult to satisfy you."

"Ay, that is it." He came to his feet, and gripped the duke's shoulder
in his strong, nervous hand. "Break off this coronation, and never
let me hear of it again. That will suffice. Thus I can rid my mind of
apprehensions, and leave Paris with nothing to fear."

"Very well. I will send at once to Notre Dame and to St. Denis, to stop
the preparations and dismiss the workmen."

"Ah, wait." The eyes that for a moment had sparkled with new hope, grew
dull again; the lines of care descended between the brows. "Oh, what to
decide! What to decide! It is what I wish, my friend. But how will my
wife take it?"

"Let her take it as she will. I cannot believe that she will continue
obstinate when she knows what apprehensions you have of disaster."

"Perhaps not, perhaps not," he answered. But his tone was not sanguine.
"Try to persuade her, Sully. Without her consent I cannot do this thing.
But you will know how to persuade her. Go to her."

Sully suspended the preparations for the coronation, and sought the
Queen. For three days, he tells us, he used prayers, entreaties, and
arguments with which to endeavour to move her. But all was labour lost.
Maria de' Medici was not to be moved. To all Sully's arguments she
opposed an argument that was unanswerable.

Unless she were crowned Queen of France, as was her absolute right, she
would be a person of no account and subject to the Council of Regency
during the King's absence, a position unworthy and intolerable to her,
the mother of the Dauphin.

And so it was Henry's part to yield. His hands were tied by the wrongs
that he had done, and the culminating wrong that he was doing her by
this very war, as he had himself openly acknowledged. He had chanced one
day to ask the Papal Nuncio what Rome thought of this war.

"Those who have the best information," the Nuncio answered boldly,
"are of opinion that the principal object of the war is the Princess of
Conde, whom your Majesty wishes to bring back to France."

Angered by this priestly insolence, Henry's answer had been an
impudently defiant acknowledgment of the truth of that allegation.

"Yes, by God!" he cried. "Yes--most certainly I want to have her
back, and I will have her back; no one shall hinder me, not even God's
viceregent on earth."

Having uttered those words, which he knew to have been carried to the
Queen, and to have wounded her perhaps more deeply than anything that
had yet happened in this affair, his conscience left him, despite his
fears, powerless now to thwart her even to the extent of removing those
pernicious familiars of hers of whose plottings he had all but positive
evidence.

And so the coronation was at last performed with proper pomp and
magnificence at St. Denis on Thursday, the 13th May. It had been
concerted that the festivities should last four days and conclude on the
Sunday with the Queen's public entry into Paris. On the Monday the
King was to set out to take command of his armies, which were already
marching upon the frontiers.

Thus Henry proposed, but the Queen--convinced by his own admission of
the real aim and object of the war, and driven by outraged pride to hate
the man who offered her this crowning insult, and determined that at
all costs it must be thwarted--had lent an ear to Concini's purpose to
avenge her, and was ready to repay infidelity with infidelity. Concini
and his fellow-conspirators had gone to work so confidently that a week
before the coronation a courier had appeared in Liege, announcing
that he was going with news of Henry's assassination to the Princes of
Germany, whilst at the same time accounts of the King's death were being
published in France and Italy.

Meanwhile, whatever inward misgivings Henry may have entertained,
outwardly at least he appeared serene and good-humoured at his wife's
coronation, gaily greeting her at the end of the ceremony by the title
of "Madam Regent."

The little incident may have touched her, arousing her conscience. For
that night she disturbed his slumbers by sudden screams, and when he
sprang up in solicitous alarm she falteringly told him of a dream
in which she had seen him slain, and fell to imploring him with a
tenderness such as had been utterly foreign to her of late to take great
care of himself in the days to come. In the morning she renewed those
entreaties, beseeching him not to leave the Louvre that day, urging that
she had a premonition it would be fatal to him.

He laughed for answer. "You have heard of the predictions of La Brosse,"
said he. "Bah! You should not attach credit to such nonsense."

Anon came the Duke of Vendome, his natural son by the Marquise de
Verneuil, with a like warning and a like entreaty, only to receive a
like answer.

Being dull and indisposed as a consequence of last night's broken rest,
Henry lay down after dinner. But finding sleep denied him, he rose,
pensive and gloomy, and wandered aimlessly down, and out into the
courtyard. There an exempt of the guard, of whom he casually asked the
time, observing the King's pallor and listlessness, took the liberty of
suggesting that his Majesty might benefit if he took the air.

That chance remark decided Henry's fate. His eyes quickened
responsively. "You advise well," said he. "Order my coach. I will go to
the Arsenal to see the Duc de Sully, who is indisposed."

On the stones beyond the gates, where lackeys were wont to await their
masters, sat a lean fellow of some thirty years of age, in a dingy,
clerkly attire, so repulsively evil of countenance that he had once been
arrested on no better grounds than because it was deemed impossible that
a man with such a face could be other than a villain.

Whilst the coach was being got ready, Henry re-entered the Louvre, and
startled the Queen by announcing his intention. With fearful insistence
she besought him to countermand the order, and not to leave the palace.

"I will but go there and back," he said, laughing at her fears. "I shall
have returned before you realize that I have gone." And so he went,
never to return alive.

He sat at the back of the coach, and the weather being fine all the
curtains were drawn up so that he might view the decorations of the city
against the Queen's public entry on Sunday. The Duc d'Epernon was on
his right, the Duc de Montbazon and the Marquis de la Force on his left.
Lavordin and Roquelaure were in the right boot, whilst near the left
boot, opposite to Henry, sat Mirebeau and du Plessis Liancourt. He was
attended only by a small number of gentlemen on horseback, and some
footmen.

The coach turned from the Rue St. Honore into the narrow Rue de la
Ferronerie, and there was brought to a halt by a block occasioned by
the meeting of two carts, one laden with hay, the other with wine. The
footmen went ahead with the exception of two. Of these, one advanced to
clear a way for the royal vehicle, whilst the other took the opportunity
to fasten his garter.

At that moment, gliding like a shadow between the coach and the shops,
came that shabby, hideous fellow who had been sitting on the stones
outside the Louvre an hour ago. Raising himself by deliberately standing
upon one of the spokes of the stationary wheel, he leaned over the Duc
d'Epernon, and, whipping a long, stout knife from his sleeve, stabbed
Henry in the breast. The King, who was in the act of reading a letter,
cried out, and threw up his arms in an instinctive warding movement,
thereby exposing his heart. The assassin stabbed again, and this time
the blade went deep.

With a little gasping cough, Henry sank together, and blood gushed from
his mouth.

The predictions were fulfilled; the tale borne by the courier riding
through Liege a week ago was made true, as were the stories of his death
already at that very hour circulating in Antwerp, Malines, Brussels, and
elsewhere.

The murderer aimed yet a third blow, but this at last was parried by
Epernon, whereupon the fellow stepped back from the coach, and stood
there, making no attempt to escape, or even to rid himself of the
incriminating knife. St. Michel, one of the King's gentlemen-in-waiting,
who had followed the coach, whipped out his sword and would have slain
him on the spot had he not been restrained by Epernon. The footmen
seized the fellow, and delivered him over to the captain of the guard.
He proved to be a school-master of Angouleme--which was Epernon's
country. His name was Ravaillac.

The curtains of the coach were drawn, the vehicle was put about, and
driven back to the Louvre, whilst to avoid all disturbance it was
announced to the people that the King was merely wounded.

But St. Michel went on to the Arsenal, taking with him the knife that
had stabbed his master, to bear the sinister tidings to Henry's loyal
and devoted friend. Sully knew enough to gauge exactly whence the blow
had proceeded. With anger and grief in his heart he got to horse, ill
as he was, and, calling together his people, set out presently for the
Louvre, with a train one hundred strong, which was presently increased
to twice that number by many of the King's faithful servants who joined
his company as he advanced. In the Rue de la Pourpointicre a man in
passing slipped a note into his hand.

It was a brief scrawl: "Monsieur, where are ye going? It is done. I have
seen him dead. If you enter the Louvre you will not escape any more than
he did."

Nearing St. Innocent, the warning was repeated, this time by a gentleman
named du Jon, who stopped to mutter:

"Monsieur le Duc, our evil is without remedy. Look to yourself, for this
strange blow will have fearful consequences."

Again in the Rue St. Honore another note was thrown him, whose contents
were akin to those of the first. Yet with misgivings mounting swiftly
to certainty, Sully rode amain towards the Louvre, his train by now
amounting to some three hundred horse. But at the end of the street he
was stopped by M. de Vitry, who drew rein as they met.

"Ah, monsieur," Vitry greeted him, "where are you going with such a
following? They will never suffer you to enter the Louvre with more than
two or three attendants, which I would not advise you to do. For this
plot does not end here. I have seen some persons so little sensible of
the loss they have sustained that they cannot even simulate the grief
they should feel. Go back, monsieur. There is enough for you to do
without going to the Louvre."

Persuaded by Vitry's solemnity, and by what he knew in his heart, Sully
faced about and set out to retrace his steps. But presently he was
overtaken by a messenger from the Queen, begging him to come at once
to her at the Louvre, and to bring as few persons as possible with him.
"This proposal," he writes, "to go alone and deliver myself into the
hands of my enemies, who filled the Louvre, was not calculated to allay
my suspicions."

Moreover he received word at that moment that an exempt of the guards
and a force of soldiers were already at the gates of the Arsenal, that
others had been sent to the Temple, where the powder was stored, and
others again to the treasurer of the Exchequer to stop all the money
there.

"Convey to the Queen my duty and service," he bade the messenger, "and
assure her that until she acquaints me with her orders I shall continue
assiduously to attend the affairs of my office." And with that he went
to shut himself up in the Bastille, whither he was presently followed
by a stream of her Majesty's envoys, all bidding him to the Louvre.
But Sully, ill as he was, and now utterly prostrated by all that he had
endured, put himself to bed and made of his indisposition a sufficient
excuse.

Yet on the morrow he allowed himself to be persuaded to obey her
summons, receiving certain assurances that he had no ground for any
apprehensions. Moreover, he may by now have felt a certain security in
the esteem in which the Parisians held him. An attempt against him in
the Louvre itself would prove that the blow that had killed his master
was not the independent act of a fanatic, as it was being represented;
and vengeance would follow swiftly upon the heads of those who would
thus betray themselves of having made of that poor wretch's fanaticism
an instrument to their evil ends.

In that assurance he went, and he has left on record the burning
indignation aroused in him at the signs of satisfaction, complacency,
and even mirth that he discovered in that house of death. The
Queen herself, however, overwrought by the events, and perhaps
conscience-stricken by the tragedy which in the eleventh hour she had
sought to avert, burst into tears at sight of Sully, and brought in the
Dauphin, who flung himself upon the Duke's neck.

"My son," the Queen addressed him, "this is Monsieur de Sully. You must
love him well, for he was one of the best and most faithful servants of
the King your father, and I entreat him to continue to serve you in the
same manner."

Words so fair might have convinced a man less astute that all his
suspicions were unworthy. But, even then, the sequel would very quickly
have undeceived him. For very soon thereafter his fall was brought about
by the Concinis and their creatures, so that no obstacle should remain
between themselves and the full gratification of their fell ambitions.

At once he saw the whole policy of the dead King subversed; he saw the
renouncing of all ancient alliances, and the union of the crowns
of France and Spain; the repealing of all acts of pacification; the
destruction of the Protestants; the dissipation of the treasures amassed
by Henry; the disgrace of those who would not receive the yoke of the
new favourites. All this Sully witnessed in his declining years, and he
witnessed, too, the rapid rise to the greatest power and dignity in the
State of that Florentine adventurer, Concino Concini--now bearing the
title of Marshal d'Ancre--who had so cunningly known how to profit by a
Queen's jealousy and a King's indiscretions.

As for the miserable Ravaillac, it is pretended that he maintained under
torture and to the very hour of his death that he had no accomplices,
that what he had done he had done to prevent an unrighteous war against
Catholicism and the Pope--which was, no doubt, the falsehood with which
those who used him played upon his fanaticism and whetted him to their
service. I say "pretended" because, after all, complete records of his
examinations are not discoverable, and there is a story that when at the
point of death, seeing himself abandoned by those in whom perhaps he had
trusted, he signified a desire to confess, and did so confess; but the
notary Voisin, who took his depositions in articulo mortis, set them
down in a hand so slovenly as to be afterwards undecipherable.

That may or may not be true. But the statement that when the President
du Harlay sought to pursue inquiries into certain allegations by a woman
named d'Escoman, which incriminated the Duc d'Epernon, he received a
royal order to desist, rests upon sound authority.

                     *   *   *   *   *

That is the story of the assassination of Henry IV. re-told in the
light of certain records which appear to me to have been insufficiently
studied. They should suggest a train of speculation leading to
inferences which, whilst obvious, I hesitate to define absolutely.

"If it be asked," says Perefixe, "who were the friends that suggested to
Ravaillac so damnable a design, history replies that it is ignorant and
that upon an action of Such consequences it is not permissible to give
suspicions and conjectures for certain truths. The judges themselves who
interrogated him dared not open their mouths, and never mentioned the
matter but with gestures of horror and amazement."





VI. THE BARREN WOOING

The Murder of Amy Robsart



There had been a banquet, followed by a masque, and this again by a
dance in which the young queen had paired off with Lord Robert Dudley,
who in repute was the handsomest man in Europe, just as in fact he was
the vainest, shallowest, and most unscrupulous. There had been homage
and flattery lavishly expressed, and there was a hint of masked
hostility from certain quarters to spice the adventure, and to thrill
her bold young spirit. Never yet in all the months of her reign since
her coronation in January of last year had she felt so much a queen, and
so conscious of the power of her high estate; never so much a woman,
and so conscious of the weakness of her sex. The interaction of those
conflicting senses wrought upon her like a heady wine. She leaned more
heavily upon the silken arm of her handsome Master of the Horse, and
careless in her intoxication of what might be thought or said, she--who
by the intimate favour shown him had already loosed the tongue of
Scandal and set it chattering in every court in Europe--drew him forth
from that thronged and glittering chamber of the Palace of Whitehall
into the outer solitude and friendly gloom.

And he, nothing loth to obey the suasion of that white hand upon his
arm, exultant, indeed, to parade before them all the power he had with
her, went willingly enough. Let Norfolk and Sussex scowl, let Arundel
bite his lip until it bled, and sober Cecil stare cold disapproval. They
should mend their countenances soon, and weigh their words or be for
ever silenced, when he was master in England. And that he would soon be
master he was assured to-night by every glance of her blue eyes, by the
pressure of that fair hand upon his arm, by the languishing abandonment
with which that warm young body swayed towards him, as they passed out
from the blaze of lights and the strains of music into the gloom and
silence of the gallery leading to the terrace.

"Out--let us go out, Robin. Let me have air," she almost panted, as she
drew him on.

Assuredly he would be master soon. Indeed, he might have been master
already but for that wife of his, that stumbling-block to his ambition,
who practiced the housewifely virtues at Cumnor Place, and clung so
tenaciously and so inconsiderately to life in spite of all his plans to
relieve her of the burden of it.

For a year and more his name had been coupled with the Queen's in a
tale that hurt her honour as a woman and imperilled her dignity as a
sovereign. Already in October of 1559 Alvarez de Quadra, the Spanish
ambassador, had written home: "I have learnt certain things as to the
terms on which the Queen and Lord Robert stand towards each other which
I could not have believed."

That was at a time when de Quadra was one of a dozen ambassadors who
were competing for her hand, and Lord Robert had, himself, appeared to
be an ally of de Quadra and an advocate of the Spanish marriage with the
Archduke Charles. But it was a presence which nowise deceived the astute
Spaniard, who employed a legion of spies to keep him well informed.

"All the dallying with us," he wrote, "all the dallying with the Swede,
all the dallying there will be with the rest, one after another, is
merely to keep Lord Robert's enemies in play until his villainy about
his wife can be executed."

What that particular villainy was, the ambassador had already stated
earlier in his letter. "I have learnt from a person who usually gives me
true information that Lord Robert has sent to have his wife poisoned."

What had actually happened was that Sir Richard Verney--a trusted
retainer of Lord Robert's--had reported to Dr. Bayley, of New College,
Oxford, that Lady Robert Dudley was "sad and ailing," and had asked him
for a potion. But the doctor was learned in more matters than physic. He
had caught an echo of the tale of Lord Robert's ambition; he had heard
a whisper that whatever suitors might come from overseas for Elizabeth,
she would marry none but "my lord"--as Lord Robert was now commonly
styled. More, he had aforetime heard rumours of the indispositions of
Lady Robert, yet had never found those rumours verified by the fact.
Some months ago, it had been reported that her ladyship was suffering
from cancer of the breast and likely soon to die of it. Yet Dr. Bayley
had reason to know that a healthier woman did not live in Berkshire.

The good doctor was a capable deductive reasoner, and the conclusion
to which he came was that if they poisoned her under cover of his
potion--she standing in no need of physic--he might afterwards be
hanged as a cover for their crime. So he refused to prescribe as he was
invited, nor troubled to make a secret of invitation and refusal.

For awhile, then, Lord Robert had prudently held his hand; moreover,
the urgency there had been a year ago, when that host of foreign suitors
laid siege to Elizabeth of England, had passed, and his lordship could
afford to wait. But now of a sudden the urgency was returned. Under the
pressure brought to bear upon her to choose a husband, Elizabeth had
half-committed herself to marry the Archduke Charles, promising the
Spanish ambassador a definite answer within a few days.

Lord Robert had felt the earth to be quaking under him; he had seen
the ruin of his high ambitions; he had watched with rage the expanding
mockery upon the countenances of Norfolk, Sussex, and those others who
hated and despised him; and he had cursed that wife of his who knew not
when to die. But for that obstinacy with which she clung to life he had
been the Queen's husband these many months, so making an end to suspense
and to the danger that lies in delay.

To-night the wantonness with which the Queen flaunted before the eyes of
all her court the predilection in which she held him, came not merely to
lull his recent doubts and fears, to feed his egregious vanity, and to
assure him that in her heart he need fear no rival; it came also to
set his soul Quiver impotent rage. He had but to put forth his hands
to possess himself of this splendid prize. Yet those hands of his were
bound while that woman lived at Cumnor. Conceive his feelings as they
stole away together like any pair of lovers.

Arm in arm they came by a stone gallery, where a stalwart scarlet
sentinel, a yeoman of the guard, with a Tudor rose embroidered in gold
upon his back, stood under a lamp set in the wall, with grounded pike
and body stiffly erect.

The tall young Queen was in crimson satin with cunningly-wrought silver
embroideries, trimmed with tufted silver fringe, her stomacher stiff
with silver bullion studded with gold rosettes and Roman pearls, her
bodice cut low to display her splendid neck, decked by a carcanet of
pearls and rubies, and surmounted by a fan-like cuff of guipure, high
behind and sloping towards the bust. Thus she appeared to the sentinel
as the rays of the single lamp behind him struck fire from her red-gold
hair. As if by her very gait to express the wantonness of her mood, she
pointed her toes and walked with head thrown back, smiling up into
the gipsy face of her companion, who was arrayed from head to foot in
shimmering ivory satin, with an elegance no man in England could have
matched.

They came by that stone gallery to a little terrace above the Privy
Steps. A crescent moon hung low over the Lambeth marshes across the
river. From a barge that floated gay with lights in mid-stream came
a tinkle of lutes, and the sweet voice of a singing boy. A moment
the lovers stood at gaze, entranced by the beauty of the soft, tepid
September night, so subtly adapted to their mood. Then she fetched a
sigh, and hung more heavily upon his arm, leaned nearer to his tall,
vigorous, graceful figure.

"Robin, Robin!" was all she said, but in her voice throbbed a world of
passionate longing, an exquisite blend of delight and pain.

Judging the season ripe, his arm flashed round her, and drew her
fiercely close. For a moment she was content to yield, her head against
his stalwart shoulder, a very woman nestling to the mate of her choice,
surrendering to her master. Then the queen in her awoke and strangled
nature. Roughly she disengaged herself from his arm, and stood away, her
breathing quickened.


"God's Death, Robin!" There was a harsh note in the voice that lately
had cooed so softly. "You are strangely free, I think."

But he, impudence incarnate, nothing abashed, accustomed to her
gusty moods, to her alternations between the two natures she had
inherited--from overbearing father and wanton mother--was determined at
all costs to take the fullest advantage of the hour, to make an end of
suspense.

"I am not free, but enslaved--by love and worship of you. Would you deny
me; Would you?"

"Not I, but fate," she answered heavily, and he knew that the woman at
Cumnor was in her mind.

"Fate will soon mend the wrong that fate has done--very soon now." He
took her hand, and, melted again from her dignity, she let it lie in
his. "When that is done, sweet, then will I claim you for my own."

"When that is done, Robin?" she questioned almost fearfully, as if a
sudden dread suspicion broke upon her mind. "When what is done?"

He paused a moment to choose his words, what time she stared intently
into the face that gleamed white in the surrounding gloom.

"When that poor ailing spirit is at rest." And he added: "It will be
soon."

"Thou hast said the same aforetime, Robin. Yet it has not so fallen
out."

"She has clung to life beyond what could have been believed of her
condition," he explained, unconscious of any sinister ambiguity. "But
the end, I know, is very near--a matter but of days."

"Of days!" she shivered, and moved forward to the edge of the terrace,
he keeping step beside her. Then she stood awhile in silence, looking
down at the dark oily surge of water. "You loved her once, Robin?" she
asked, in a queer, unnatural voice.

"I never loved but once," answered that perfect courtier.

"Yet you married her--men say it was a love marriage. It was a marriage,
anyway, and you can speak so calmly of her death?" Her tone was
brooding. She sought understanding that should silence her own lingering
doubt of him.

"Where lies the blame? Who made me what I am?" Again his bold arm
encompassed her. Side by side they peered down through the gloom at the
rushing waters, and he seized an image from them. "Our love is like that
seething tide," he said. "To resist it is to labour in agony awhile, and
then to perish."

"And to yield is to be swept away."

"To happiness," he cried, and reverted to his earlier prayer. "Say
that when... that afterwards, I may claim you for my own. Be true to
yourself, obey the voice of instinct, and so win to happiness."

She looked up at him, seeking to scan the handsome face in that dim
light that baffled her, and he observed the tumultuous heave of her
white breast.

"Can I trust thee, Robin? Can I trust thee? Answer me true!" she
implored him, adorably weak, entirely woman now.

"What does your own heart answer you?" quoth he, loaning close above
her.

"I think I can, Robin. And, anyway, I must. I cannot help myself. I am
but a woman, after all," she murmured, and sighed. "Be it as thou wilt.
Come to me again when thou art free."

He bent lower, murmuring incoherently, and she put up a hand to pat his
swarthy bearded cheek.

"I shall make thee greater than any man in England, so thou make me
happier than any woman."

He caught the hand in his and kissed it passionately, his soul singing
a triumph song within him. Norfolk and Sussex and those other scowling
ones should soon be whistled to the master's heel.

As they turned arm in arm into the gallery to retrace their steps,
they came suddenly face to face with a slim, sleek gentleman, who bowed
profoundly, a smile upon h is crafty, shaven, priestly face. In a smooth
voice and an accent markedly foreign, he explained that he, too, sought
the cool of the terrace, not thinking to intrude; and upon that, bowing
again, he passed on and effaced himself. It was Alvarez de Quadra,
Bishop of Aquila, the argus-eyed ambassador of Spain.

The young face of the Queen hardened.

"I would I were as well served abroad as the King of Spain is here,"
she said aloud, that the retreating ambassador might hear the dubious
compliment; and for my lord's ear alone she added under her breath: "The
spy! Philip of Spain will hear of this."

"So that he hears something more, what shall it signify?" quoth my lord,
and laughed.

They paced the length of the gallery in silence, past the yeoman of the
guard, who kept his watch, and into the first antechamber. Perhaps it
was that meeting with de Quadra and my lord's answer to her comment that
prompted what now she asked: "What is it ails her, Robin?"

"A wasting sickness," he answered, never doubting to whom the question
alluded.

"You said, I think, that... that the end is very near."

He caught her meaning instantly. "Indeed, if she is not dead already,
she is very nearly so."

He lied, for never had Amy Dudley been in better health. And yet he
spoke the truth, for in so much as her life depended upon his will,
it was as good as spent. This was, he knew, a decisive moment of his
career. The hour was big with fate. If now he were weak or hesitant, the
chance might slip away and be for ever lost to him. Elizabeth's moods
were as uncertain as were certain the hostile activities of my lord's
enemies. He must strike quickly whilst she was in her present frame of
mind, and bring her to wedlock, be it in public or in private. But first
he must shake off the paralysing encumbrance of that house-wife down at
Cumnor.

I believe--from evidence that I account abundant--that he considered
it with the cold remorselessness of the monstrous egotist he was. An
upstart, great-grandson to a carpenter, noble only in two descents, and
in both of them stained by the block, he found a queen--the victim of
a physical passion that took no account of the worthlessness underlying
his splendid exterior--reaching out a hand to raise him to a throne.
Being what he was, he weighed his young wife's life at naught in the
evil scales of his ambition. And yet he had loved her once, more truly
perhaps than he could now pretend to love the Queen.

It was some ten years since, as a lad of eighteen, he had taken Sir
John Robsart's nineteen-year-old daughter to wife. She had brought him
considerable wealth and still more devotion. Because of this devotion
she was content to spend her days at Cumnor, whilst he ruffled it at
court; content to take such crumbs of attention as he could spare her
upon occasion. And during the past year, whilst he had been plotting her
death, she had been diligently caring for his interests and fostering
the prosperity of the Berkshire estate. If he thought of this at all, he
allowed no weakly sentiment to turn him from his purpose. There was too
much at stake for that--a throne, no less.

And so, on the morning after that half-surrender of Elizabeth's, we
find my lord closeted with his henchman, Sir Richard Verney. Sir
Richard--like his master--was a greedy, unscrupulous, ambitious
scoundrel, prepared to go to any lengths for the sake of such worldly
advancement as it lay in my lord's power to give him. My lord perforce
used perfect frankness with this perfect servant.

"Thou'lt rise or fall with me, Dick," quoth he. "Help me up, then, and
so mount with me. When I am King, as soon now I shall be, look to me.
Now to the thing that is to do. Thou'lt have guessed it."

To Sir Richard it was an easy guess, considering how much already he had
been about this business. He signified as much.

My lord shifted in his elbow-chair, and drew his embroidered bedgown of
yellow satin closer about his shapely limbs.

"Hast failed me twice before, Richard," said he. "God's death, man, fail
me not again, or the last chance may go the way of the others. There's a
magic in the number three. See that I profit by it, or I am undone, and
thou with me."

"I'd not have failed before, but for that suspicious dotard Bayley,"
grumbled Verney. "Your lordship bade me see that all was covered."

"Aye, aye. And I bid thee so again. On thy life, leave no footprints
by which we may be tracked. Bayley is not the only physician in Oxford.
About it, then, and swiftly. Time is the very soul of fortune in this
business, with the Spaniard straining at the leash, and Cecil and the
rest pleading his case with her. Succeed, and thy fortune's made; fail,
and trouble not to seek me again."

Sir Richard bowed, and took his leave. As he reached the door, his
lordship stayed him. "If thou bungle, do not look to me. The court goes
to Windsor to-morrow. Bring me word there within the week." He rose,
magnificently tall and stately, in his bedgown of embroidered yellow
satin, his handsome head thrown back, and went after his retainer.
"Thou'lt not fail me, Dick," said he, a hand upon the lesser scoundrel's
shoulder. "There is much at issue for me, and for thee with me."

"I will not fail you, my lord," Sir Richard rashly promised, and on that
they parted.

Sir Richard did not mean to fail. He knew the importance of succeeding,
and he appreciated the urgency of the business as much as did my lord
himself. But between his cold, remorseless will to succeed and success
itself there lay a gulf which it needed all his resource to bridge.
He paid a short visit to Lady Robert at Cumnor, and professed deepest
concern to find in her a pallor and an ailing air which no one else had
yet observed. He expressed himself on the subject to Mrs. Buttelar and
the other members of her ladyship's household, reproaching them with
their lack of care of their mistress. Mrs. Buttelar became indignant
under his reproaches.

"Nay, now, Sir Richard, do you wonder that my lady is sad and downcast
with such tales as are going of my lord's doings at court, and of what
there is 'twixt the Queen and him? Her ladyship may be too proud to
complain, but she suffers the more for that, poor lamb. There was talk
of a divorce awhile ago that got to her ears."

"Old wives' tales," snorted Sir Richard.

"Likely," agreed Mrs. Buttelar. "Yet when my lord neither comes to
Cumnor, nor requires her ladyship to go to him, what is she to think,
poor soul?"

Sir Richard made light of all, and went off to Oxford to find a
physician more accommodating than Dr. Bayley. But Dr. Bayley had talked
too much, and it was in vain that Sir Richard pleaded with each of
the two physicians he sought that her ladyship was ailing--"sad and
heavy"--and that he must have a potion for her.

Each in turn shook his head. They had no medicine for sorrow, was their
discreet answer. From his description of her condition, said each, it
was plain that her ladyship's sickness was of the mind, and, considering
the tales that were afloat, neither was surprised.

Sir Richard went back to his Oxford lodging with the feeling of a
man checkmated. For two whole days of that precious time he lay there
considering what to do. He thought of going to seek a physician in
Abingdon. But fearing no better success in that quarter, fearing,
indeed, that in view of the rumours abroad he would merely be
multiplying what my lord called "footprints," he decided to take
some other way to his master's ends. He was a resourceful, inventive
scoundrel, and soon he had devised a plan.

On Friday he wrote from Oxford to Lady Robert, stating that he had a
communication for her on the subject of his lordship as secret as it was
urgent. That he desired to come to her at Cumnor again, but dared not do
so openly. He would come if she would contrive that her servants should
be absent, and he exhorted her to let no one of them know that he was
coming, else he might be ruined, out of his desire to serve her.

That letter he dispatched by the hand of his servant Nunweek, desiring
him to bring an answer. It was a communication that had upon her
ladyship's troubled mind precisely the effect that the rascal conceived.
There was about Sir Richard's personality nothing that could suggest
the villain. He was a smiling, blue-eyed, florid gentleman, of a kindly
manner that led folk to trust him. And on the occasion of his late
visit to Cumnor he had displayed such tender solicitude that her
ladyship--starved of affection as she was--had been deeply touched.

His letter so cunningly couched filled her with vague alarm and with
anxiety. She had heard so many and such afflicting rumours, and
had received in my lord's cruel neglect of her such circumstantial
confirmation of them, that she fastened avidly upon what she deemed the
chance of learning at last the truth. Sir Richard Verney had my lord's
confidence, and was much about the court in his attendance upon my lord.
He would know the truth, and what could this letter mean but that he was
disposed to tell it.

So she sent him back a line in answer, bidding him come on Sunday
afternoon. She would contrive to be alone in the house, so that he need
not fear being seen by any.

As she promised, so she performed, and on the Sunday packed off her
household to the fair that was being held at Abingdon that day, using
insistence with the reluctant, and particularly with one of her women,
a Mrs. Oddingsell, who expressed herself strongly against leaving her
ladyship alone in that lonely house. At length, however, the last of
them was got off, and my lady was left impatiently to await her secret
visitor. It was late afternoon when he arrived, accompanied by Nunweek,
whom he left to hold the horses under the chestnuts in the avenue.
Himself he reached the house across the garden, where the blighting hand
of autumn was already at work.

Within the porch he found her waiting, fretted by her impatience.

"It is very good in you to have come, Sir Richard," was her gracious
greeting.

"I am your ladyship's devoted servant," was his sufficient answer, and
he doffed his plumed bonnet, and bowed low before her. "We shall be
private in your bower above stairs," he added.

"Why, we are private anywhere. I am all alone, as you desired."

"That is very wise--most wise," said he. "Will your ladyship lead the
way?"

So they went up that steep, spiral staircase, which had loomed so
prominently in the plans the ingenious scoundrel had evolved. Across
the gallery on the first floor they entered a little room whose windows
overlooked the garden. This was her bower--an intimate cosy room,
reflecting on every hand the gentle, industrious personality of the
owner. On an oak table near the window were spread some papers and
account-books concerned with the estate--with which she had sought to
beguile the time of waiting. She led the way towards this, and, sinking
into the high-backed chair that stood before it, she looked up at him
expectantly. She was pale, there were dark stains under her eyes, and
wistful lines had crept into the sweet face of that neglected wife.

Contemplating his poor victim now, Sir Richard may have compared her
with the woman by whom my lord desired so impatiently to supplant
her. She was tall and beautifully shaped, despite an almost maidenly
slenderness. Her countenance was gentle and adorable, with its soft grey
eyes and light brown hair, and tender, wistful mouth.

It was not difficult to believe that Lord Robert had as ardently desired
her to wife five years ago as he now desired to be rid of her. Then he
obeyed the insistent spur of passion; now he obeyed the remorseless spur
of ambition. In reality, then as now, his beacon-light was love of self.

Seeing her so frail and trusting, trembling in her anxious impatience
to hear the news of her lord which he had promised her, Sir Richard may
have felt some pang of pity. But, like my lord, he was of those whose
love of self suffers the rivalry of no weak emotion.

"Your news, Sir Richard," she besought him, her dove-like glance upon
his florid face--less florid now than was its wont.

He leaned against the table, his back to the window. "Why, it is briefly
this," said he. "My lord..." And then he checked, and fell into a
listening attitude.

"What was that? Did you hear anything, my lady?"

"No. What is it?" Her face betrayed alarm, her anxiety mounting under so
much mystery.

"Sh! Stay you here," he enjoined. "If we are spied upon..." He left the
sentence there. Already he was moving quickly, stealthily, towards the
door. He paused before opening it. "Stay where you are, my lady," he
enjoined again, so gravely that she could have no thought of disobeying
him. "I will return at once."

He stepped out, closed the door, and crossed to the stairs. There he
stopped. From his pouch he had drawn a fine length of whipcord, attached
at one end to a tiny bodkin of needle sharpness. That bodkin he drove
into the edge of one of the panels of the wainscot, in line with the
topmost step; drawing the cord taut at a height of a foot or so
above this step, he made fast its other end to the newel-post at
the stair-head. He had so rehearsed the thing in his mind that the
performance of it occupied but a few seconds. Such dim light of
that autumn afternoon as reached the spot would leave that fine cord
invisible.

Sir Richard went back to her ladyship. She had not moved in his absence,
so brief as scarcely to have left her time in which to resolve upon
disobeying his injunction.

"We move in secret like conspirators," said he, "and so we are easily
affrighted.. I should have known it could be none but my lord himself...
here?"

"My lord!" she interrupted, coming excitedly to her feet. "Lord Robert?"

"To be sure, my lady. It was he had need to visit you in secret--for did
the Queen have knowledge of his coming here, it would mean the Tower for
him. You cannot think what, out of love for you, his lordship suffers.
The Queen...

"But do you say that he is here, man," her voice shrilled up in
excitement.

"He is below, my lady. Such is his peril that he dared not set foot in
Cumnor until he was certain beyond doubt that you are here alone."

"He is below!" she cried, and a flush dyed her pale cheeks, a light
of gladness quickened her sad eyes. Already she had gathered from his
cunning words a new and comforting explanation of the things reported to
her. "He is below!" she repeated. "Oh!" She turned from him, and in an
instant was speeding towards the door.

He stood rooted there, his nether lip between his teeth, his face a
ghastly white, whilst she ran on.

"My lord! Robin! Robin!" he heard her calling, as she crossed the
corridor. Then came a piercing scream that echoed through the silent
house; a pause; a crashing thud below; and--silence.

Sir Richard remained by the table, immovable. Blood was trickling down
his chin. He had sunk his teeth through his lip when that scream rang
out. A long moment thus, as if entranced, awe-stricken. Then he braced
himself, and went forward, reeling at first like a drunken man. But
by the time he had reached the stairs he was master of himself again.
Swiftly, for all his trembling fingers, he unfastened the cord's end
from the newel-post. The wrench upon it had already pulled the bodkin
from the wainscot. He went down that abrupt spiral staircase at a
moderate pace, mechanically coiling the length of whip-cord, and
bestowing it with the bodkin in his pouch again, and all the while his
eyes were fixed upon the grey bundle that lay so still at the stairs'
foot.

He came to it at last, and, pausing, looked more closely. He was
thankful that there was not the need to touch it. The position of the
brown-haired head was such as to leave no doubt of the complete success
of his design. Her neck was broken. Lord Robert Dudley was free to marry
the Queen.

Deliberately Sir Richard stepped over the huddled body of that poor
victim of a knave's ambition, crossed the hall, and passed out,
closing the door. An excellent day's work, thought he, most excellently
accomplished. The servants, returning from Abingdon Fair on that Sunday
evening, would find her there. They would publish the fact that in their
absence her ladyship had fallen downstairs and broken her neck, and that
was the end of the matter.

                     *   *   *   *   *

But that was not the end at all. Fate, the ironic interloper, had taken
a hand in this evil game.

The court had moved a few days earlier to Windsor, and thither on
the Friday--the 6th of September--came Alvarez de Quadra to seek the
definite answer which the Queen had promised him on the subject of the
Spanish marriage. What he had seen that night at Whitehall, coupled
with his mistrust of her promises and experience of her fickleness, had
rendered him uneasy. Either she was trifling with him, or else she was
behaving in a manner utterly unbecoming the future wife of the Archduke.
In either case some explanation was necessary. De Quadra must know where
he stood. Having failed to obtain an audience before the court
left London, he had followed it to Windsor, cursing all women and
contemplating the advantages of the Salic law.

He found at Windsor an atmosphere of constraint, and it was not until
the morrow that he obtained an audience with the Queen. Even then this
was due to chance rather than to design on the part of Elizabeth. For
they met on the terrace as she was returning from hunting. She dismissed
those about her, including the stalwart Robert Dudley, and, alone with
de Quadra, invited him to speak.

"Madame," he said, "I am writing to my master, and I desire to know
whether your Majesty would wish me to add anything to what you have
announced already as your intention regarding the Archduke."

She knit her brows. The wily Spaniard fenced so closely that there was
no alternative but to come to grips.

"Why, sir," she answered dryly, "you may tell his Majesty that I
have come to an absolute decision, which is that I will not marry the
Archduke."

The colour mounted to the Spaniard's sallow cheeks. Iron self-control
alone saved him from uttering unpardonable words. Even so he spoke
sternly:

"This, madame, is not what you had led me to believe when last we talked
upon the subject."

At another time Elizabeth might have turned upon him and rent him for
that speech. But it happened that she was in high good-humour that
afternoon, and disposed to indulgence. She laughed, surveying herself in
the small steel mirror that dangled from her waist.

"You are ungallant to remind me, my lord," said she. "My sex, you may
have heard, is privileged to change of mind."

"Then, madame, I pray that you may change it yet again." His tone was
bitter.

"Your prayer will not be heard. This time I am resolved."

De Quadra bowed. "The King, my master, will not be pleased, I fear."

She looked him straightly in the face, her dark eyes kindling.

"God's death!" said she, "I marry to please myself, and not the King
your master."

"You are resolved on marriage then?" flashed he.

"And it please you," she mocked him archly, her mood of joyousness
already conquering her momentary indignation.

"What pleases you must please me also, madame," he answered, in a tone
so cold that it belied his words. "That it please you, is reason enough
why you should marry... Whom did your Majesty say?"

"Nay. I named no names. Yet one so astute might hazard a shrewd guess."
Half-challenging, half-coy, she eyed him over her fan.

"A guess? Nay, madame. I might affront your Majesty."

"How so?"

"If I were deluded by appearances. If I named a subject who signally
enjoys your royal favour."

"You mean Lord Robert Dudley." She paled a little, and her bosom's heave
was quickened. "Why should the guess affront me?"

"Because a queen--a wise queen, madame--does not mate with a
subject--particularly with one who has a wife already."

He had stung her. He had wounded at once the pride of the woman and the
dignity of the queen, yet in a way that made it difficult for her to
take direct offense. She bit her lip and mastered her surge of anger.
Then she laughed, a thought sneeringly.

"Why, as to my Lord Robert's wife, it seems you are less well-informed
than usual, sir. Lady Robert Dudley is dead, or very nearly so."

And as blank amazement overspread his face, she passed upon her way and
left him.

But anon, considering, she grew vaguely uneasy, and that very night
expressed her afflicting doubt to my lord, reporting to him de Quadra's
words. His lordship, who was mentally near-sighted, laughed.

"He'll change his tone before long," said he.

She set her hands upon his shoulders, and looked up adoringly into his
handsome gipsy face. Never had he known her so fond as in these
last days since her surrender to him that night upon the terrace at
Whitehall, never had she been more the woman and less the queen in her
bearing towards him.

"You are sure, Robin? You are quite sure?" she pleaded.

He drew her close, she yielding herself to his embrace. "With so much
at stake could I be less than sure, sweet?" said he, and so convinced
her--the more easily since he afforded her the conviction she desired.

That was on the night of Saturday, and early on Monday came the news
which justified him of his assurances. It was brought him to Windsor
by one of Amy's Cumnor servants, a fellow named Bowes, who, with the
others, had been away at Abingdon Fair yesterday afternoon, and had
returned to find his mistress dead at the stairs' foot--the result of an
accident, as all believed.

It was not quite the news that my lord had been expecting. It staggered
him a little that an accident so very opportune should have come to
resolve his difficulties, obviating the need for recourse to those more
dangerous measures with which he had charged Sir Richard Verney. He
perceived how suspicion might now fall upon himself, how his enemies
would direct it, and on the instant made provision. There and then he
seized a pen, and wrote to his kinsman, Sir Thomas Blount, who even then
was on his way to Cumnor. He stated in the letter what he had learnt
from Bowes, bade Blount engage the coroner to make the strictest
investigation, and send for Amy's natural brother, Appleyard. "Have no
respect to any living person," was the final injunction of that letter
which he sent Blount by the hand of Bowes.

And, then, before he could carry to the Queen the news of this accident
which had broken his matrimonial shackles, Sir Richard Verney arrived
with the true account. He had expected praise and thanks from his
master. Instead, he met first dismay, and then anger and fierce
reproaches.

"My lord, this is unjust," the faithful retainer protested. "Knowing the
urgency, I took the only way--contrived the accident."

"Pray God," said Dudley, "that the jury find it to have been an
accident; for if the truth should come to be discovered, I leave you to
the consequences. I warned you of that before you engaged in this. Look
for no help from me."

"I look for none," said Sir Richard, stung to hot contempt by the
meanness and cowardice so characteristic of the miserable egotist he
served. "Nor will there be the need, for I have left no footprints.

"I hope that may be so, for I tell you, man, that I have ordered a
strict inquiry, bidding them have no respect to any living person, and
to that I shall adhere."

"And if, in spite of that, I am not hanged?" quoth Sir Richard, a sneer
upon his white face.

"Come to me again when the affair is closed, and we will talk of it."

Sir Richard went out, rage and disgust in his heart, leaving my lord
with rage and fear in his.

Grown calmer now, my lord dressed himself with care and sought the
Queen to tell her of the accident that had removed the obstacle to their
marriage. And that same night her Majesty coldly informed de Quadra that
Lady Robert Dudley had fallen down a flight of stairs and broken her
neck.

The Spaniard received the information with a countenance that was
inscrutable.

"Your Majesty's gift of prophecy is not so widely known as it deserves
to be," was his cryptic comment.

She stared at him blankly a moment. Then a sudden uneasy memory awakened
by his words, she drew him forward to a window embrasure apart from
those who had stood about her, and for greater security addressed him,
as he tells us, in Italian.

"I do not think I understand you, sir. Will you be plain with me?" She
stood erect and stiff, and frowned upon him after the manner of her
bullying father. But de Quadra held the trumps, and was not easily
intimidated.

"About the prophecy?" said he. "Why, did not your Majesty foretell the
poor lady's death a full day before it came to pass? Did you not say
that she was already dead, or nearly so?"

He saw her blench; saw fear stare from those dark eyes that could be so
very bold. Then her ever-ready anger followed swiftly.

"'Sblood, man! What do you imply?" she cried, and went on without
waiting for his answer. "The poor woman was sick and ill, and must
soon have succumbed; it will no doubt be found that the accident which
anticipated nature was due to her condition."

Gently he shook his head, relishing her discomfiture, taking
satisfaction in torturing her who had flouted him and his master, in
punishing her whom he had every reason to believe guilty.

"Your Majesty, I fear, has been ill-informed on that score. The poor
lady was in excellent health--and like to have lived for many years--at
least, so I gather from Sir William Cecil, whose information is usually
exact."

She clutched his arm. "You told him what I had said?"

"It was indiscreet, perhaps. Yet, how was I to know...?" He left his
sentence there. "I but expressed my chagrin at your decision on the
score of the Archduke--hardly a wise decision, if I may be so bold," he
added slyly.

She caught the suggestion of a bargain, and became instantly suspicious.

"You transcend the duties of your office, my lord," she rebuked him, and
turned away.

But soon that night she was closeted with Dudley, and closely
questioning him about the affair. My lord was mightily vehement.

"I take Heaven to be my witness," quoth he, when she all but taxed him
with having procured his lady's death, "that I am innocent of any part
in it. My injunctions to Blount, who has gone to Cumnor, are that the
matter be sifted without respect to any person, and if it can be shown
that this is other than the accident I deem it, the murderer shall
hang."

She flung her arms about his neck, and laid her head on his shoulder.
"Oh, Robin, Robin, I am full of fears," she wailed, and was nearer to
tears than he had ever seen her.

But, anon, as the days passed their fears diminished, and finally the
jury at Cumnor--delayed in their finding, and spurred by my lord to
exhaustive inquiries--returned a verdict of "found dead," which in all
the circumstances left his lordship--who was known, moreover, to have
been at Windsor when his lady died--fully acquitted. Both he and the
Queen took courage from that finding, and made no secret of it now that
they would very soon be wed.

But there were many whom that finding did not convince, who read my
lord too well, and would never suffer him to reap the fruits of his evil
deed. Prominent among these were Arundel--who himself had aimed at the
Queen's hand--Norfolk and Pembroke, and behind them was a great mass of
the people. Indignation against Lord Robert was blazing out, fanned
by such screaming preachers as Lever, who, from the London pulpits,
denounced the projected marriage, hinting darkly at the truth of Amy
Dudley's death.

What was hinted at home was openly expressed abroad, and in Paris Mary
Stuart ventured a cruel witticism that Elizabeth was to conserve in
her memory: "The Queen of England," she said, "is about to marry her
horse-keeper, who has killed his wife to make a place for her."

Yet Elizabeth persisted in her intent to marry Dudley, until the sober
Cecil conveyed to her towards the end of that month of September some
notion of the rebellion that was smouldering.

She flared out at him, of course. But he stood his ground.

"There is," he reminded her, "this unfortunate matter of a prophecy, as
the Bishop of Aquila persists in calling it."

"God's Body! Is the rogue blabbing?"

"What else did your Majesty expect from a man smarting under a sense of
injury? He has published it broadcast that on the day before Lady Robert
broke her neck, you told him that she was dead or nearly so. And he
argues from it a guilty foreknowledge on your Majesty's part of what was
planned."

"A guilty foreknowledge!" She almost choked in rage, and then fell to
swearing as furiously in that moment as old King Harry at his worst.

"Madame!" he cried, shaken by her vehemence. "I but report the phrase he
uses. It is not mine."

"Do you believe it?"

"I do not, madame. If I did I should not be here at present."

"Does any subject of mine believe it?"

"They suspend their judgment. They wait to learn the truth from the
sequel."

"You mean?"

"That if your motive prove to be such as de Quadra and others allege,
they will be in danger of believing."

"Be plain, man, in God's name. What exactly is alleged?"

He obeyed her very fully.

"That my lord contrived the killing of his wife so that he might have
liberty to marry your Majesty, and that your Majesty was privy to the
deed." He spoke out boldly, and hurried on before she could let loose
her wrath. "It is still in your power, madame, to save your honour,
which is now in peril. But there is only one way in which you can
accomplish it. If you put from you all thought of marrying Lord Robert,
England will believe that de Quadra and those others lied. If you
persist and carry out your intention, you proclaim the truth of his
report; and you see what must inevitably follow."

She saw indeed, and, seeing, was afraid.

Within a few hours of that interview she delivered her answer to Cecil,
which was that she had no intention of marrying Dudley.

Because of her fear she saved her honour by sacrificing her heart, by
renouncing marriage with the only man she could have taken for her mate
of all who had wooed her. Yet the wound of that renunciation was slow to
heal. She trifled with the notion of other marriages, but ever and anon,
in her despair, perhaps, we see her turning longing eyes towards the
handsome Lord Robert, later made Earl of Leicester. Once, indeed, some
six years after Amy's death, there was again some talk of her marrying
him, which was quickly quelled by a reopening of the question of how Amy
died. Between these two, between the fulfilment of her desire and his
ambition, stood the irreconcilable ghost of his poor murdered wife.

Perhaps it was some thought of this that found expression in her
passionate outburst when she learnt of the birth of Mary Stuart's child:
"The Queen of Scots is lighter of a fair son; and I am but a barren
stock."





VII. SIR JUDAS

The Betrayal of Sir Walter Ralegh



Sir Walter was met on landing at Plymouth from his ill-starred voyage to
El Dorado by Sir Lewis Stukeley, which was but natural, seeing that Sir
Lewis was not only Vice-Admiral of Devon, but also Sir Walter's very
good friend and kinsman.

If Sir Walter doubted whether it was in his quality as kinsman or as
Vice-Admiral that Sir Lewis met him, the cordiality of the latter's
embrace and the noble entertainment following at the house of Sir
Christopher Hare, near the port, whither Sir Lewis conducted him, set
this doubt at rest and relighted the lamp of hope in the despairing soul
of our adventurer. In Sir Lewis he saw only his kinsman--his very
good friend and kinsman, to insist upon Stukeley's own description of
himself--at a time when of all others in his crowded life he needed the
support of a kinsman and the guidance of a friend.

You know the story of this Sir Walter, who had been one of the brightest
ornaments of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and might have added lustre
to that of King James, had not his Sowship--to employ the title bestowed
upon that prince by his own queen--been too mean of soul to appreciate
the man's great worth. Courtier, philosopher, soldier, man of letters
and man of action alike, Ralegh was at once the greatest prose-writer,
and one of the greatest captains of his age, the last survivor of that
glorious company--whose other members were Drake and Frobisher and
Hawkins--that had given England supremacy upon the seas, that had broken
the power and lowered the pride of Spain.

His was a name that had resounded, to the honour and glory of England,
throughout the world, a name that, like Drake's, was a thing of hate and
terror to King Philip and his Spaniards; yet the King of Scots, unclean
of body and of mind, who had succeeded to the throne of Elizabeth, must
affect ignorance of that great name which shall never die while England
lives.

When the splendid courtier stood before him--for at fifty Sir Walter was
still handsome of person and magnificent of Apparel--James looked him
over and inquired who he might be. When they had told him:

"I've rawly heard of thee," quoth the royal punster, who sought by such
atrocities of speech to be acclaimed a wit.

It was ominous of what must follow, and soon thereafter you see this
great and gallant gentleman arrested on a trumped-up charge of high
treason, bullied, vituperated, and insulted by venal, peddling lawyers,
and, finally, although his wit and sincerity had shattered every
fragment of evidence brought against him, sentenced to death. Thus far
James went; but he hesitated to go further, hesitated to carry out the
sentence. Sir Walter had too many friends in England then; the memory of
his glorious deeds was still too fresh in the public mind, and execution
might have been attended by serious consequences for King James.
Besides, one at least of the main objects was achieved. Sir Walter's
broad acres were confiscate by virtue of that sentence, and King James
wanted the land--filched thus from one who was England's pride--to
bestow it upon one of those golden calves of his who were England's
shame.

"I maun hae the land for Carr. I maun hae it," was his brazen and
peevish answer to an appeal against the confiscation.

For thirteen years Sir Walter lay in the Tower, under that sentence of
death passed in 1603, enjoying after a season a certain liberty, visited
there by his dear lady and his friends, among whom was Henry, Prince of
Wales, who did not hesitate to publish that no man but his father--whom
he detested--would keep such a bird in a cage. He beguiled the time in
literary and scientific pursuits, distilling his essences and writing
that stupendous work of his, "The History of the World." Thus old age
crept upon him; but far from quenching the fires of enterprise within
his adventurer's soul, it brought a restlessness that urged him at last
to make a bid for liberty. Despairing of winning it from the clemency of
James, he applied his wits to extracting it from the King's cupidity.

Throughout his life, since the day when first he had brought himself to
the notice of a Queen by making of his cloak a carpet for her feet, he
had retained side by side with the dignity of the sage and the
greatness of the hero, the craft and opportunism of the adventurer. His
opportunity now was the straitened condition of the royal treasury, a
hint of which had been let fall by Winwood the Secretary of State. He
announced at once that he knew of a gold mine in Guiana, the El Dorado
of the Spaniards.

On his return from a voyage to Guiana in 1595, he had written of it
thus:

"There the common soldier shall fight for gold instead of pence, pay
himself with plates half a foot broad, whereas he breaks his bones in
other wars for provant and penury Those commanders and chieftains that
shoot at honour and abundance shall find here more rich and beautiful
cities, more temples adorned with golden images, more sepulchres filled
with treasure than either Cortez found in Mexico or Pizarro in Peru."

Winwood now reminded him that as a consequence many expeditions had gone
out, but failed to discover any of these things.

"That," said Ralegh, "is because those adventurers were ignorant alike
of the country and of the art of conciliating its inhabitants. Were I
permitted to go, I would make Guiana to England what Peru has been to
Spain."

That statement, reported to James in his need, was enough to fire his
cupidity, and when Ralegh had further added that he would guarantee
to the Crown one-fifth of the treasure without asking any contribution
towards the adventure either in money or in ships, he was permitted to
come forth and prepare for the expedition.


His friends came to his assistance, and in March of 1617 he set sail for
El Dorado with a well-manned and well-equipped fleet of fourteen ships,
the Earls of Arundel and Pembroke standing sureties for his return.

From the outset the fates were unpropitious. Disaster closed the
adventure. Gondomar, the Ambassador of Spain at Whitehall, too
well-informed of what was afoot, had warned his master. Spanish ships
waited to frustrate Sir Walter, who was under pledge to avoid all
conflict with the forces of King Philip. But conflict there was, and
bloodshed in plenty, about the city of Manoa, which the Spaniards held
as the key to the country into which the English adventurers sought
to penetrate. Among the slain were the Governor of Manoa, who was
Gondomar's own brother, and Sir Walter's eldest son.

To Ralegh, waiting at the mouth of the Orinoco, came his beaten forces
in retreat, with the terrible news of a happening that meant his
ruin. Half-maddened, his anguish increased by the loss of his boy, he
upbraided them so fiercely that Keymis, who had been in charge of
the expedition, shut himself up in his cabin and shot himself with
a pocket-pistol. Mutiny followed, and Whitney--most trusted of Sir
Walter's captains--set sail for England, being followed by six other
ships of that fleet, which meanwhile had been reduced to twelve. With
the remaining five the stricken Sir Walter had followed more at leisure.
What need to hurry? Disgrace, and perhaps death, awaited him in England.
He knew the power of Spain with James, who was so set upon a Spanish
marriage for his heir, knew Spain's hatred of himself, and what
eloquence it would gather in the mouth of Gondomar, intent upon avenging
his brother's death.

He feared the worst, and so was glad upon landing to have by him a
kinsman upon whom he could lean for counsel and guidance in this the
darkest hour of all his life. Sitting late that night in the library of
Sir Christopher Hare's house, Sir Walter told his cousin in detail the
story of his misadventure, and confessed to his misgivings.

"My brains are broken," was his cry.

Stukeley combed his beard in thought. He had little comfort to offer.

"It was not expected," said he, "that you would return.

"Not expected?" Sir Walter's bowed white head was suddenly flung back.
Indignation blazed in the eyes that age had left undimmed. "What act in
all my life justified the belief I should be false to honour? My danger
here was made quite plain, and Captain King would have had me steer a
course for France, where I had found a welcome and a harbour. But to
consent I must have been false to my Lords of Arundel and Pembroke,
who were sureties to the King for my return. Life is still sweet to me,
despite my three-score years and more, but honour is sweeter still."

And then, because life was sweet, he bluntly asked his cousin: "What is
the King's intent by me?"

"Nay, now," said Stukeley, "who shall know what passes in the King's
mind? From the signs, I judge your case to be none so desperate. You
have good friends in plenty, among whom, although the poorest, count
myself the first. Anon, when you are rested, we'll to London by easy
stages, baiting at the houses of your friends, and enlisting their good
offices on your behalf."

Ralegh took counsel on the matter with Captain King, a bluff,
tawny-bearded seaman, who was devoted to him body and soul.

"Sir Lewis proposes it, eh?" quoth the hardy seaman. "And Sir Lewis
is Vice-Admiral of Devon? He is not by chance bidden to escort you to
London?"

The Captain, clearly, had escaped the spell of Stukeley's affability.
Sir Walter was indignant. He had never held his kinsman in great
esteem, and had never been on the best of terms with him in the past.
Nevertheless, he was very far from suspecting him of what King implied.
To convince him that he did Sir Lewis an injustice, Ralegh put the blunt
question to his kinsman in King's presence.

"Nay," said Sir Lewis, "I am not yet bidden to escort you. But as
Vice-Admiral of Devon I may at any moment be so bidden. It were wiser, I
hold, not to await such an order. Though even if it come," he made
haste to add, "you may still count upon my friendship. I am your kinsman
first, and Vice-Admiral after."

With a smile that irradiated his handsome, virile countenance, Sir
Walter held out his hand to clasp his cousin's in token of appreciation.
Captain King expressed no opinion save what might be conveyed in a grunt
and a shrug.

Guided now unreservedly by his cousin's counsel, Sir Walter set out with
him upon that journey to London. Captain King went with them, as well
as Sir Walter's body-servant, Cotterell, and a Frenchman named Manourie,
who had made his first appearance in the Plymouth household on the
previous day. Stukeley explained the fellow as a gifted man of medicine,
whom he had sent for to cure him of a trivial but inconvenient ailment
by which he was afflicted.

Journeying by slow stages, as Sir Lewis had directed, they came at
last to Brentford. Sir Walter, had he followed his own bent, would have
journeyed more slowly still, for in a measure, as he neared London,
apprehensions of what might await him there grew ever darker. He spoke
of them to King, and the blunt Captain said nothing to dispel them.

"You are being led like a sheep to the shambles," he declared, "and
you go like a sheep. You should have landed in France, where you have
friends. Even now it is not too late. A ship could be procured..."

"And my honour could be sunk at sea," Sir Walter harshly concluded, in
reproof of such counsel.

But at the inn at Brentford he was sought out by a visitor, who brought
him the like advice in rather different terms. This was De Chesne, the
secretary of the French envoy, Le Clerc. Cordially welcomed by Ralegh,
the Frenchman expressed his deep concern to see Sir Walter under arrest.

"You conclude too hastily," laughed Sir Walter.

"Monsieur, I do not conclude. I speak of what I am inform'."

"Misinformed, sir. I am not a prisoner--at least, not yet," he added,
with a sigh. "I travel of my own free will to London with my good friend
and kinsman Stukeley to lay the account of my voyage before the King."

"Of your own free will? You travel of your own frets will? And you
are not a prisoner? Ha!" There was bitter mockery in De Chesne's
short laugh. "C'est bien drole!" And he explained: "Milord the Duke o
Buckingham, he has write in his master's name to the ambassador Gondomar
that you are taken and held at the disposal of the King of Spain.
Gondomar is to inform him whether King Philip wish that you be sent to
Spain to essay the justice of his Catholic Majesty, or that you suffer
here. Meanwhile your quarters are being made ready in the Tower. Yet you
tell me you are not prisoner! You go of your own free will to London.
Sir Walter, do not be deceive'. If you reach London, you are lost."

Now here was news to shatter Sir Walter's last illusion. Yet desperately
he clung to the fragments of it. The envoy's secretary must be at fault.

"'Tis yourself are at fault, Sir Walter, in that you trust those about
you," the Frenchman insisted.

Sir Walter stared at him, frowning. "D'ye mean Stukeley?" quoth he,
half-indignant already at the mere suggestion.

"Sir Lewis, he is your kinsman." De Chesne shrugged. "You should know
your family better than I. But who is this Manourie who accompanies you?
Where is he come from? What you know of him?"

Sir Walter confessed that he knew nothing.

"But I know much. He is a fellow of evil reputation. A spy who does not
scruple to sell his own people. And I know that letters of commission
from the Privy Council for your arrest were give' to him in London ten
days ago. Whether those letters were to himself, or he was just the
messenger to another, imports nothing. The fact is everything. The
warrant against you exists, and it is in the hands of one or another of
those that accompany you. I say no more. As I have tol' you, you should
know your own family. But of this be sure, they mean that you go to
the Tower, and so to your death. And now, Sir Walter, if I show you the
disease I also bring the remedy. I am command' by my master to offer
you a French barque which is in the Thames, and a safe conduct to the
Governor of Calais. In France you will find safety and honour, as your
worth deserve'."

Up sprang Sir Walter from his chair, and flung off the cloak of thought
in which he had been mantled.

"Impossible," he said. "Impossible! There is my plighted word to return,
and there are my Lords of Arundel and Pembroke, who are sureties for me.
I cannot leave them to suffer by my default."

"They will not suffer at all," De Chesne assured him. He was very well
informed. "King James has yielded to Spain partly because he fears,
partly because he will have a Spanish marriage for Prince Charles, and
will do nothing to trouble his good relations with King Philip. But,
after all, you have friends, whom his Majesty also fears. If you escape'
you would resolve all his perplexities. I do not believe that any
obstacle will be offer' to your escape--else why they permit you to
travel thus without any guard, and to retain your sword?"

Half distracted as he was by what he had learnt, yet Sir Walter clung
stoutly and obstinately to what he believed to be the only course for a
man of honour. And so he dismissed De Chesne with messages of gratitude
but refusal to his master, and sent for Captain King. Together they
considered all that the secretary had stated, and King agreed with De
Chesne's implied opinion that it was Sir Lewis himself who held the
warrant.

They sent for him at once, and Ralegh straightly taxed him with it. Sir
Lewis as straightly admitted it, and when King thereupon charged him
with deceit he showed no anger, but only the profoundest grief. He sank
into a chair, and took his head in his hands.

"What could I do? What could I do?" he cried. "The warrant came in the
very moment we were setting out. At first I thought of telling you; and
then I bethought me that to do so would be but to trouble your mind,
without being able to offer you help."

Sir Walter understood what was implied. "Did you not say," he asked,
"that you were my kinsman first and Vice-Admiral of Devon after?"

"Ay--and so I am. Though I must lose my office of Vice-Admiral, which
has cost me six hundred pounds, if I suffer you to escape, I'd never
hesitate if it were not for Manourie, who watches me as closely as he
watches you, and would baulk us at the last. And that is why I have held
my peace on the score of this warrant. What can it help that I should
trouble you with the matter until at the same time I can offer you some
way out?"

"The Frenchman has a throat, and throats can be slit," said the
downright King.

"So they can; and men can be hanged for slitting them," returned Sir
Lewis, and thereafter resumed and elaborated his first argument, using
now such forceful logic and obvious sincerity that Sir Walter was
convinced. He was no less convinced, too, of the peril in which he
stood. He plied those wits of his, which had rarely failed him in an
extremity. Manourie was the difficulty. But in his time he had known
many of these agents who, without sentimental interest and purely for
the sake of gold, were ready to play such parts; and never yet had
he known one who was not to be corrupted. So that evening he desired
Manourie's company in the room above stairs that had been set apart for
Sir Walter's use. Facing him across the table at which both were seated,
Sir Walter thrust his clenched fist upon the board, and, suddenly
opening it, dazzled the Frenchman's beady eyes with the jewel sparkling
in his palm.

"Tell me, Manourie, are you paid as much as that to betray me?"

Manourie paled a little under his tan. He was a swarthy, sharp-featured
fellow, slight and wiry. He looked into Sir Walter's grimly smiling
eyes, then again at the white diamond, from which the candlelight was
striking every colour of the rainbow. He made a shrewd estimate of its
price, and shook his black head. He had quite recovered from the shock
of Sir Walter's question.

"Not half as much," he confessed, with impudence.

"Then you might find it more remunerative to serve me," said the knight.
"This jewel is to be earned."

The agent's eyes flickered; he passed his tongue over his lips. "As
how?" quoth he.

"Briefly thus: I have but learnt of the trammel in which I am taken. I
must have time to concert my measures of escape, and time is almost at
an end. You are skilled in drugs, so my kinsman tells me. Can you so
drug me as to deceive physicians that I am in extremis?"

Manourie considered awhile.

"I... I think I could," he answered presently.

"And keep faith with me in this, at the price of, say.. two such
stones?"

The venal knave gasped in amazement. This was not generosity; it was
prodigality. He recovered again, and swore himself Sir Walter's.

"About it, then." Sir Walter rolled the gem across the board into the
clutch of the spy, which pounced to meet it. "Keep that in earnest. The
other will follow when we have cozened them."

Next morning Sir Walter could not resume the journey. When Cotterell
went to dress him he found his master taken with vomits, and reeling
like a drunkard. The valet ran to fetch Sir Lewis, and when they
returned together they found Sir Walter on all fours gnawing the rushes
on the floor, his face livid and horribly distorted, his brow glistening
with sweat.

Stukeley, in alarm, ordered Cotterell to get his master back to bed
and to foment him, which was done. But on the next day there was no
improvement, and on the third things were in far more serious case.
The skin of his brow and arms and breast was inflamed, and covered with
horrible purple blotches--the result of an otherwise harmless ointment
with which the French empiric had supplied him.

When Stukeley beheld him thus disfigured, and lying apparently inert
and but half-conscious upon his bed, he backed away in terror. The
Vice-Admiral had seen afore-time the horrible manifestations of the
plague, and could not be mistaken here. He fled from the infected air
of his kinsman's chamber, and summoned what physicians were available
to pronounce and prescribe. The physicians came--three in number--but
manifested no eagerness to approach the patient closely. The mere sight
of him was enough to lead them to the decision that he was afflicted
with the plague in a singularly virulent form.

Presently one of them plucked up courage so far as to feel the pulse
of the apparently delirious patient. Its feebleness confirmed his
diagnosis; moreover the hand he held was cold and turgid. He was not to
know that Sir Walter had tightly wrapped about his upper arm the ribbon
from his poniard, and so he was entirely deceived.

The physicians withdrew, and delivered their verdict, whereupon Sir
Lewis at once sent word of it to the Privy Council.

That afternoon the faithful Captain King, sorely afflicted by the news,
came to visit his master, and was introduced to Sir Walter's chamber by
Manourie, who was in attendance upon him. To the seaman's amazement he
found Sir Walter sitting up in bed, surveying in a hand-mirror a face
that was horrible beyond description with the complacent smile of one
who takes satisfaction in his appearance. Yet there was no fevered
madness in the smiling eyes. They were alive with intelligence,
amounting, indeed, to craft.

"Ah, King!" was the glad welcome "The prophet David did make himself a
fool, and suffered spittle to fall upon his beard, to escape from the
hands of his enemies And there was Brutus, ay, and others as memorable
who have descended to such artifice."

Though he laughed, it is clear that he was seeking to excuse an
unworthiness of which he was conscious.

"Artifice?" quoth King, aghast. "Is this artifice?"

"Ay--a hedge against my enemies, who will be afraid to approach me."

King sat himself down by his master's bed. "A better hedge against your
enemies, Sir Walter, would have been the strip of sea 'twixt here and
France. Would to Heaven you had done as I advised ere you set foot in
this ungrateful land."

"The omission may be repaired," said Sir Walter.

Before the imminence of his peril, as now disclosed to him, Sir Walter
had been reconsidering De Chesne's assurance touching my Lords of
Arundel and Pembroke, and he had come to conclude--the more readily,
perhaps because it was as he would have it--that De Chesne was right;
that to break faith with them were no such great matter after all, nor
one for which they would be called upon to suffer. And so, now, when it
was all but too late, he yielded to the insistence of Captain King, and
consented to save himself by flight to France. King was to go about the
business of procuring a ship without loss of time. Yet there was no need
of desperate haste, as was shown when presently orders came to Brentford
for the disposal of the prisoner. The King, who was at Salisbury,
desired that Sir Walter should be conveyed to his own house in London.
Stukeley reported this to him, proclaiming it a sign of royal favour.
Sir Walter was not deceived. He knew the reason to be fear lest he
should infect the Tower with the plague by which he was reported
stricken.

So the journey was resumed, and Sir Walter was brought to London, and
safely bestowed in his own house, but ever in the care of his loving
friend and kinsman. Manourie's part being fulfilled and the aim
accomplished, Sir Walter completed the promised payment by bestowing
upon him the second diamond--a form of eminently portable currency with
which the knight was well supplied. On the morrow Manourie was gone,
dismissed as a consequence of the part he had played.

It was Stukeley who told Sir Walter this--a very well informed and
injured Stukeley, who asked to know what he had done to forfeit the
knight's confidence that behind his back Sir Walter secretly concerted
means of escape. Had his cousin ceased to trust him?

Sir Walter wondered. Looking into that lean, crafty face, he considered
King's unquenchable mistrust of the man, bethought him of his kinsman's
general neediness, remembered past events that shed light upon his ways
and nature, and began now at last to have a sense of the man's hypocrisy
and double-dealing. Yet he reasoned in regard to him precisely as he
had reasoned in regard to Manourie. The fellow was acquisitive, and
therefore corruptible. If, indeed, he was so base that he had been
bought to betray Sir Walter, then he could be bought again to betray
those who had so bought him.

"Nay, nay," said Sir Walter easily. "It is not lack of trust in you, my
good friend. But you are the holder of an office, and knowing as I do
the upright honesty of your character I feared to embarrass you with
things whose very knowledge must give you the parlous choice of being
false to that office or false to me."

Stukeley broke forth into imprecations. He was, he vowed, the most
accursed and miserable of men that such a task as this should have
fallen to his lot. And he was a poor man, too, he would have his cousin
remember. It was unthinkable that he should use the knowledge he had
gained to attempt to frustrate Sir Walter's plans of escape to France.
And this notwithstanding that if Sir Walter escaped, it is certain he
would lose his office of Vice-Admiral and the six hundred pounds he had
paid for it.

"As to that, you shall be at no loss," Sir Walter assured him. "I could
not suffer it. I pledge you my honour, Lewis, that you shall have a
thousand pounds from my wife on the day that I am safely landed in
France or Holland. Meanwhile, in earnest of what is to come, here is a
toy of value for you." And he presented Sir Lewis with a jewel of price,
a great ruby encrusted in diamonds.

Thus reassured that he would be immune from pecuniary loss, Sir Lewis
was ready to throw himself whole-heartedly into Sir Walter's plans,
and to render him all possible assistance. True, this assistance was a
costly matter; there was this person to be bought and that one; there
were expenses here and expenses there, incurred by Sir Lewis on his
kinsman's behalf; and there were odd presents, too, which Stukeley
seemed to expect and which Sir Walter could not deny him. He had no
illusions now that King had been right; that here he was dealing with
a rogue who would exact the uttermost farthing for his services, but
he was gratified at the shrewdness with which he had taken his cousin's
measure, and did not grudge the bribes by which he was to escape the
scaffold.

De Chesne came again to the house in London, to renew his master's offer
of a ship to carry Sir Walter overseas, and such other assistance as Sir
Walter might require But by now the knight's arrangements were complete.
His servant Cotterell had come to inform him that his own boatswain,
now in London, was the owner of a ketch, at present lying at Tilbury,
admirably suited for the enterprise and entirely at Sir Walter's
disposal. It had been decided, then, with the agreement of Captain King,
that they should avail themselves of this; and accordingly Cotterell
was bidden desire the boatswain to have the craft made ready for sea at
once. In view of this, and anxious to avoid unnecessarily compromising
the French envoy, Sir Walter gratefully declined the latter's offer.

And so we come at last to that July evening appointed for the flight.
Ralegh, who, having for some time discarded the use of Manourie's
ointment, had practically recovered his normal appearance, covering his
long white hair under a Spanish hat, and muffling the half of his face
in the folds of a cloak, came to Wapping Stairs--that ill-omened place
of execution of pirates and sea-rovers--accompanied by Cotterell, who
carried the knight's cloak-bag, and by Sir Lewis and Sir Lewis's son.
Out of solicitude for their dear friend and kinsman, the Stukeleys could
not part from him until he was safely launched upon his voyage. At the
head of the stairs they were met by Captain King; at the foot of them a
boat was waiting, as concerted, the boatswain at the tiller.

King greeted them with an air of obvious relief.

"You feared perhaps we should not come," said Stukeley, with a sneer at
the Captain's avowed mistrust of him. "Yet now, I trust, you'll do me
the justice to admit that I have shown myself an honest man."

The uncompromising King looked at him and frowned, misliking the words.

"I hope that you'll continue so," he answered stiffly.

They went down the slippery steps to the boat, and then the shore glided
slowly past them as they pushed off into the stream of the ebbing tide.

A moment later, King, whose suspicious eyes kept a sharp look-out,
observed another boat put off some two hundred yards higher up the
river. At first he saw it breast the stream as if proceeding towards
London Bridge, then abruptly swing about and follow them. Instantly he
drew the attention of Sir Walter to that pursuing wherry.

"What's this?" quoth Sir Walter harshly. "Are we betrayed?"

The watermen, taking fright at the words, hung now upon their oars.

"Put back," Sir Walter bade them. "I'll not betray my friends to no
purpose. Put back, and let us home again."

"Nay, now," said Stukeley gravely, himself watching the wherry. "We are
more than a match for them in oars, even if their purpose be such as you
suspect--for which suspicion, when all is said, there is no ground. On
then!" He addressed himself to the watermen, whipping out a pistol, and
growing truculent in mien and voice. "To your oars! Row, you dogs, or
I'll pistol you where you sit."

The men bent their backs forthwith, and the boat swept on. But Sir
Walter was still full of apprehensions, still questioning the wisdom of
keeping to their down-stream course if they were being followed.

"But are we followed?" cried the impatient Sir Lewis. "'Sdeath, cousin,
is not the river a highway for all the world to use, and must every
wherry that chances to go our way be in pursuit of us? If you are to
halt at every shadow, faith, you'll never accomplish anything. I vow I
am unfortunate in having a friend whom I would save so full of doubts
and fears."

Sir Walter gave him reason, and even King came to conclude that he had
suspected him unjustly, whilst the rowers, under Stukeley's suasion,
now threw themselves heartily into their task, and onward sped the boat
through the deepening night, taking but little account of that other
wherry that hung ever in their wake. In this wise they came at length to
Greenwich on the last of the ebb. But here finding the water beginning
to grow against them, and wearied by the exertion into which Stukeley's
enthusiasm had flogged them, the watermen paused again, declaring that
they could not reach Gravesend before morning.

Followed a brief discussion, at the end of which Sir Walter bade them
put him ashore at Purfleet.

"And that's the soundest counsel," quoth the boatswain. "For at Purfleet
we can get horses on to Tilbury."

Stukeley was of the same opinion; but not so the more practical Captain
King.

"'Tis useless," he declared to them. "At this hour how shall you get
horses to go by land?"

And now, Sir Walter, looking over his shoulder, saw the other wherry
bearing down upon them through the faintly opalescent mists of dawn. A
hail came to them across the water.

"Oh, 'Sdeath! We are betrayed!" cried Ralegh bitterly, and Stukeley
swore more fiercely still. Sir Walter turned to him. "Put ashore," he
said shortly, "and let us home."

"Ay, perhaps 'twere best. For to-night there's an end to the enterprise,
and if I am taken in your company now, what shall be said to me for this
active assistance in your escape?" His voice was gloomy, his face drawn
and white.

"Could you not plead that you had but pretended to go with me to seize
on my private papers?" suggested the ingenious mind of Ralegh.

"I could. But shall I be believed? Shall I?" His loom was deepening to
despair.

Ralegh was stricken almost with remorse on his cousin's account. His
generous heart was now more concerned with the harm to his friends than
with his own doom. He desired to make amends to Stukeley, but had no
means save such as lay in the power of that currency he used. Having
naught else to give, he must give that. He plunged his hand into an
inner pocket, and brought forth a handful of jewels, which he thrust
upon his kinsman.

"Courage," he urged him. "Up now, and we may yet win out and home, so
that all will be well with you at least, and you shall not suffer for
your friendship to me."

Stukeley embraced him then, protesting his love and desire to serve him.

They came to land at last, just below Greenwich bridge, and almost at
the same moment the other wherry grounded immediately above them. Men
sprang from her, with the obvious intent of cutting off their retreat.

"Too late!" said Ralegh, and sighed, entirely without passion now that
the dice had fallen and showed that the game was lost. "You must act on
my suggestion to explain your presence, Lewis."

"Indeed, there is no other course," Sir Lewis agreed. "And you are in
the same case, Captain King. You must confess that you joined with me
but to betray Sir Walter. I'll bear you out. Thus, each supporting the
other..."

"I'll roast in Hell before I brand myself a traitor," roared the Captain
furiously. "And were you an honest man, Sir Lewis, you'ld understand my
meaning."

"So, so?" said Stukeley, in a quiet, wicked voice. And it was observed
that his son and one or two of the watermen had taken their stand beside
him as if in readiness for action. "Why, then, since you will have it
so, Captain, I arrest you, in the King's name, on a charge of abetting
treason."

The Captain fell back a step, stricken a moment by sheer amazement. Then
he groped for a pistol to do at last what he realized he should have
done long since. Instantly he was overpowered. It was only then that Sir
Walter understood the thing that had happened, and with understanding
came fury. The old adventurer flung back his cloak, and snatched at his
rapier to put it through the vitals of his dear friend and kinsman. But
he was too late. Hands seized upon him, and he found himself held by the
men from the wherry, confronted by a Mr. William Herbert, whom he knew
for Stukeley's cousin, and he heard Mr. Herbert formally asking him for
the surrender of his sword.

Instantly he governed himself, repressed his fury. He looked coldly at
his kinsman, whose face showed white and evil in the growing light of
the early summer dawn "Sir Lewis," was all he said, "these actions will
not turn out to your credit."

He had no illusion left. His understanding was now a very full one. His
dear friend and kinsman had played him false throughout, intending first
to drain him of his resources before finally flinging the empty husk to
the executioner. Manourie had been in the plot; he had run with the hare
and hunted with the hounds; and Sir Walter's own servant Cotterell had
done no less. Amongst them they had "cozened the great cozener"--to use
Stukeley's own cynical expression. Even so, it was only on his trial
that Sir Walter plumbed the full depth of Stukeley's baseness; for it
was only then he learnt that his kinsman had been armed by a warrant
of immunity to assist his projects of escape, so that he might the more
effectively incriminate and betray him; and Sir Walter discovered also
that the ship in which he had landed, and other matters, were to provide
additional Judas' fees to this acquisitive betrayer.

If to escape his enemies Sir Walter had had recourse to artifices
unworthy the great hero that he was, now that all hope was lost he
conducted himself with a dignity and cheerfulness beyond equal. So
calm and self-possessed and masterly was his defence from the charge of
piracy preferred at the request of Spain, and so shrewd in its inflaming
appeal to public opinion, that his judges were constrained to abandon
that line of prosecution, and could discover no way of giving his head
to King James save by falling back upon the thirteen-year old sentence
of death against him. Of this they now ordered execution.

Never a man who loved his life as dearly as Sir Walter loved it met
death as blithely. He dressed himself for the scaffold with that
elegance and richness which all his life he had observed. He wore a ruff
band and black velvet wrought nightgown over a doublet of hair-coloured
satin, a black wrought waistcoat, black cut taffety breeches and
ash-coloured silk stockings. Under his plumed hat he covered his white
locks with a wrought nightcap. This last he bestowed on his way to the
scaffold upon a bald-headed old man who had come to take a last look of
him, with the observation that he was more in need of it than himself.
When he had removed it, it was observed that his hair was not curled as
usual. This was a matter that had fretted his barber Peter in the prison
of the Gatehouse at Westminster that morning. But Sir Walter had put him
off with a laugh and a jest.

"Let them comb it that shall have it," he had said of his own head.

Having taken his leave of the friends who had flocked about him with
the observation that he had a long journey before him, he called for
the axe, and, when presented to him, ran his fingers along the edge, and
smiled.

"Sharp medicine," quoth he, "but a sound cure for all diseases."

When presently the executioner bade him turn his head to the East:

"It is no great matter which way a man's head stands, so that his heart
lies right," he said.

Thus passed one of England's greatest heroes, indeed one of the very
makers of this England, and than his death there is no more shameful
blot upon the shameful reign of that pusillanimous James, unclean of
body and of soul, who sacrificed him to the King of Spain.

A spectator of his death, who suffered for his words--as men must ever
suffer for the regardless utterance of Truth--declared that England had
not such another head to cut off.

As for Stukeley, the acquisitiveness which had made a Judas of him was
destined, by a poetic justice, ever desired but rarely forthcoming for
knaves, soon to be his ruin. He was caught diminishing the gold coin of
the realm by the operation known to-day as "clipping," and with him was
taken his creature Manourie, who, to save himself, turned chief witness
against Stukeley. Sir Lewis was sentenced to death, but saved himself
by purchasing his pardon at the cost of every ill-gotten shilling he
possessed, and he lived thereafter as bankrupt of means as he was of
honour.

Yet before all this happened, Sir Lewis had for his part in Sir Walter
Ralegh's death come to be an object of execration throughout the land,
and to be commonly known as "Sir Judas." At Whitehall he suffered
rebuffs and insults that found a climax in the words addressed to him by
the Lord Admiral, to whom he went to give an account of his office.

"Base fellow, darest thou who art the contempt and scorn of men offer
thyself in my presence?"

For a man of honour there was but one course. Sir Judas was not a man of
honour. He carried his grievance to the King. James leered at him.

"What wouldst thou have me do? Wouldst thou have me hang him? On my
soul, if I should hang all that speak ill of thee, all the trees of the
country would not suffice, so great is the number."





VIII. HIS INSOLENCE OF BUCKINGHAM

George Villier's Courtship of Ann of Austria



He was Insolence incarnate.

Since the day when, a mere country lad, his singular good looks
had attracted the attention of King James--notoriously partial to
good-looking lads--and had earned him the office of cup-bearer to his
Majesty, the career of George Villiers is to be read in a series of
acts of violent and ever-increasing arrogance, expressing the vanity and
levity inherent in his nature. Scarcely was he established in the royal
favour than he distinguished himself by striking an offending gentleman
in the very presence of his sovereign--an act of such gross disrespect
to royalty that his hand would have paid forfeit, as by law demanded,
had not the maudlin king deemed him too lovely a fellow to be so cruelly
maimed.

Over the mind and will of King Charles his ascendancy became even
greater than it had been over that of King James; and it were easy to
show that the acts of George Villiers' life supplied the main planks
of that scaffold in Whitehall whereupon Charles Stuart came to lose his
head. Charles was indeed a martyr; a martyr chiefly to the reckless,
insolent, irresponsible vanity of this Villiers, who, from a simple
country squire with nothing but personal beauty to recommend him, had
risen to be, as Duke of Buckingham, the first gentleman in England.

The heady wine of power had gone to his brain, and so addled it that, as
John Chamberlain tells us, there was presently a touch of craziness
in him--of the variety, no doubt, known to modern psychologists as
megalomania He lost the sense of proportion, and was without respect for
anybody or anything. The Commons of England and the immensely dignified
Court of Spain--during that disgraceful, pseudo-romantic adventure at
Madrid--were alike the butts of this parvenu's unmeasured arrogance But
the crowning insolence of his career was that tragicomedy the second act
of which was played on a June evening in an Amiens garden on the banks
of the river Somme.

Three weeks ago--on the 14th May, 1625, to be precise--Buckingham had
arrived in Paris as Ambassador Extra-ordinary, charged with the task of
conducting to England the King of France's sister, Henrietta Maria, who
three days earlier had been married by proxy to King Charles.

The occasion enabled Buckingham to fling the reins on to the neck of
his mad vanity, to indulge to the very fullest his crazy passion
for ostentation and magnificence. Because the Court of France was
proverbially renowned for splendour and luxury, Buckingham felt it due
to himself to extinguish its brilliance by his own. On his first coming
to the Louvre he literally blazed. He wore a suit of white satin velvet
with a short cloak in the Spanish fashion, the whole powdered over with
diamonds to the value of some ten thousand pounds. An enormous diamond
clasped the heron's plume in his hat; diamonds flashed in the hilt of
his sword; diamonds studded his very spurs, which were of beaten gold;
the highest orders of England, Spain, and France flamed on his breast.
On the occasion of his second visit he wore a suit of purple satin, of
intent so lightly sewn with pearls that as he moved he shook them off
like raindrops, and left them to lie where they fell, as largesse for
pages and the lesser fry of the Court.

His equipages and retinue were of a kind to match his personal
effulgence. His coaches were lined with velvet and covered with cloth
of gold, and some seven hundred people made up his train. There were
musicians, watermen, grooms of the chamber, thirty chief yeomen, a
score of cooks, as many grooms, a dozen pages, two dozen footmen, six
outriders, and twenty gentlemen, each with his own attendants, all
arrayed as became the satellites of a star of such great magnitude.

Buckingham succeeded in his ambition. Paris, that hitherto had set the
fashion to the world, stared mouth-agape, dazzled by the splendour of
this superb and scintillating ambassador.

Another, by betraying consciousness of the figure that he cut, might
have made himself ridiculous. But Buckingham's insolent assurance was
proof against that peril. Supremely self-satisfied, he was conscious
only that what he did could not be better done, and he ruffled it with
an air of easy insouciance, as if in all this costly display there was
nothing that was not normal. He treated with princes, and even with
the gloomy Louis XIII., as with equals; and, becoming more and more
intoxicated with his very obvious success, he condescended to observe
approvingly the fresh beauty of the young Queen.

Anne of Austria, then in her twenty-fourth year, was said to be one
of the most beautiful women in Europe. She was of a good height and
carriage, slight, and very gracefully built, of a ravishing fairness of
skin and hair, whilst a look of wistfulness had come to invest with an
indefinable tenderness her splendid eyes. Her childless marriage to the
young King of France, which had endured now for ten years, had hardly
been successful. Gloomy, taciturn, easily moved to suspicion, and
difficult to convince of error, Louis XIII. held his wife aloof,
throwing up between himself and her a wall of coldness, almost of
dislike.

There is a story--and Tallemant des Raux gives credit to it--that in the
early days of her reign as Queen of France, Richelieu had fallen deeply
in love with her, and that she, with the mischief of an irresponsible
young girl, had encouraged him, merely to betray him to a ridicule which
his proud spirit had never been able to forgive. Be that or another
the reason, the fact that Richelieu hated her, and subjected her to
his vindictive persecution, is beyond dispute. And it was he who by a
hundred suggestions poisoned against her the King's mind, and thus kept
ever open the gulf between the two.

The eyes of that neglected young wife dilated a little, and admiration
kindled in them, when they rested upon the dazzling figure of my Lord of
Buckingham. He must have seemed to her a figure of romance, a prince out
of a fairy-tale.

That betraying glance he caught, and it inflamed at once his monstrous
arrogance. To the scalps already adorning the belt of his vanity he
would add that of the love of a beautiful young queen. Perhaps he was
thrilled in his madness by the thought of the peril that would spice
such an adventure. Into that adventure he plunged forthwith. He wooed
her during the eight days that he abode in Paris, flagrantly, openly,
contemptuous of courtiers and of the very King himself. At the Louvre,
at the Hotel de Chevreuse, at the Luxembourg, where the Queen-Mother
held her Court, at the Hotel de Guise, and elsewhere he was ever at the
Queen's side.

Richelieu, whose hard pride and self-love had been wounded by the Duke's
cavalier behaviour, who despised the fellow for an upstart, and may even
have resented that so shallow a man should have been sent to treat with
a statesman of his own caliber--for other business beside the marriage
had brought Buckingham to Paris--suggested to the King that the Duke's
manner in approaching the Queen lacked a proper deference, and the
Queen's manner of receiving him a proper circumspection. Therefore the
King's long face became longer, his gloomy eyes gloomier, as he looked
on. Far, however, from acting as a deterrent, the royal scowl was mere
incense to the vanity of Buckingham, a spur to goad him on to greater
daring.

On the 2nd of June a splendid company of some four thousand French
nobles and ladies, besides Buckingham and his retinue, quitted Paris to
accompany Henrietta Maria, now Queen of England, on the first stage of
her journey to her new home. The King was not of the party. He had
gone with Richelieu to Fontainebieau, leaving it to the Queen and the
Queen-Mother to accompany his sister.

Buckingham missed no chance upon that journey of pressing his attentions
upon Anne of Austria. Duty dictated that his place should be beside the
carriage of Henrietta Maria. But duty did not apply to His Insolence of
Buckingham, so indifferent of whom he might slight or offend. And then
the devil took a hand in the game.

At Amiens, the Queen-Mother fell ill, so that the Court was compelled to
halt there for a few days to give her Majesty the repose she required.
Whilst Amiens was thus honoured by the presence of three queens at
one and the same time within its walls, the Duc de Chaulnes gave an
entertainment in the Citadel. Buckingham attended this, and in the dance
that followed the banquet it was Buckingham who led out the Queen.

Thereafter the royal party had returned to the Bishop's Palace, where it
was lodged, and a small company went out to take the evening cool in the
Bishop's fragrant gardens on the Somme, Buckingham ever at the Queen's
side. Anne of Austria was attended by her Mistress of the Household,
the beautiful, witty Marie de Rohan, Duchess of Chevreuse, and by her
equerry, Monsieur de Putange. Madame de Chevreuse had for cavalier that
handsome coxcomb, Lord Holland, who was one of Buckingham's creatures,
between whom and herself a certain transient tenderness had sprung up.
M. de Putange was accompanied by Madame de Vernet, with whom at the time
he was over head and ears in love. Elsewhere about the spacious gardens
other courtiers sauntered.

Now either Madame de Chevreuse and M. de Putange were too deeply
engrossed in their respective companions, or else the state of their
own hearts and the tepid, languorous eventide disposed them complacently
towards the affair of gallantry upon which their mistress almost seemed
to wish to be embarked. They forgot, it would seem, that she was a
queen, and remembered sympathetically that she was a woman, and that she
had for companion the most splendid cavalier in all the world. Thus they
committed the unpardonable fault of lagging behind, and allowing her to
pass out of their sight round the bend of an avenue by the water.

No sooner did Buckingham realize that he was alone with the Queen, that
the friendly dusk and a screen of trees secured them from observation,
than, piling audacity up on audacity, he determined to accomplish here
and now the conquest of this lovely lady who had used him so graciously
and received his advances with such manifest pleasure.

"How soft the night! How exquisite!" he sighed.

"Indeed," she agreed. "And how still, but for the gentle murmur of the
river."

"The river!" he cried, on a new note. "That is no gentle murmur. The
river laughs, maliciously mocking. The river is evil."

"Evil?" quoth she. He had checked in his step, and they stood now side
by side.

"Evil," he repeated. "Evil and cruel. It goes to swell the sea that soon
shall divide me from you, and it mocks me, rejoicing wickedly in the
pain that will presently be mine."

It took her aback. She laughed, a little breathlessly, to hide her
discomposure, and scarce knew how to answer him, scarce knew whether
she took pleasure or offense in his daring encroachment upon that royal
aloofness in which she dwelt, and in which her Spanish rearing had
taught her she must ever dwell.


"Oh, but Monsieur l'Ambassadeur, you will be with us again, perhaps
before so very long."

His answer came in a swift, throbbing question, his lips so near her
face that she could feel his breath hot upon her cheek.

"Do you wish it, madame? Do you wish it? I implore you, of your pity,
say but that you wish it, and I will come, though I tear down half a
world to reach you."

She recoiled in Wright and displeasure before a wooing so impetuous and
violently outspoken; though the displeasure was perhaps but a passing
emotion, the result of early training. Yet she contrived to answer him
with the proper icy dignity due to her position as a princess of Spain,
now Queen of France.

"Monsieur, you forget yourself. The Queen of France does not listen to
such words. You are mad, I think."

"Yes, I am mad," he flung back. "Mad with love--so mad that I have
forgot that you are a queen and I an ambassador. Under the ambassador
there is a man, under the queen a woman--our real selves, not the titles
with which Fate seeks to dissemble our true natures. And with the whole
strength of my true nature do I love you, so potently, so overwhelmingly
that I will not believe you sensible of no response."

Thus torrentially he delivered himself, and swept her a little off
her feet. She was a woman, as he said; a queen, it is true; but also
a neglected, coldly-used wife; and no one had ever addressed her in
anything approaching this manner, no one had ever so much as suggested
that her existence could matter greatly, that in her woman's nature
there was the magic power of awakening passion and devotion. He was so
splendidly magnificent, so masterful and unrivalled, and he came thus
to lay his being, as it were, in homage at her feet. It touched her a
little, who knew so little of the real man. It cost her an effort to
repulse him, and the effort was not very convincing.

"Hush, monsieur, for pity's sake! You must not talk so to me. It ... it
hurts."

O fatal word! She meant that it was her dignity as Queen he wounded, for
she clung to that as to the anchor of salvation. But he in his egregious
vanity must of cours e misunderstand.

"Hurts!" he cried, and the rapture in his accents should have warned
her. "Because you resist it, because you fight against the commands of
your true self. Anne!" He seized her, and crushed her to him. "Anne!"

Wild terror gripped her at that almost brutal contact, and anger, too,
her dignity surging up in violent outraged rebellion. A scream, loud and
piercing, broke from her and rang through the still garden. It brought
him to his senses. It was as if he had been lifted up into the air, and
then suddenly allowed to fall.

He sprang away from her, an incoherent exclamation on his lips, and when
an instant later Monsieur de Putange came running up in alarm, his hand
upon his sword, those two stood with the width of the avenue between
them, Buckingham erect and defiant, the Queen breathing hard and
trembling, a hand upon her heaving breast as if to repress its tumult.

"Madame! Madame!" had been Putange's cry, as he sprang forward in alarm
and self-reproach.

He stood now almost between them, looking from one to the other in
bewilderment. Neither spoke.

"You cried out, Madame," M. de Putange reminded her, and Buckingham
may well have wondered whether presently he would be receiving M. de
Putange's sword in his vitals. He must have known that his life now hung
upon her answer.

"I called you, that was all," said the Queen, in a voice that she strove
to render calm. "I confess that I was startled to find myself alone with
M. L'Ambassadeur. Do not let it occur again, M. de Putange!"

The equerry bowed in silence. His itching fingers fell away from his
sword-hilt, and he breathed more freely. He had no illusions as to
what must have happened. But he was relieved there were to be no
complications. The others now coming up with them, the party thereafter
kept together until presently Buckingham and Lord Holland took their
leave.

On the morrow the last stage of the escorting journey was accomplished.
A little way beyond Amiens the Court took its leave of Henrietta Maria,
entrusting her now to Buckingham and his followers, who were to convey
her safely to Charles.

It was a very contrite and downcast Buckingham who came now to Anne of
Austria as she sat in her coach with the Princesse de Conti for only
companion.

"Madame," he said, "I am come to take my leave."

"Fare you well, Monsieur l'Ambassadeur," she said, and her voice was
warm and gentle, as if to show him that she bore no malice.

"I am come to ask your pardon, madame," he said, in a low voice.

"Oh, monsieur--no more, I beg you." She looked down; her hands were
trembling, her cheeks going red and white by turns.

He put his head behind the curtains of the coach, so that none might see
him from outside, and looking at him now, she beheld tears in his eyes.

"Do not misunderstand me, madame. I ask your pardon only for having
discomposed you, startled you. As for what I said, it were idle to ask
pardon, since I could no more help saying it than I can help drawing
breath. I obeyed an instinct stronger than the will to live. I gave
expression to something that dominates my whole being, and will ever
dominate it as long as I have life. Adieu, madame! At need you know
where a servant who will gladly die for you is to be found." He kissed
the hem of her robe, dashed the back of his hand across his eyes, and
was gone before she could say a word in answer.

She sat pale, and very thoughtful, and the Princesse de Conti, watching
her furtively, observed that her eyes were moist.

"I will answer for the Queen's virtue," she stated afterwards, "but I
cannot speak so positively for the hardness of her heart, since without
doubt the Duke's tears affected her spirits."

But it was not yet the end. As Buckingham was nearing Calais, he was
met by a courier from Whitehall, with instructions for him regarding
the negotiations he had been empowered to carry out with France in the
matter of an alliance against Spain--negotiations which had not
thriven with Louis and Richelieu, possibly because the ambassador was
ill-chosen. The instructions came too late to be of use, but in time to
serve as a pretext for Buckingham's return to Amiens. There he sought an
audience of the Queen-Mother, and delivered himself to her of a futile
message for the King. This chimerical business--as Madame de Motteville
shrewdly calls it--being accomplished, he came to the real matter which
had prompted him to use that pretext for his return, and sought audience
of Anne of Austria.

It was early morning, and the Queen was not yet risen. But the levÃ©es at
the Court of France were precisely what the word implies, and they were
held by royalty whilst still abed. It was not, therefore, amazing that
he should have been admitted to her presence. She was alone save for her
lady-in-waiting, Madame de Lannoi, who was, we are told, aged, prudent
and virtuous. Conceive, therefore, the outraged feelings of this lady
upon seeing the English duke precipitate himself wildly into the room,
and on his knees at the royal bedside seize the coverlet and bear it to
his lips.

Whilst the young Queen looked confused and agitated, Madame de Lannoi
became a pillar of icy dignity.

"M. le Duc," says she, "it is not customary in France to kneel when
speaking to the Queen."

"I care nothing for the customs of France, madame," he answered rudely.
"I am not a Frenchman."

"That is too obvious, monsieur," snapped the elderly, prudent and
virtuous countess. "Nevertheless, whilst in France perhaps monsieur will
perceive the convenience of conforming to French customs. Let me call
for a chair for Monsieur le Duc."

"I do not want a chair, madame."

The countess cast her eyes to Heaven, as if to say, "I suppose one
cannot expect anything else in a foreigner," and let him kneel as he
insisted, placing herself, however, protectingly at the Queen's pillow.

Nevertheless, entirely unabashed, heeding Madame de Lannoi's presence
no more than if she had been part of the room's furniture, the Duke
delivered himself freely of what was in his mind. He had been obliged to
return to Amiens on a matter of State. It was unthinkable that he should
be so near to her Majesty and not hasten to cast himself at her feet;
and whilst gladdening the eyes of his body with the sight of her
matchless perfection, the image of which was ever before the eyes of
his soul, allow himself the only felicity life now held for him--that of
protesting himself her utter slave. This, and much more of the kind,
did he pour out, what time the Queen, embarrassed and annoyed beyond
utterance, could only stare at him in silence.

Apart from the matchless impudence of it, it was also of a rashness
beyond pardon. Unless Madame de Lannoi were the most circumspect of
women, here was a fine tale for Court gossips, and for the King's ears,
a tale that must hopelessly compromise the Queen. For that, Buckingham,
in his self-sufficiency and arrogance, appears to have cared nothing.
One suspects that it would have pleased his vanity to have his name
linked with the Queen's by the lips of scandal.

She found her tongue at last.

"Monsieur le Duc," she said in her confusion, "it was not necessary,
it was not worth while, to have asked audience of me for this. You have
leave to go."

He looked up in doubt, and saw only confusion; attributed it perhaps
to the presence of that third party to which himself he had been so
indifferent. He kissed the coverlet again, stumbled to his feet, and
reached the door. Thence he sent her a flaming glance of his bold eyes,
and hand on heart--

"Adieu, madame!" said he in tragic tones, and so departed.

Madame de Lannoi was discreet, and related at the time nothing of what
had passed at that interview. But that the interview itself had taken
place under such conditions was enough to set the tongue of gossip
wagging. An echo of it reached the King, together with the story of that
other business in the garden, and he was glad to know that the Duke of
Buckingham was back in London. Richelieu, to vent his own malice against
the Queen, sought to feed the King's suspicions.

"Why did she cry out, sire?" he will have asked. "What did M. de
Buckingham do to make her cry out?"

"I don't know. But whatever it was, she was no party to it since she did
cry out."

Richelieu did not pursue the matter just then. But neither did he
abandon it. He had his agents in London and elsewhere, and he desired
of them a close report upon the Duke of Buckingham's movements, and the
fullest particulars of his private life.

Meanwhile, Buckingham had left behind him in France two faithful agents
of his own, with instructions to keep his memory green with the Queen.
For he intended to return upon one pretext or another before very long,
and complete the conquest. Those agents of his were Lord Holland and
the artist Balthazar Gerbier. It is to be presumed that they served the
Duke's interests well, and it is no less to be presumed from that which
followed that they found her Majesty willing enough to hear news of that
amazingly romantic fellow who had flashed across the path of her grey
life, touching it for a moment with his own flaming radiance. In her
loneliness she came to think of him with tenderness and pity, in which
pity for herself and her dull lot was also blent. He was away, overseas;
she might never see him again; therefore there could be little harm in
indulging the romantic tenderness he had inspired.

So one day, many months after his departure, she begged Gerbier--as
La Rochefoucauld tells us--to journey to London and bear the Duke a
trifling memento of her--a set of diamond studs. That love-token--for it
amounted to no less--Gerbier conveyed to England, and delivered to the
Duke.

Buckingham's head was so completely turned by the event, and his desire
to see Anne of Austria again became thereupon so overmastering, that he
at once communicated to France that he was coming over as the ambassador
of the King of England to treat of certain masters connected with
Spain. But Richelieu had heard from the French ambassador in London
that portraits of the Queen of France were excessively abundant at York
House, the Duke's residence, and he had considered it his duty to inform
the King. Louis was angry, but not with the Queen. To have believed her
guilty of any indiscretion would have hurt his gloomy pride too
deeply. All that he believed was that this was merely an expression of
Buckingham's fanfaronading, thrasonical disposition, a form of vain,
empty boasting peculiar to megalomaniacs.

As a consequence, the King of England was informed that the Duke of
Buckingham, for reasons well known to himself, would not be agreeable as
Charles's ambassador to his Most Christian Majesty. Upon learning this,
the vainglorious Buckingham was loud in proclaiming the reason ("well
known to himself") and in protesting that he would go to France to see
the Queen with the French King's consent or without it. This was duly
reported to Richelieu, and by Richelieu to King Louis. But his Most
Christian Majesty merely sneered, accounted it more empty boasting on
the part of the parvenu, and dismissed it from his mind.

Richelieu found this attitude singularly exasperating in a King who
was temperamentally suspicious. It so piqued and annoyed him, that when
considered in addition to his undying rancour against Anne of Austria,
it is easily believed he spared no pains to obtain something in the
nature of a proof that the Queen was not as innocent as Louis insisted
upon believing.

Now it happened that one of his London agents informed him, among other
matters connected with the Duke's private life, that he had a bitter and
secret enemy in the Countess of Carlisle, between whom and himself there
had been a passage of some tenderness too abruptly ended by the Duke.
Richelieu, acting upon this information, contrived to enter into
correspondence with Lady Carlisle, and in the course of this
correspondence he managed her so craftily--says La Rochefoucauld--that
very soon she was, whilst hardly realizing it, his Eminence's most
valuable spy near Buckingham. Richelieu informed her that he was
mainly concerned with information that would throw light upon the real
relations of Buckingharn and the Queen of France, and he persuaded her
that nothing was too insignificant to be communicated. Her resentment
of the treatment she had received from Buckingham, a resentment the more
bitter for being stifled--since for her reputation's sake she dared
not have given it expression--made her a very ready instrument in
Richelieu's hands, and there was no scrap of gossip she did not
carefully gather up and dispatch to him. But all was naught until one
day at last she was able to tell him something that set his pulses
beating more quickly than their habit.

She had it upon the best authority that a set of diamond studs
constantly worn of late by the Duke was a love-token from the Queen of
France sent over to Buckingham by a messenger of her own. Here, indeed,
was news. Here was a weapon by which the Queen might be destroyed.
Richelieu considered. If he could but obtain possession of the studs,
the rest would be easy. There would be an end--and such an end!--to
the King's obstinate, indolent faith in his wife's indifference to that
boastful, flamboyant English upstart. Richelieu held his peace for the
time being, and wrote to the Countess.

Some little time thereafter there was a sumptuous ball given at York
House, graced by the presence of King Charles and his young French
Queen. Lady Carlisle was present, and in the course of the evening
Buckingham danced with her. She was a very beautiful, accomplished and
ready-witted woman, and to-night his Grace found her charms so alluring
that he was almost disposed to blame himself for having perhaps treated
her too lightly. Yet she seemed at pains to show him that it was his to
take up again the affair at the point at which it had been dropped.
She was gay, arch, provoking and irresistible. So irresistible that
presently, yielding to the lure of her, the Duke slipped away from his
guests with the lady on his arm, and they found themselves at the foot
of the garden in the shadow of the water-gate that Inigo Jones had just
completed for him. My lady languished at his side, permitted him to
encircle her with a protecting arm, and for a moment lay heavily against
him. He caught her violently to him, and now her ladyship, hitherto so
yielding, with true feminine contrariness set herself to resist him. A
scuffle ensued between them. She broke from him at last, and sped swift
as a doe across the lawn towards the lights of the great house, his
Grace in pursuit between vexation and amusement.

But he did not overtake her, and it was with a sense of having been
fooled that he rejoined his guests. His questing eyes could discern her
nowhere. Presently he made inquiries, to be told that she had desired
her carriage to be called, and had left York House immediately upon
coming in from the garden.

He concluded that she was gone off in a pet. It was very odd. It was, in
fact, most flagrantly contradictory that she should have taken offense
at that which she had so obviously invited. But then she always had been
a perverse and provoking jade. With that reflection he put her from his
mind.

But anon, when his guests had departed, and the lights in the great
house were extinguished, Buckingham thought of the incident again.
Cogitating it, he sat in his room, his fingers combing his fine,
pointed, auburn beard. At last, with a shrug and a half-laugh, he rose
to undress for bed. And then a cry escaped him, and brought in his valet
from an adjoining room. The riband of diamond studs was gone.

Reckless and indifferent as he was, a sense of evil took him in the
moment of his discovery of that loss, so that he stood there pale,
staring, and moist of brow. It was no ordinary theft. There were upon
his person a dozen ornaments of greater value, any one of which could
have been more easily detached. This was the work of some French agent.
He had made no secret of whence those studs had come to him.

There his thoughts checked on a sudden. As in a flash of revelation, he
saw the meaning of Lady Carlisle's oddly contradictory behaviour. The
jade had fooled him. It was she who had stolen the riband. He sat down
again, his head in his hands, and swiftly, link by link, he pieced
together a complete chain.

Almost as swiftly he decided upon the course of action which he must
adopt so as to protect the Queen of France's honour. He was virtually
the ruler of England, master in these islands of an almost boundless
power. That power he would exert to the full this very night to thwart
those enemies of his own and of the Queen's, who worked so subtly in
concert. Many would be wronged, much harm would be done, the liberties
of some thousands of freeborn Englishmen would be trampled underfoot.
What did it matter? It was necessary that his Grace of Buckingham should
cover up an indiscretion.

"Set ink and paper yonder," he bade his gaping valet. "Then go call M.
Gerbier. Rouse Lacy and Thom, and send them to me at once, and leave
word that I shall require a score of couriers to be in the saddle and
ready to set out in half an hour."

Bewildered, the valet went off upon his errand. The Duke sat down to
write. And next morning English merchants learnt that the ports of
England were closed by the King's express command--delivered by his
minister, the Duke of Buckingham--that measures were being taken--were
already taken in all southern ports--so that no vessel of any kind
should leave the island until the King's further pleasure were made
known. Startled, the people wondered was this enactment the forerunner
of war. Had they known the truth, they might have been more startled
still, though in a different manner. As swiftly as couriers could
travel--and certainly well ahead of any messenger seeking escape
overseas--did this blockade spread, until the gates of England were
tight locked against the outgoing of those diamond studs whirls meant
the honour of the Queen of France.

And meanwhile a diamond-cutter was replacing the purloined stones by
others, matching them so closely that no man should be able to say which
were the originals and which the copies. Buckingham and Gerbier between
them guided the work. Soon it was accomplished, and a vessel slipped
down the Thames, allowed to pass by those who kept close watch to
enforce the royal decree, and made sail for Calais, which was beginning
to manifest surprise at this entire cessation of traffic from England.
From that vessel landed Gerbier, and rode straight to Paris, carrying
the Queen of France the duplicate studs, which were to replace those
which she had sent to Buckingham.

Twenty-four hours later the ports of England were unsealed, and commerce
was free and unhampered once more. But it was twenty-four hours too
late for Richelieu and his agent, the Countess of Carlisle. His Eminence
deplored a fine chance lost through the excessive power that was wielded
in England by the parvenu.

Yet that is not quite the end of the story. Buckingham's inflamed and
reckless mind would stop at nothing now to achieve the object of his
desires--go to France and see the Queen. Since the country was closed
to him, he would force a way into it, the red way of war. Blood should
flow, ruin and misery desolate the land, but in the end he would go to
Paris to negotiate a peace, and that should be his opportunity. Other
reasons there may have been, but none so dominant, none that could
not have been removed by negotiation. The pretexted casus belli was the
matter of the Protestants of La Rochelle, who were in rebellion against
their king.

To their aid sailed Buckingham with an English expedition. Disaster
and defeat awaited it. Its shattered remnant crept back in disgrace to
England, and the Duke found himself more detested by the people than he
had been already--which is saying much. He went off to seek comfort at
the hands of the two persons who really loved him--his doting King and
his splendid wife.

But the defeat had neither lessened his resolve nor chastened his
insolence. He prepared a second expedition in the very teeth of a
long-suffering nation's hostility, indifferent to the mutinies and
mutterings about him. What signified to him the will of a nation? He
desired to win to the woman whom he loved, and to accomplish that he
nothing recked that he should set Europe in a blaze, nothing recked what
blood should be poured out, what treasure dissipated.

Hatred of him by now was so widespread and vocal, that his friends,
fearing that soon it would pass from words to deeds, urged him to take
precautions, advised the wearing of a shirt of mail for greater safety.

But he laughed sneeringly, ever arrogant and scornful.

"It needs not. There are no Roman spirits left," was his contemptuous
answer.

He was mistaken. One morning after breakfast, as he was leaving
the house in the High Street, Portsmouth, where he lodged whilst
superintending the final preparations for that unpopular expedition,
John Felton, a self-appointed instrument of national vengeance, drove a
knife to the hilt into the Duke's breast.

"May the Lord have mercy on your soul!" was the pious exclamation with
which the slayer struck home. And, in all the circumstances, there seems
to have been occasion for the prayer.






IX. THE PATH OF EXILE

The Fall of Lord Clarendon



Tight-wrapped in his cloak against the icy whips of the black winter's
night, a portly gentleman, well advanced in years, picked his way
carefully down the wet, slippery steps of the jetty by the light of
a lanthorn, whose rays gleamed lividly on crushed brown seaweed and
trailing green sea slime. Leaning heavily upon the arm which a sailor
held out to his assistance, he stepped into the waiting boat that rose
and fell on the heaving black waters. A boathook scraped against the
stones, and the frail craft was pushed off.

The oars dipped, and the boat slipped away through the darkness,
steering a course for the two great poop lanterns that were swinging
rhythmically high up against the black background of the night. The
elderly gentleman, huddled now in the stern-sheets, looked behind
him--to look his last upon the England he had loved and served and
ruled. The lanthorn, shedding its wheel of yellow light upon the jetty
steps, was all of it that he could now see.

He sighed, and settled down again to face the poop lights, dancing there
above the invisible hull of the ship that was to carry Edward Hyde, Earl
of Clarendon, lately Lord Chancellor of England, into exile. As a dying
man looks down the foreshortened vista of his active life, so may Edward
Hyde--whose career had reached a finality but one degree removed from
the finality of death--have reviewed in that moment those thirty years
of sincere endeavour and high achievement since he had been a law
student in the Temple when Charles I. was King.

That King he had served faithfully, so faithfully that when the
desperate fortunes of the Royalist party made it necessary to place
the Prince of Wales beyond the reach of Cromwell, it was in Sir Edward
Hyde's care that the boy was sent upon his travels. The present was not
to be Hyde's first experience of exile. He had known it, and of a bitter
sort, in those impecunious days when the Second Charles, whose steps
he guided, was a needy, homeless outcast. A man less staunch and loyal
might have thrown over so profitless a service. He had talents that
would have commanded a price in the Roundhead market. Yet staunchly
adhering to the Stuart fortunes, labouring ceaselessly and shrewdly
in the Stuart interest, employing his great ability and statecraft, he
achieved at long length the restoration of the Stuarts to the Throne of
England. And for all those loyal, self-denying labours in exile on the
Stuart behalf, all the reward he had at the time was that James Stuart,
Duke of York, debauched his daughter.

Nor did Hyde's labours cease when he had made possible the Restoration;
it was Hyde who, when that Restoration was accomplished, took in hand
and carried out the difficult task of welding together the old and
the new conditions of political affairs. And it was Hyde who was the
scapegoat when things did not run the course that Englishmen desired.
As the head of the administration he was held responsible even for those
acts which he had strongly but vainly reprobated in Council. It was Hyde
who was blamed when Charles sold Dunkirk to the French, and spent the
money in harlotry; it was Hyde who was blamed because the Queen was
childless.

The reason for this last lay in the fact that the wrong done to Hyde's
daughter Anne had now been righted by marriage with the Duke of York.
Now the Duke of York was the heir-apparent, and the people, ever ready
to attach most credit to that which is most incredible and fantastic,
believed that to ensure the succession of his own grandchildren Hyde had
deliberately provided Charles with a barren wife.

When the Dutch, sailing up the Thames, had burnt the ships of war at
Chatham, and Londoners heard the thunder of enemy guns, Hyde was openly
denounced as a traitor by a people stricken with terror and seeking a
victim in the blind, unreasoning way of public feeling. They broke his
windows, ravaged his garden, and erected a gibbet before the gates of
his superb mansion on the north side of Piccadilly.

Edward Hyde, Earl of Clarendon, and Lord Chancellor of England,
commanded the love of his intimates, but did not possess those qualities
of cheap glitter that make for popularity with the masses. Nor did he
court popularity elsewhere. Because he was austere in his morals,
grave and sober in his conduct, he was hated by those who made up the
debauched court of his prince. Because he was deeply religious in his
principles, the Puritans mistrusted him for a bigot. Because he was
autocratic in his policy he was detested by the Commons, the day of
autocracy being done.

Yet might he have weathered the general hostility had Charles been half
as loyal to him as he had ever been loyal to Charles. For a time, it is
true, the King stood his friend, and might so have continued to the
end had not the women become mixed up in the business. As Evelyn, the
diarist, puts it, this great man's fall was the work of "the buffoones
and ladys of pleasure."

It really is a very tangled story--this inner history of the fall of
Clarendon, with which the school-books are not concerned. In a sense, it
is also the story of the King's marriage and of Catherine of Braganza,
his unfortunate little ugly Queen, who must have suffered as much as
any woman wedded to a sultan in any country where the seraglio is not a
natural and proper institution.

If Clarendon could not be said to have brought about the marriage, at
least he had given it his suffrages when proposed by Portugal, which was
anxious to establish an alliance with England as some protection against
the predatory designs of Spain. He had been influenced by the dowry
offered--five hundred thousand pounds in money, Tangier, which would
give England a commanding position on the Mediterranean, and the Island
of Bombay. Without yet foreseeing that the possession of Bombay, and the
freedom to trade in the East Indies--which Portugal had hitherto kept
jealously to herself--were to enable England to build up her great
Indian Empire, yet the commercial advantages alone were obvious enough
to make the match desirable.

Catherine of Braganza sailed for England, and on the lath of May, 1662,
Charles, attended by a splendid following, went to meet his bride at
Portsmouth. He was himself a very personable man, tall--he stood a full
six feet high--lean and elegantly vigorous. The ugliness of his drawn,
harsh-featured face was mitigated by the glory of full, low-ridded,
dark eyes, and his smile could be irresistibly captivating. He was
as graceful in manner as in person, felicitous of speech, and of an
indolent good temper that found expression in a charming urbanity.

Good temper and urbanity alike suffered rudely when he beheld the wife
they brought him. Catherine, who was in her twenty-fifth year, was of
an absurdly low stature, so long in the body and short in the legs that,
dressed as she was in an outlandish, full-skirted farthingale, she had
the appearance of being on her knees when she stood before him. Her
complexion was sallow, and though her eyes, like his own, were fine,
they were not fine enough to redeem the dull plainness of her face. Her
black hair was grotesquely dressed, with a long fore-top and two great
ribbon bows standing out, one on each side of her head, like a pair of
miniature wings.

It is little wonder that the Merry Monarch, the fastidious voluptuary,
with his nice discernment in women, should have checked in his long
stride, and halted a moment in consternation.

"Lord!" was his wry comment to Etheredge, who was beside him. "They've
brought me a bat, not a woman."

But if she lacked beauty, she was well cowered, and Charles was in
desperate need of money.

"I suppose," he told Clarendon anon, "I must swallow this black draught
to get the jam that goes with it."

The Chancellor's grave eyes considered him almost sternly what time he
coldly recited the advantages of this marriage. If he did riot presume
to rebuke the ribaldry of his master, neither would he condescend to
smile at it. He was too honest ever to be a sycophant.

Catherine was immediately attended--in the words of Grammont--by six
frights who called themselves maids-of-honour, and a governess who was
a monster. With this retinue she repaired to Hampton Court, where
the honeymoon was spent, and where for a brief season the poor
woman--entirely enamoured of the graceful, long-legged rake she had
married--lived in a fool's paradise.

Disillusion was to follow soon enough. She might be, by he grace of
her dowry, Queen of England, but she was soon to discover that to King
Charles she was no more than a wife de jure. With wives de facto Charles
would people his seraglio as fancy moved him; and the present wife
defacto, the mistress of his heart, the first lady of his harem, was
that beautiful termagant, Barbara Villiers, wife of the accommodating
Roger Palmer, Earl of Castle-maine.

There was no lack--there never is in such cases--of those who out of
concern and love for the happily deluded wife lifted the veil for her,
and made her aware of the facts of his Majesty's association with my
Lady Castle-maine--an association dating back to the time when he was
still a homeless wanderer. The knowledge would appear to have troubled
the poor soul profoundly; but the climax of her distress was reached
when, on her coming to Whitehall, she found at the head of the list of
ladies-in-waiting assigned to her the name of my Lady Castlemaine. The
forlorn little woman's pride rose up before this outrage. She struck out
that offending name, and gave orders that the favourite was not to be
admitted to her presence.

But she reckoned without Charles. For all his urbane, good-tempered,
debonair ways, there was an ugly cynical streak in his nature,
manifested now in the manner in which he dealt with this situation.
Himself he led his boldly handsome favourite by the hand into his wife's
presence, before the whole Court assembled, and himself presented her
to Catherine, what time that Court, dissolute and profligate as it was,
looked on in amazement at so outrageous a slight to the dignity of a
queen.

What followed may well have exceeded all expectations. Catherine
stiffened as if the blow dealt her had been physical. Gradually her
face paled until it was grey and drawn; tears of outraged pride and
mortification flooded her eyes. And then, as if something snapped within
her brain under this stress of bitter emotion, blood gushed from her
nostrils, and she sank back in a swoon into the arms of her Portuguese
ladies.

Confusion followed, and under cover of it Charles and his light of
love withdrew, realizing that if he lingered not all his easy skill in
handling delicate situations could avail him to save his royal dignity.

Naturally the experiment was not to be repeated. But since it was his
wish that the Countess of Castlemaine should be established as one of
the Queen's ladies--or, rather, since it was her ladyship's wish, and
since Charles was as wax in her ladyship's hands--it became necessary to
have the Queen instructed in what was, in her husband's view, fitting.
For this task he selected Clarendon. But the Chancellor, who had so long
and loyally played Mentor to Charles's Telemachus, sought now to guide
him in matters moral as he had hitherto guided him in matters political.

Clarendon declined the office of mediator, and even expostulated with
Charles upon the unseemliness of the course upon which his Majesty was
bent.

"Surely, sire, it is for her Majesty to say who shall and who shall not
be the ladies of her bedchamber. And I nothing marvel at her decision in
this instance."

"Yet I tell you, my lord, that it is a decision that shall be revoked."

"By whom, sire?" the Chancellor asked him gravely.

"By her Majesty, of course."

"Under coercion, of which you ask me to be the instrument," said
Clarendon, in the tutorly manner he had used with the King from the
latter's boyhood. "Yourself, sire, at a time when your own wishes did
not warp your judgment, have condemned the very thing that now you
are urging. Yourself, sire, hotly blamed your cousin, King Louis, for
thrusting Mademoiselle de Valliere upon his queen. You will not have
forgotten the things you said then of King Louis."

Charles remembered those unflattering criticisms which he was now
invited to apply to his own case. He bit his lip, admitting himself in
check.

But anon--no doubt in obedience to the overbearing suasion of my Lady
Castlemaine--he returned to the attack, and sent the Chancellor his
orders in a letter demanding unquestioning obedience.

"Use your best endeavours," wrote Charles, "to facilitate what I am sure
my honour is so much concerned in. And whosoever I find to be my Lady
Castlemaine's enemy in this matter, I do promise upon my word to be his
enemy so long as I live."

My Lord Clarendon had few illusions on the score of mankind. He knew
his world from froth to dregs--having studied it under a variety of
conditions. Yet that letter from his King was a bitter draught. All that
Charles possessed and was he owed to Clarendon. Yet in such a contest
as this, Charles did not hesitate to pen that bitter, threatening line:
"Whosoever I find to be my Lady Castlemaine's enemy in this matter, I do
promise upon my word to be his enemy so long as I live."

All that Clarendon had done in the past was to count for nothing unless
he also did the unworthy thing that Charles now demanded. All that
he had accomplished in the service of his King was to be swept into
oblivion by the breath of a spiteful wanton.

Clarendon swallowed the draught and sought the Queen, upon that odious
embassy with whose ends he was so entirely out of sympathy. He used
arguments whose hollowness was not more obvious to the Queen than to
himself.

That industrious and entertaining chronicler of trifles, Mr. Pepys,
tells us, scandalized, in his diary that on the following day the talk
of the Court was all upon a midnight scene between the royal couple in
the privacy of their own apartments, so stormy that the sounds of it
were plainly to be heard in the neighbouring chambers.

You conceive the poor little woman, smarting under the insult of
Charles's proposal by the mouth of Clarendon, assailing her royal
husband, and fiercely upbraiding him with his lack not merely of
affection but even of the respect that was her absolute due. And
Charles, his purpose set, urged to it by the handsome termagant whom he
dared not refuse, stirred out of his indolent good-nature, turning
upon her, storming back, and finally threatening her with the greater
disgrace of seeing herself pack ed home to Portugal, unless she would
submit to the lesser disgrace he thrust upon her here.

Whether by these or by other arguments he made his will prevail, prevail
it did. Catherine of Braganza swallowed her pride and submitted. And a
very complete submission it was. Lady Castlemaine was not only installed
as a Lady of the Bedchamber, but very soon we find the Queen treating
her with a friendliness that provoked comment and amazement.

The favourite's triumph was complete, and marked by an increasing
insolence, most marked in her demeanour towards the Chancellor, of
whose views on the subject, as expressed to the King, she was aware.
Consequently she hated him with all the spiteful bitterness that is
inseparable from the nature of such women. And she hated him the more
because, wrapped in his cold contempt, he moved in utter unconcern of
her hostility. In this hatred she certainly did not lack for allies,
members of that licentious court whose hostility towards the austere
Chancellor was begotten of his own scorn of them. Among them they worked
to pull him down.

The attempt to undermine his influence with the King proving vain--for
Charles was as well aware of its inspiration as of the Chancellor's
value to him--that crew of rakes went laboriously and insidiously to
work upon the public mind, which is to say the public ignorance--most
fruitful soil for scandal against the great. Who shall say how far my
lady and the Court were responsible for the lampoon affixed one day to
my Lord Clarendon's gatepost:

                    Three sights to be seen:
             Dunkirk, Tangier, and a barren queen.

Her ladyship might well have considered the unpopularity of the
Chancellor as the crown of her triumph, had this triumph been as stable
as she could have wished. But, Charles being what he was, it follows
that her ladyship had frequent, if transient, anxious jealousies to
mar the perfection of her existence, to remind her how insecure is the
tenure of positions such as hers, ever at the mercy of the very caprice
to existence.

And then, at long length, there came a day of horrid dread for her, a
day when she found herself bereft of her influence with her royal lover,
when pleadings and railings failed alike to sway him. In part she owed
it to an indiscretion of her own, but in far greater measure to a child
of sixteen, of a golden-headed, fresh, youthful loveliness, and a nature
that still found pleasure in dolls and kindred childish things, yet of
a quick and lively wit, and a clear, intelligent mind, untroubled either
by the assiduity of the royal attentions or the fact that she was become
the toast of the day.

This was Miss Frances Stewart, the daughter of Lord Blantyre, newly come
to Court as a Lady-in-Waiting to her Majesty. How profound an impression
her beauty made upon the admittedly impressionable old Pepys you may
study in his diary. He had a glimpse of her one day riding in the Park
with the King, and a troop of ladies, among whom my Lady Castlemaine,
looking, as he tells us, "mighty out of humour." There was a moment when
Miss Stewart came very near to becoming Queen of England, and although
she never reached that eminence, yet her effigy not only found its way
into the coinage, but abides there to this day (more perdurable than
that of any actual queen) in the figure of Britannia, for which she was
the model.

Charles wooed her openly. It was never his way to study appearances
in these matters. He was so assiduous that it became customary in
that winter of 1666 for those seeking the King at Whitehall to
inquire whether he were above or below--"below" meaning Miss Stewart's
apartments on the ground-floor of the palace, in which apartments his
Majesty was a constant visitor. And since where the King goes the Court
follows, and where the King smiles there the Court fawns, it resulted
that this child now found herself queering it over a court that flocked
to her apartments. Gallants and ladies came there to flirt and to
gossip, to gamble and to pay homage.

About a great table in her splendid salon, a company of rustling,
iridescent fops in satin and heavy periwigs, and of ladies with curled
head-dresses and bare shoulders, played at basset one night in January.
Conversation rippled, breaking here and there into laughter, white,
jewelled hands reached out for cards, or for a share of the heaps of
gold that swept this way and that with the varying fortunes of the game.

My Lady Castlemaine, seated between Etheredge and Rochester, played
in silence, with lips tight-set and brooding eyes. She had lost, it is
true, some L1500 that night; yet, a prodigal gamester, and one who came
easily by money, she had been known to lose ten times that sum and yet
preserve her smile. The source of her ill-humour was not the game. She
played recklessly, her attention wandering; those handsome, brooding
eyes of hers were intent upon watching what went on at the other end of
the long room. There, at a smaller table, sat Miss Stewart, half a dozen
gallants hovering near her, engaged upon a game of cards of a vastly
different sort. Miss Stewart did not gamble. The only purpose she could
find for cards was to build castles; and here she was building one with
the assistance of her gallants, and under the superintendence of his
Grace of Buckingham, who was as skilled in this as in other equally
unstable forms of architecture.

Apart, over by the fire, in a great chair of gilt leather, lounged the
King, languidly observing this smaller party, a faint, indolent smile on
his swarthy, saturnine countenance. Absently, with one hand he stroked
a little spaniel that was curled in his lap. A black boy in a gorgeous,
plumed turban and a long, crimson surcoat arabesqued in gold--there were
three or four such attendants about the room--proffered him a cup of
posses on a golden salver.

The King rose, thrust aside the little blackamoor, and with his spaniel
under his arm, sauntered across to Miss Stewart's table. Soon he found
himself alone with her--the others having removed themselves on his
approach, as jackals fall back before the coming of the lion. The last
to go, and with signs of obvious reluctance, was his Grace of Richmond,
a delicately-built, uncomely, but very glittering gentleman.

Charles faced her across the table, the tall house of cards standing
between them.

Miss invited his Majesty's admiration for my Lord of Buckingham's
architecture. Pouf! His Majesty blew, and the edifice rustled down to a
mere heap of cards again.

"Symbol of kingly power," said Miss, pertly. "You demolish better than
you build, sire."

"Oddsfish! If you challenge me, it were easy to prove you wrong," quoth
he.

"Pray do. The cards are here."

"Cards! Pooh! Card castles are well enough for Buckingham. But such is
not the castle I'll build you if you command me."

"I command the King's Majesty? Mon Dieu! But it would be treason
surely."

"Not greater treason than to have enslaved me." His fine eyes were oddly
ardent. "Shall I build you this castle, child?"

Miss looked at him, and looked away. Her eyelids fluttered
distractingly. She fetched a sigh.

"The castle that your Majesty would build for any but your Queen must
prove a prison."

She rose, and, looking across the room, she met the handsome, scowling
eyes of the neglected favourite. "My Lady Castlemaine looks as if she
feared that fortune were not favouring her." She was so artless that
Charles could not be sure there was a double meaning to her speech.
"Shall we go see how she is faring?" she added, with a disregard for
etiquette, whose artlessness he also doubted.

He yielded, of course. That was his way with beauty, especially with
beauty not yet reduced into possession. But the characteristic urbanity
with which he sauntered beside her across the room was no more than a
mask upon his chagrin. It was always thus that pretty Frances Stewart
used him. She always knew how to elude him and, always with that cursed
air of artlessness, uttered seemingly simple sentences that clung to his
mind to tantalize him.

"The castle your Majesty would build for any but your Queen must prove
a prison." What had she meant by that? Must he take her to queen before
she would allow him to build a castle for her?

It was an insistent, haunting thought, wracking his mind. He knew there
was a party hostile to the Duke of York and Clarendon, which, fearing
the succession of the former, and, so, of the grandchildren of the
latter, as a result of Catherine of Braganza's childlessness, strongly
favoured the King's divorce.

It was a singular irony that my Lady Castlemaine should be largely
responsible for the existence of that party. In her hatred for
Clarendon, and her blind search for weapons that would slay the
Chancellor, she had, if not actually invented, at least helped to give
currency to the silly slander that Clarendon had deliberately chosen for
Charles a barren queen, so as to ensure the ultimate succession of his
own daughter's children. But she had never thought to see that slander
recoil upon her as it now did; she had never thought that a party would
come to rise up in consequence that would urge divorce upon the King at
the very moment when he was consumed by passion for the unattainable,
artlessly artful Frances Stewart.

It was Buckingham, greatly daring, who slyly made himself that party's
mouthpiece. The suggestion startled Charles, voicing, as perhaps it
did, the temptation by which he was secretly assailed. He looked at
Buckingham, frowning.

"I verily believe you are the wickedest dog in England."

The impudent gallant made a leg. "For a subject, sire, I believe I am."

Charles--with whom the amusing word seems ever to have been more
compelling than the serious--laughed his soft, mellow laugh. Then he
sighed, and the frown of thought returned.

"It would be a wicked thing to make a poor lady miserable only because
she is my wife, and has no children by me, which is no fault of hers."

He was a thoroughly bad husband, but his indolent good-nature shrank
from purchasing his desires at the price of so much ignominy to the
Queen. Before that could come to pass it would be necessary to give the
screw of temptation another turn or two. And it was Miss Stewart herself
who--in all innocence--supplied what was required in that direction.
Driven to bay by the importunities of Charles, she announced at last
that it was her intention to retire from Court, so as to preserve
herself from the temptations by which she was beset, and to determine
the uneasiness which, through no fault of her own, her presence was
occasioning the Queen; and she announced further, that, so desperate had
she been rendered that she would marry any gentleman of fifteen hundred
pounds a year who would have her in honour.

You behold Charles reduced to a state of panic. He sought to bribe
her with offers of any settlements she chose to name, or any title she
coveted, offering her these things at the nation's expense as freely
and lightly as the jewels he had tossed into her lap, or the collar
of pearls worth sixteen hundred pounds he had put about her neck. The
offers were ineffectual, and Charles, driven almost to distraction
by such invulnerable virtue, might now have yielded to the insidious
whispers of divorce and re-marriage had not my Lady Castlemaine taken a
hand in the game.

Her ladyship, dwelling already, as a consequence of that royal
infatuation for Miss Stewart, in the cold, rarefied atmosphere of a
neglect that amounted almost to disgrace, may have considered with
bitterness how her attempt to exploit her hatred of the Chancellor had
recoiled upon herself.

In the blackest hour of her despair, when hope seemed almost dead, she
made a discovery--or, rather, the King's page, the ineffable Chiffinch,
Lord Keeper of the Back Stairs and Grand-Eunuch of the Royal Seraglio,
who was her ladyship's friend, made it and communicated it to her
There had been one ardent respondent in the Duke of Richmond to that
proclamation of Miss Stewart's that she would marry any gentleman of
fifteen hundred pounds a year. Long enamoured of her, his Grace saw here
his opportunity, and he seized it. Consequently he was now in constant
attendance upon her, but very secretly, since he feared the King's
displeasure.

My Lady Castlemaine, having discovered this, and being well served in
the matter by Chiffinch, spied her opportunity. It came one cold night
towards the end of February of that year 1667. Charles, going below at a
late hour to visit Miss Stewart, when he judged that she would be
alone, was informed by her maid that Miss was not receiving, a headache
compelling her to keep her room.

His Majesty returned above in a very ill-humour, to find himself
confronted in his own apartments by my Lady Castlemaine. Chiffinch had
introduced her by the back-stairs entrance. Charles stiffened at sight
of her.

"I hope I may be allowed to pay my homage," says she, on a note of
irony, "although the angelic Stewart has forbid you to see me at my own
house. I come to condole with you upon the affliction and grief into
which the new-fashioned chastity of the inhuman Stewart has reduced your
Majesty."

"You are pleased to be amused, ma'am," says Charles frostily.

"I will not," she returned him, "make use of reproaches which would
disgrace myself; still less will I endeavour to excuse frailties in
myself which nothing can justify, since your constancy for me deprives
me of all defence." Her ladyship, you see, had a considerable gift of
sarcasm.

"In that case, may I ask you why you have come?"

"To open your eyes. Because I cannot bear that you should be made the
jest of your own Court."

"Madam!"

"Ah! You didn't know, of course, that you are being laughed at for
the gross manner in which you are being imposed upon by the Stewart's
affectations, any more than you know that whilst you are denied
admittance to her apartments, under the presence of some indisposition,
the Duke of Richmond is with her now."

"That is false," he was beginning, very indignantly.

"I do not desire you to take my word for it. If you will follow me,
you will no longer be the dupe of a false prude, who makes you act so
ridiculous a part."

She took him, still half-resisting, by the hand, and in silence led him,
despite his reluctance, back by the way he had so lately come. Outside
her rival's door she left him, but she paused at the end of the gallery
to make sure that he had entered.

Within he found himself confronted by several of Miss Stewart's
chambermaids, who respectfully barred his way, one of them informing him
scarcely above a whisper that her mistress had been very ill since his
Majesty left, but that, being gone to bed, she was, God be thanked, in a
very fine sleep.

"That I must see," said the King. And, since one of the women placed
herself before the door of the inner room, his Majesty unceremoniously
took her by the shoulders and put her aside.

He thrust open the door, and stepped without further ceremony into the
well-lighted bedroom. Miss Stewart occupied the handsome, canopied bed.
But far from being as he had been told, in "a very fine sleep," she was
sitting up; and far from presenting an ailing appearance, she looked
radiantly well and very lovely in her diaphanous sleeping toilet, with
golden ringlets in distracting disarray Nor was she alone. By her pillow
sat one who, if at first to be presumed her physician, proved upon
scrutiny to be the Duke of Richmond.

The King's swarthy face turned a variety of colours, his languid eyes
lost all trace of languor. Those who knew his nature might have expected
that he would now deliver himself with that sneering sarcasm, that
indolent cynicism, which he used upon occasion. But he was too deeply
stirred for acting. His self-control deserted him entirely. Exactly what
he said has not been preserved for us. All that we are told is that he
signified his resentment in such terms as he had never before used; and
that his Grace, almost petrified by the King's most royal rage, uttered
never a word in answer. The windows of the room overlooked the Thames.
The King's eyes strayed towards them. Richmond was slight of build,
Charles vigorous and athletic. His Grace took the door betimes lest the
window should occur to his Majesty, and so he left the lady alone with
the outraged monarch.

Thereafter Charles did not have it all quite his own way. Miss Stewart
faced him in an indignation nothing less than his own, and she was very
far from attempting any such justification of herself, or her conduct,
as he may have expected.

"Will your Majesty be more precise as to the grounds of your complaint?"
she invited him challengingly.

That checked his wildness. It brought him up with a round turn. His jaw
fell, and he stared at her, lost now for words. Of this she took the
fullest advantage.

"If I am not allowed to receive visits from a man of the Duke of
Richmond's rank, who comes with honourable intentions, then I am a slave
in a free country. I know of no engagement that should prevent me from
disposing of my hand as I think fit. But if this is not permitted me in
your Majesty's dominions, I do not believe there is any power on earth
can prevent me going back to France, and throwing myself into a convent,
there to enjoy the peace denied me at this Court."

With that she melted into tears, and his discomfiture was complete. On
his knees he begged her forgiveness for the injury he had done her. But
Miss was not in a forgiving humour.

"If your Majesty would graciously consent to leave me now in peace,"
said she, "you would avoid offending by a longer visit those who
accompanied or conducted you to my apartments."

She had drawn a bow at a venture but shrewdly, and the shaft went home
Charles rose, red in the face. Swearing he would never speak to her
again, he stalked out.

Later, however, he considered. If he felt bitterly aggrieved, he must
also have realized that he had no just grounds for this, and that in his
conduct in Miss Stewart's room he had been entirely ridiculous. She was
rightly resolved against being lightly worn by any man. If anything, the
reflection must have fanned his passion. It was impossible, he thought,
that she should love that knock-kneed fellow, Richmond, who had no
graces either of body or of mind, and if she suffered the man's suit,
it must be, as she had all but said, so that she might be delivered from
the persecution to which his Majesty had submitted her. The thought of
her marrying Richmond, or, indeed, anybody, was unbearable to Charles,
and it may have stifled his last scruple in the matter of the divorce.

His first measure next morning was to banish Richmond from the Court.
But Richmond had not stayed for the order to quit. The King's messenger
found him gone already.

Then Charles took counsel in the matter with the Chancellor.
Clarendon's habitual gravity was increased to sternness. He spoke to the
King--taking the fullest advantage of the tutelary position in which for
the last twenty-five years he had stood to him--much as he had spoken
when Charles had proposed to make Barbara Palmer a Lady of the Queen's
Bedchamber, saving that he was now even more uncompromising. The King
was not pleased with him. But just as he had had his way, despite the
Chancellor, in that other matter, so he would have his way despite him
now. This time, however, the Chancellor took no risks. He feared too
much the consequences for Charles, and he determined to spare no effort
to avoid a scandal, and to save the already deeply-injured Queen. So he
went secretly to work to outwit the King. He made himself the protector
of those lovers, the Duke of Richmond and Miss Stewart, with the result
that one dark night, a week or two later, the lady stole away from
the Palace of White-hall, and made her way to the Bear Tavern, at the
Bridge-foot, Westminster, where Richmond awaited her with a coach. And
so, by the secret favour of the Lord Chancellor, they stole away to Kent
and matrimony.

That was checkmate indeed to Charles who swore all manner of things in
his mortification. But it was not until some six weeks later that he
learnt by whose agency the thing had been accomplished. He learnt it,
not a doubt, from my Lady Castlemaine.

The estrangement between her ladyship and the King, which dated back to
the time of his desperate courtship of Miss Stewart, was at last
made up; and once again we see her ladyship triumphant, and firmly
established in the amorous King's affections. She had cause to
be grateful to the Chancellor for this. But her vindictive nature
remembered only the earlier injury still unavenged. Here at last was her
chance to pay off that score. Clarendon, beset by enemies on every hand,
yet trusting in the King whom he had served so well, stood his ground
unintimidated and unmoved--an oak that had weathered mightier storms
than this. He did not dream that he was in the power of an evil woman.
And that woman used her power. When all else failed, she told the King
of Clarendon's part in the flight of Miss Stewart, and lest the King
should be disposed to pardon the Chancellor out of consideration for his
motives, represented him as a self-seeker, and charged him with having
acted thus so as to make sure of keeping his daughter's children by the
Duke of York in the succession.

That was the end. Charles withdrew his protection, threw Clarendon to
the wolves. He sent the Duke of Albemarle to him with a command that he
should surrender his seals of office. The proud old man refused to yield
his seals to any but the King himself. He may have hoped that the memory
of all that lay between them would rise up once more when they were face
to face. So he came in person to Whitehall to make surrender. He walked
deliberately, firmly, and with head erect, through the hostile throng of
courtiers--"especially the buffoones and ladys of pleasure," as Evelyn
says.

Of his departure thence, his disgrace now consummated, Pepys has left us
a vivid picture:

"When he went from the King on Monday morning my Lady Castlemaine was
in bed (though about twelve o'clock), and ran out in her smock into her
aviary looking into Whitehall Gardens; and thither her woman brought her
her nightgown; and she stood, blessing herself at the old man's going
away; and several of the gallants of Whitehall--of which there were many
staying to see the Chancellor's return--did talk to her in her birdcage;
among others Blandford, telling her she was the bird of passage."

Clarendon lingered, melancholy and disillusioned, at his fine house in
Piccadilly until, impeached by Parliament, he remembered Strafford's
fate, and set out to tread once more and for the remainder of his days
the path of exile.

Time avenged him. Two of his granddaughters--Mary and Anne--reigned
successively as queens in England.





X. THE TRAGEDY OF HERRENHAUSEN

Count Philip KÃ¶nigsmark and the Princess Sophia Dorothea



He was accounted something of a scamp throughout Europe, and
particularly in England, where he had been associated with his brother
in the killing of Mr. Thynne. But the seventeenth century did not
look for excessively nice scruples in a soldier of fortune; and so it
condoned the lack of virtue in Count Philip Christof KÃ¶nigsmark for
the sake of his personal beauty, his elegance, his ready wit, and his
magnificent address. The court of Hanover made him warmly welcome,
counting itself the richer for his presence; whilst he, on his side, was
retained there by the Colonelcy in the Electoral Guard to which he
had been appointed, and by his deep and ill-starred affection for the
Princess Sophia Dorothea, the wife of the Electoral Prince, who later
was to reign in England as King George I.

His acquaintance with her dated back to childhood, for they had been
playmates at her father's ducal court of Zell, where KÃ¶nigsmark had been
brought up. With adolescence he had gone out into the world to seek the
broader education which it offered to men of quality and spirit. He had
fought bulls in Madrid, and the infidel overseas; he had wooed adventure
wherever it was to be met, until romance hung about him like an aura.
Thus Sophia met him again, a dazzling personality, whose effulgence
shone the more brightly against the dull background of that gross
Hanoverian court; an accomplished, graceful, self-reliant man of the
world, in whom she scarcely recognized her sometime playmate.

The change he found in her was no less marked, though of a different
kind. The sweet child he had known--she had been married in 1682, at
the age of sixteen--had come in her ten years of wedded life to the
fulfilment of the handsome promise of her maidenhood. But her beauty was
spiritualized by a certain wistfulness that had not been there before,
that should not have been there now had all been well. The sprightliness
inherent in her had not abated, but it had assumed a certain warp of
bitterness; humour, which is of the heart, had given place in her
to wit, which is of the mind, and this wit was barbed, and a little
reckless of how or where it offended.

KÃ¶nigsmark observed these changes that the years had wrought, and knew
enough of her story to account for them. He knew of her thwarted love
for her cousin, the Duke of Wolfenbuttel, thwarted for the sake of
dynastic ambition, to the end that by marrying her to the Electoral
Prince George the whole of the Duchy of Luneberg might be united.
Thus, for political reasons, she had been thrust into a union that was
mutually loveless; for Prince George had as little affection to bring to
it as herself. Yet for a prince the door to compensations is ever open.
Prince George's taste, as is notorious, was ever for ugly women, and
this taste he indulged so freely, openly, and grossly that the coldness
towards him with which Sophia had entered the alliance was eventually
converted into disgust and contempt.

Thus matters stood between that ill-matched couple; contempt on her
side, cold dislike on his, a dislike that was fully shared by his
father, the Elector, Ernest Augustus, and encouraged in the latter by
the Countess von Platen.

Madame von Platen, the wife of the Elector's chief minister of state,
was--with the connivance of her despicable husband, who saw therein
the means to his own advancement--the acknowledged mistress of Ernest
Augustus. She was a fleshly, gauche, vain, and ill-favoured woman.
Malevolence sat in the creases of her painted face, and peered from her
mean eyes. Yet, such as she was, the Elector Ernest loved her. His son's
taste for ugly women would appear to have been hereditary.

Between the Countess and Sophia there was a deadly feud. The princess
had mortally offended her father-in-law's favourite. Not only had she
never troubled to dissemble the loathing which that detestable woman
inspired in her, but she had actually given it such free and stinging
expression as had provoked against Madame von Platen the derision of
the court, a derision so ill-concealed that echoes of it had reached its
object, and made her aware of the source from whence it sprang.

It was into this atmosphere of hostility that the advent of the elegant,
romantic KÃ¶nigsmark took place. He found the stage set for comedy of
a grim and bitter kind, which he was himself, by his recklessness, to
convert into tragedy.

It began by the Countess von Platen's falling in love with him. It was
some time before he suspected it, though heaven knows he did not lack
for self-esteem. Perhaps it was this very self-esteem that blinded him
here to the appalling truth. Yet in the end understanding came to
him. When the precise significance of the fond leer of that painted
harridan's repellent coquetry was borne in upon him he felt the skin of
his body creep and roughen But he dissembled craftily. He was a venal
scamp, after all, and in the court of Hanover he saw opportunities to
employ his gifts and his knowledge of the great world in such a way as
to win to eminence. He saw that the Elector's favourite could be of use
to him; and it is not your adventurer's way to look too closely into the
nature of the ladder by which he has the chance to climb.

Skilfully, craftily, then, he played the enamoured countess so long as
her fondness for him might be useful, her hostility detrimental. But
once the Colonelcy of the Electoral Guards was firmly in his grasp,
and an intimate friendship had ripened between himself and Prince
Charles--the Elector's younger son--sufficiently to ensure his future,
he plucked off the mask and allied himself with Sophia in her hostility
towards Madame von Platen. He did worse. Some little time thereafter,
whilst on a visit to the court of Poland, he made one night in his cups
a droll story of the amorous persecution which he had suffered at Madame
von Platen's hands.

It was a tale that set the profligate company in a roar. But there was
one present who afterwards sent a report of it to the Countess, and you
conceive the nature of the emotions it aroused in her. Her rage was the
greater for being stifled. It was obviously impossible for her to appeal
to her lover, the Elector, to avenge her. From the Elector, above all
others, must the matter be kept concealed. But not on that account would
she forgo the vengeance due. She would present a reckoning in full ere
all was done, and bitterly should the presumptuous young adventurer who
had flouted her be made to pay.

The opportunity was very soon to be afforded her. It arose more or less
directly out of an act in which she indulged her spite against Sophia.
This lay in throwing Melusina Schulemberg into the arms of the Electoral
Prince. Melusina, who was years afterwards to be created Duchess
of Kendal, had not yet attained to that completeness of lank, bony
hideousness that was later to distinguish her in England. But even in
youth she could boast of little attraction. Prince George, however,
was easily attracted. A dull, undignified libertine, addicted to
over-eating, heavy drinking, and low conversation, he found in Melusina
von Schulemberg an ideal mate. Her installation as maÃ®tresse en-titre
took place publicly at a ball given by Prince George at Herrenhausen, a
ball at which the Princess Sophia was present.

Accustomed, inured, as she was to the coarse profligacy of her dullard
husband, and indifferent to his philandering as her contempt of him now
left her, yet in the affront thus publicly offered her, she felt that
the limit of endurance had been reached. Next day it was found that she
had disappeared from Herrenhausen. She had fled to her father's court at
Zell.

But her father received her coldly; lectured her upon the freedom and
levity of her manners, which he condemned as unbecoming the dignity
of her rank; recommended her to use in future greater prudence, and a
proper, wifely submission; and, the homily delivered, packed her back to
her husband at Herrenhausen.

George's reception of her on her return was bitterly hostile. She had
been guilty of a more than usual, of an unpardonable want of respect for
him. She must learn what was due to her station, and to her husband. He
would thank her to instruct herself in these matters against his return
from Berlin, whither he was about to journey, and he warned her that he
would suffer no more tantrums of that kind.

Thus he delivered himself, with cold hate in his white, flabby,
frog-face and in the very poise of his squat, ungainly figure.

Thereafter he departed for Berlin, bearing hate of her with him, and
leaving hate and despair behind.

It was then, in this despair, that Sophia looked about her for a true
friend to lend her the aid she so urgently required; to rescue her from
her intolerable, soul-destroying fate. And at her elbow, against this
dreadful need, Destiny had placed her sometime playmate, her most
devoted friend--as she accounted him, and as, indeed, he was--the
elegant, reckless KÃ¶nigsmark, with his beautiful face, his golden mane,
and his unfathomable blue eyes.

Walking with him one summer day between clipped hedges in the formal
gardens of Herrenhausen--that palace as squat and ungraceful as those
who had built and who inhabited it--she opened her heart to him very
fully, allowed him, in her overwhelming need of sympathy, to see things
which for very shame she had hitherto veiled from all other eyes. She
kept nothing back; she dwelt upon her unhappiness with her boorish
husband, told him of slights and indignities innumerable, whose pain she
had hitherto so bravely dissembled, confessed, even, that he had beaten
her upon occasion.

KÃ¶nigsmark went red and white by turns, with the violent surge of his
emotions, and the deep sapphire eyes blazed with wrath when she came at
last to the culminating horror of blows endured.

"It is enough, madame," he cried. "I swear to you, as Heaven hears me,
that he shall be punished."

"Punished?" she echoed, checking in her stride, and looked at him with
a smile of sad incredulity. "It is not his punishment I seek, my friend,
but my own salvation."

"The one can be accomplished with the other," he answered hotly, and
struck the cut-steel hilt of his sword. "You shall be rid of this lout
as soon as ever I can come to him. I go after him to Berlin to-night."

The colour all faded from her cheeks, her sensitive lips fell apart, as
she looked at him aghast.

"Why, what would you do? What do you mean?" she asked him.

"I will send him the length of my sword, and so make a widow of you,
madame."

She shook her head. "Princes do not fight," she said, on a note of
contempt.

"I shall so shame him that he will have no alternative--unless, indeed,
he is shameless. I will choose my occasion shrewdly, put an affront
on him one evening in his cups, when drink shall have made him valiant
enough to commit himself to a meeting. If even that will not answer, and
he still shields himself behind his rank--why, there are other ways to
serve him." He was thinking, perhaps, of Mr. Thynne.

The heat of so much reckless, romantic fury on her behalf warmed the
poor lady, who had so long been chilled for want of sympathy, and
starved of love. Impulsively she caught his hand in hers.

"My friend, my friend!" she cried, on a note that quivered and broke.
"You are mad--wonderfully beautifully mad, but mad. What would become of
you if you did this?"

He swept the consideration aside by a contemptuous, almost angry
gesture. "Does that matter? I am concerned with what is to become of
you. I was born for your service, my princess, and the service being
rendered..." He shrugged and smiled, threw out his hands and let them
fall again to his sides in an eloquent gesture. He was the complete
courtier, the knight-errant, the romantic preux-chevalier all in one.

She drew closer to him, took the blue lapels of his military coat in her
white hands, and looked pathetically up into his beautiful face. If ever
she wanted to kiss a man, she surely wanted to kiss KÃ¶nigsmark in that
moment, but as she might have kissed a loving brother, in token of her
deep gratitude for his devotion to her who had known so little true
devotion.

"If you knew," she said, "what balsam this proof of your friendship has
poured upon the wounds of my soul, you would understand my utter lack of
words in which to thank you. You dumbfound me, my friend; I can find no
expression for my gratitude."

"I ask no gratitude," quoth he. "I am all gratitude myself that you
should have come to me in the hour of your need. I but ask your leave to
serve you in my own way."

She shook her head. She saw his blue eyes grow troubled.

He was about to speak, to protest, but she hurried on. "Serve me if you
will--God knows I need the service of a loyal friend--but serve me as I
shall myself decide--no other way."

"But what alternative service can exist?" he asked, almost impatiently.

"I have it in mind to escape from this horrible place--to quit Hanover,
never to return."

"But to go whither?"

"Does it matter? Anywhere away from this hateful court, and this hateful
life; anywhere, since my father will not let me find shelter at Zell,
as I had hoped. Had it not been for the thought of my children, I
should have fled long ago. For the sake of those two little ones I have
suffered patiently through all these years. But the limit of endurance
has been reached and passed. Take me away. KÃ¶nigsmark!" She was
clutching his lapels again. "If you would really serve me, help me to
escape."

His hands descended upon hers, and held them prisoned against his
breast. A flush crept into his fair cheeks, there was a sudden kindling
of the eyes that looked down into her own piteous ones. These sensitive,
romantic natures are quickly stirred to passion, ever ready to yield to
the adventure of it.

"My princess," he said, "you may count upon your KÃ¶nigsmark while he has
life." Disengaging her hands from his lapels, but still holding them, he
bowed low over them, so low that his heavy golden mane tumbled forward
on either side of his handsome head to form a screen under cover of
which he pressed his lips upon her fingers.

She let him have his will with her hands. It was little enough reward
for so much devotion.

"I thank you again," she breathed. "And now I must think--I must
consider where I can count upon finding refuge."

That cooled his ardour a little. His own high romantic notion was, no
doubt, to fling her there and then upon the withers of his horse, and so
ride out into the wide world to carve a kingdom for her with his sword.
Her sober words dispelled the dream, revealed to him that it was not
quite intended he should hereafter be her custodian. And there for the
moment the matter was suspended.

Both had behaved quite recklessly. Each should have remembered that
an Electoral Princess is not wise to grant a protracted interview,
accompanied by lapel-holding, hand-holding, and hand-kissings, within
sight of the windows of a palace. And, as it happened, behind one of
those windows lurked the Countess von Platen, watching them jealously,
and without any disposition to construe the meeting innocently. Was she
not the deadly enemy of both? Had not the Princess whetted satire upon
her, and had not KÃ¶nigsmark scorned the love she proffered him, and
then unpardonably published it in a ribald story to excite the mirth of
profligates?

That evening the Countess purposefully sought her lover, the Elector.

"Your son is away in Prussia," quoth she. "Who guards his honour in his
absence?"

"George's honour?" quoth the Elector, bulging eyes staring at the
Countess. He did not laugh, as might have been expected at the notion of
guarding something whose existence was not easily discerned. He had no
sense of humour, as his appearance suggested. He was a short, fat man
with a face shaped like a pear--narrow in the brow and heavy in the
jowl. "What the devil do you mean?" he asked.

"I mean that this foreign adventurer, KÃ¶nigsmark, and Sophia grow too
intimate."

"Sophia!" Thick eyebrows were raised until they almost met the line of
his ponderous peruke. His face broke into malevolent creases expressive
of contempt.

"That white-faced ninny! Bah!" Her very virtue was matter for his scorn.

"It is these white-faced ninnies can be most sly," replied the Countess,
out of her worldly wisdom. "Listen a moment now." And she related, with
interest rather than discount, you may be sure, what she had witnessed
that afternoon.

The malevolence deepened in his face. He had never loved Sophia, and he
felt none the kinder towards her for her recent trip to Zell. Then, too,
being a libertine, and the father of a libertine, it logically followed
that unchastity in his women-folk was in his eyes the unpardonable sin.

He heaved himself out of his deep chair. "How far has this gone?" he
demanded.

Prudence restrained the Countess from any over-statement that might
afterwards be disproved. Besides, there was not the need, if she could
trust her senses. Patience and vigilance would presently afford her all
the evidence required to damn the pair. She said as much, and promised
the Elector that she would exercise herself the latter quality in his
son's service. Again the Elector did not find it grotesque that his
mistress should appoint herself the guardian of his son's honour.

The Countess went about that congenial task with zeal--though George's
honour was the least thing that concerned her. What concerned her was
the dishonour of Sophia, and the ruin of KÃ¶nigsmark. So she watched
assiduously, and set others, too, to watch for her and to report. And
almost daily now she had for the Elector a tale of whisperings and
hand-pressings, and secret stolen meetings between the guilty twain.
The Elector enraged, and would have taken action, but that the guileful
Countess curbed him. All this was not enough. An accusation that could
not be substantiated would ruin all chance of punishing the offenders,
might recoil, indeed, upon the accusers by bringing the Duke of Zell to
his daughter's aid. So they must wait yet awhile until they held more
absolute proof of this intrigue.

And then at last one day the Countess sped in haste to the Elector with
word that KÃ¶nigsmark and the Princess had shut themselves up together
in the garden pavilion. Let him come at once, and he should so discover
them for himself, and thus at last be able to take action. The Countess
was flushed with triumph. Be that meeting never so innocent--and Madame
von Platen could not, being what she was, and having seen what she
had seen, conceive it innocent--it was in an Electoral Princess an
unforgivable indiscretion, to take the most charitable view, which none
would dream of taking. So the Elector, fiercely red in the face, hurried
off to the pavilion with Madame von Platen following. He came too late,
despite the diligence of his spy.

Sophia had been there, but her interview with the Count had been a
brief one. She had to tell him that at last she was resolved in all
particulars. She would seek a refuge at the court of her cousin, the
Duke of Wolfenbuttel, who, she was sure--for the sake of what once had
lain between them--would not now refuse to shelter and protect her. Of
KÃ¶nigsmark she desired that he should act as her escort to her cousin's
court.

KÃ¶nigsmark was ready, eager. In Hanover he would leave nothing that
he regretted. At Wolfenbuttelyy, having served Sophia faithfully, his
ever-growing, romantic passion for her might find expression. She would
make all dispositions, and advise him when she was ready to set out.
But they must use caution, for they were being spied upon. Madame von
Platen's over-eagerness had in part betrayed her. It was, indeed, their
consciousness of espionage which had led to this dangerous meeting
in the seclusion of the pavilion, and which urged him to linger after
Sophia had left him. They were not to be seen to emerge together.

The young Dane sat alone on the window-seat, his chin in his hands, his
eyes dreamy, a faint smile on his shapely lips, when Ernest Augustus
burst furiously in, the Countess von Platen lingering just beyond the
threshold. The Elector's face was apoplectically purple from rage and
haste, his breath came in wheezing gasps. His bulging eyes swept
round the chamber, and fastened finally, glaring, upon the startled
KÃ¶nigsmark.

"Where is the Princess?" he blurted out.

The Count espied Madame von Platen in the back ground, and had the
scent of mischief very strong. But he preserved an air of innocent
mystification. He rose and answered with courteous ease:

"Your Highness is seeking her? Shall I ascertain for you?"

At a loss, Ernest Augustus stared a moment, then flung a glance over his
shoulder at the Countess.

"I was told that her Highness was here," he said.

"Plainly," said KÃ¶nigsmark, with perfect calm, "you have been
misinformed." And his quiet glance and gesture invited the Elector to
look round for himself.

"How long have you been here yourself?" Feeling at a disadvantage, the
Elector avoided the direct question that was in his mind.

"Half an hour at least."

"And in that time you have not seen the Princess?"

"Seen the Princess?" KÃ¶nigsmark's brows were knit perplexedly. "I
scarcely understand your Highness."

The Elector moved a step and trod on a soft substance. He looked down,
then stooped, and rose again, holding in his hand a woman's glove.

"What's this?" quoth he. "Whose glove is this?"

If KÃ¶nigsmark's heart missed a beat--as well it may have done--he did
not betray it outwardly. He smiled; indeed he almost laughed.

"Your Highness is amusing himself at my expense by asking me questions
that only a seer could answer."

The Elector was still considering him with his ponderously suspicious
glance, when quick steps approached. A serving-maid, one of Sophia's
women, appeared in the doorway of the pavilion.

"What do you want?" the Elector snapped at her.

"A glove her Highness lately dropped here," was the timid answer,
innocently precipitating the very discovery which the woman had been too
hastily dispatched to avert.

The Elector flung the glove at her, and there was a creak of evil
laughter from him. When she had departed' he turned again to KÃ¶nigsmark.

"You fence skilfully," said he, sneering, "too skilfully for an honest
man. Will you now tell me without any more of this, precisely what the
Princess Sophia was doing here with you?"

KÃ¶nigsmark drew himself stiffly up, looking squarely into the furnace of
the Elector's face.

"Your Highness assumes that the Princess was here with me, and a prince
is not to be contradicted, even when he insults a lady whose spotless
purity is beyond his understanding. But your Highness can hardly expect
me to become in never so slight a degree a party to that insult by
vouchsafing any answer to your question."

"That is your last word, sir?" The Elector shook with suppressed anger.

"Your Highness cannot think that words are necessary?"

The bulging eyes grew narrow, the heavy nether lip was thrust forth in
scorn and menace.

"You are relieved, sir, of your duties in the Electoral Guard, and as
that is the only tie binding you to Hanover, we see no reason why your
sojourn here should be protracted."

KÃ¶nigsmark bowed stiffly, formally. "It shall end, your Highness, as
soon as I can make the necessary arrangements for my departure--in a
week at most."

"You are accorded three days, sir." The Elector turned, and waddled
out, leaving KÃ¶nigsmark to breathe freely again. The three days should
suffice for the Princess also. It was very well.

The Elector, too, thought that it was very well. He had given this
troublesome fellow his dismissal, averted a scandal, and placed his
daughter-in-law out of the reach of harm. Madame von Platen was the only
one concerned who thought that it was not well at all, the consummation
being far from that which she had desired. She had dreamt of a flaming
scandal, that should utterly consume her two enemies, Sophia and
KÃ¶nigsmark. Instead, she saw them both escaping, and the fact that she
was--as she may have supposed--effectively separating two loving hearts
could be no sort of adequate satisfaction for such bitter spite as hers.
Therefore she plied her wicked wits to force an issue more germane to
her desires.

The course she took was fraught with a certain peril. Yet confident that
at worst she could justify it, and little fearing that the worst would
happen, she boldly went to work. She forged next day a brief note in
which the Princess Sophia urgently bade KÃ¶nigsmark to come to her at
ten o'clock that night in her own apartments, and with threat and bribe
induced the waiting woman of the glove to bear that letter.

Now it so happened that KÃ¶nigsmark, through the kind offices of Sophia's
maid-of-honour, Mademoiselle de Knesebeck, who was in the secret of
their intentions, had sent the Princess a note that morning, briefly
stating the urgency of departure, and begging her so to arrange that she
could leave Herrenhausen with him on the morrow. He imagined the note
now brought him to be in answer to that appeal of his. Its genuineness
he never doubted, being unacquainted with Sophia's writing. He was
aghast at the rashness which dictated such an assignation, yet never
hesitated as to keeping it. It was not his way to hesitate. He trusted
to the gods who watch over the destinies of the bold.

And meanwhile Madame von Platen was reproaching her lover with having
dealt too softly with the Dane.

"Bah!" said the Elector. "To-morrow he goes his ways, and we are rid of
him. Is not that enough?"

"Enough, if, soon as he goes, he goes not too late already," quoth she.

"Now what will you be hinting?" he asked her peevishly.

"I'll be more plain. I will tell you what I know. It is this. KÃ¶nigsmark
has an assignation with the Princess Sophia this very night at ten
o'clock--and where do you suppose? In her Highness's own apartments."

The Elector came to his feet with an oath. "That is not true!" he cried.
"It cannot be!"

"Then I'll say no more," quoth Jezebel, and snapped her thin lips.

"Ah, but you shall. How do you know this?"

"That I cannot tell you without betraying a confidence. Let it suffice
you that I do know it. Consider now whether in banishing this profligate
you have sufficiently avenged the honour of your son."

"My God, if I thought this were true...." He choked with rage, stood
shaking a moment, then strode to the door, calling.

"The truth is easily ascertained," said Madame. "Conceal yourself in the
Rittersaal, and await his coming forth. But you had best go attended,
for it is a very reckless rogue, and he has been known aforetime to
practice murder."

Whilst the Elector, acting upon this advice, was getting his men
together, KÃ¶nigsmark was wasting precious moments in Sophia's
antechamber, whilst Mademoiselle de Knesebeck apprised her Highness
of his visit. Sophia had already retired to bed, and the amazing
announcement of the Count's presence there startled her into a fear of
untoward happenings. She was overwhelmed, too, by the rashness of this
step of his, coming after the events of yesterday. If it should be known
that he had visited her thus, terrible consequences might ensue. She
rose, and with Mademoiselle de Knesebeck's aid made ready to receive
him. Yet for all that she made haste, the precious irreclaimable moments
sped.

She came to him at last, Mademoiselle de Knesebeck following, for
propriety's sake.

"What is it?" she asked him breathlessly. "What brings you here at such
an hour?"

"What brings me?" quoth he, surprised at that reception. "Why, your
commands--your letter."

"My letter? What letter?"

A sense of doom, of being trapped, suddenly awoke in him. He plucked
forth the treacherous note, and proffered it.

"Why, what does this mean?" She swept a white hand over her eyes and
brows, as if to brush away some thing that obscured her vision. "That is
not mine. I never wrote it. How could you dream I should be imprudent as
to bid you hither, and at such an hour How could you dream it?"

"You are right," said he, and laughed, perhaps to ease her alarm,
perhaps in sheer bitter mirth. "It will be, no doubt, the work of
our friend, Madame von Platen. I had best begone. For the rest, my
travelling chaise will wait from noon until sunset to-morrow by the
Markt Kirck in Hanover, and I shall wait within it. I shall hope to
conduct you safely to Wolfenbuttelyy."

"I will come, I will come. But go now--oh, go!"

He looked very deeply into her eyes--a valedictory glance against the
worst befalling him. Then he took her hand, bowed over it and kissed it,
and so departed.

He crossed the outer ante-room, descended the short flight of stairs,
and pushed open the heavy door of the Hall of Knights. He passed
through, and thrust the door behind him, then stood a moment looking
round the vast apartment. If he was too late to avoid the springs of
the baited trap, it was here that they should snap upon him. Yet all was
still. A single lamp on a table in the middle of the vast chamber shed
a feeble, flickering light, yet sufficient to assure him that no one
waited here. He sighed relief, wrapped his cloak about him, and set out
swiftly to cross the hall.

But even as he passed, four shadows detached themselves from the tall
stove, resolved themselves into armed men, and sprang after him.

He heard them, wheeled about, flung off his cloak, and disengaged his
sword, all with the speed of lightning and the address of the man who
for ten years had walked amid perils, and learned to depend upon his
blade. That swift action sealed his doom. Their orders were to take him
living or dead, and standing in awe of his repute, they were not the men
to incur risks. Even as he came on guard, a partisan grazed his head,
and another opened his breast.

He went down, coughing and gasping, blood dabbling his bright golden
hair, and staining the priceless Mechlin at his throat, yet his right
hand still desperately clutching his useless sword.

His assassins stood about him, their partisans levelled to strike again,
and summoned him to yield. Then, beside one of them, he suddenly beheld
the Countess von Platen materializing out of the surrounding shadows as
it seemed, and behind her the squat, ungraceful figure of the Elector.
He fought for breath. "I am slain," he gasped, "and as I am to appear
before my Maker I swear to you that the Princess Sophia is innocent.
Spare her at least, your Highness."

"Innocent!" said the Elector hoarsely. "Then what did you now in her
apartments?

"It was a trap set for us by this foul hag, who..."

The heel of the vindictive harridan ground viciously upon the lips of
the dying man and choked his utterance. Thereafter the halberts finished
him off, and he was buried there and then, in lime, under the floor of
the Hall of Knights, under the very spot where he had fallen, which was
long to remain imbrued with his blood.

Thus miserably perished the glittering KÃ¶nigsmark, a martyr to his own
irrepressible romanticism.

As for Sophia, better might it have been for her had she shared his fate
that night. She was placed under arrest next morning, and Prince George
was summoned back from Berlin at once.

The evidence may have satisfied him that his honour had not suffered,
for he was disposed to let the matter drop, content that they should
remain in the forbidding relations which had existed between them before
this happening. But Sophia was uncompromising in her demand for strict
justice.

"If I am guilty, I am unworthy of you," she told him. "If innocent, you
are unworthy of me."

There was no more to be said. A consistory court was assembled to
divorce them. But since with the best intentions there was no faintest
evidence of her adultery, this court had to be content to pronounce the
divorce upon the ground of her desertion.

She protested against the iniquity of this. But she protested in vain.
She was carried off into the grim captivity of a castle on the Ahlen, to
drag out in that melancholy duress another thirty-two years of life.

Her death took place in November of 1726. And the story runs that on her
death-bed she delivered to a person of trust a letter to her sometime
husband, now King George I. of England. Seven months later, as King
George was on his way to his beloved Hanover, that letter was placed
in his carriage as it crossed the frontier into Germany. It contained
Sophia's dying declaration of innocence, and her solemn summons to King
George to stand by her side before the judgment-seat of Heaven within a
year, and there make answer in her presence for the wrongs he had done
her, for her blighted life and her miserable death.

King George's answer to that summons was immediate. The reading of
that letter brought on the apoplectic seizure of which he died in his
carriage next day--the 9th of June, 1727--on the road to Osnabruck.





XI. THE TYRANNICIDE

Charlotte Corday and Jean Paul Morat



Tyrannicide was the term applied to her deed by Adam Lux, her lover in
the sublimest and most spiritual sense of the word--for he never so much
as spoke to her, and she never so much as knew of his existence.

The sudden spiritual passion which inflamed him when he beheld her in
the tumbril on her way to the scaffold is a fitting corollary to her
action. She in her way and he in his were alike sublime; her tranquil
martyrdom upon the altar of Republicanism and his exultant martyrdom
upon the altar of Love were alike splendidly futile.

It is surely the strangest love-story enshrined in history. It has its
pathos, yet leaves no regrets behind, for there is no might-have-been
which death had thwarted. Because she died, he loved her; because he
loved her, he died. That is all, but for the details which I am now to
give you.

The convent-bred Marie Charlotte Corday d'Armont was the daughter of a
landless squire of Normandy, a member of the chÃ©tive noblesse, a man
of gentle birth, whose sadly reduced fortune may have predisposed him
against the law of entail or primogeniture--the prime cause of the
inequality out of which were sprung so many of the evils that afflicted
France. Like many of his order and condition he was among the earliest
converts to Republicanism--the pure, ideal republicanism, demanding
constitutional government of the people by the people, holding
monarchical and aristocratic rule an effete and parasitic anachronism.

From M. de Corday Charlotte absorbed the lofty Republican doctrines to
which anon she was to sacrifice her life; and she rejoiced when the hour
of awakening sounded and the children of France rose up and snapped the
fetters in which they had been trammelled for centuries by an insolent
minority of their fellow-countrymen.

In the early violence of the revolution she thought she saw a transient
phase--horrible, but inevitable in the dread convulsion of that
awakening. Soon this would pass, and the sane, ideal government of
her dreams would follow--must follow, since among the people's elected
representatives was a goodly number of unselfish, single-minded men of
her father's class of life; men of breeding and education, impelled by
a lofty altruistic patriotism; men who gradually came to form a party
presently to be known as the Girondins.

But the formation of one party argues the formation of at least another.
And this other in the National Assembly was that of the Jacobins,
less pure of motive, less restrained in deed, a party in which
stood pre-eminent such ruthless, uncompromising men as Robespierre,
Danton,--and Marat.

Where the Girondins stood for Republicanism, the Jacobins stood for
Anarchy. War was declared between the two. The Girondins arraigned Marat
and Robespierre for complicity in the September massacres, and thereby
precipitated their own fall. The triumphant acquittal of Marat was
the prelude to the ruin of the Girondins, and the proscription of
twenty-nine deputies followed at once as the first step. These fled into
the country, hoping to raise an army that should yet save France, and
several of the fugitives made their way to Caen. Thence by pamphlets and
oratory they laboured to arouse true Republican enthusiasm. They were
gifted, able men, eloquent speakers and skilled writers, and they might
have succeeded but that in Paris sat another man no less gifted, and
with surer knowledge of the temper of the proletariat, tirelessly
wielding a vitriolic pen, skilled in the art of inflaming the passions
of the mob.

That man was Jean Paul Marat, sometime medical practitioner, sometime
professor of literature, a graduate of the Scottish University of
St. Andrews, author of some scientific and many sociological works,
inveterate pamphleteer and revolutionary journalist, proprietor and
editor of L'Ami du Peuple, and idol of the Parisian rabble, who had
bestowed upon him the name borne by his gazette, so that he was known as
The People's Friend.

Such was the foe of the Girondins, and of the pure, altruistic, Utopian
Republicanism for which they stood; and whilst he lived and laboured,
their own endeavours to influence the people were all in vain. From his
vile lodging in the Rue de l'Ecole de MÃ©decine in Paris he span with
his clever, wicked pen a web that paralysed their high endeavours and
threatened finally to choke them.

He was not alone, of course. He was one of the dread triumvirate in
which Danton and Robespierre were his associates. But to the Girondins
he appeared by far the most formidable and ruthless and implacable of
the three, whilst to Charlotte Corday--the friend and associate now of
the proscribed Girondins who had sought refuge in Caen--he loomed so
vast and terrible as to eclipse his associates entirely. To her young
mind, inflamed with enthusiasm for the religion of Liberty as preached
by the Girondins, Marat was a loathly, dangerous heresiarch, threatening
to corrupt that sublime new faith with false, anarchical doctrine, and
to replace the tyranny that had been overthrown by a tyranny more odious
still.

She witnessed in Caen the failure of the Girondin attempt to raise an
army with which to deliver Paris from the foul clutches of the Jacobins.
An anguished spectator of this failure, she saw in it a sign that
Liberty was being strangled at its birth. On the lips of her friends the
Girondins she caught again the name of Marat, the murderer of Liberty;
and, brooding, she reached a conclusion embodied in a phrase of a letter
which she wrote about that time.

"As long as Marat lives there will never be any safety for the friends
of law and humanity."

From that negative conclusion to its positive, logical equivalent it
was but a step. That step she took. She may have considered awhile the
proposition thus presented to her, or resolve may have come to her with
realization. She understood that a great sacrifice was necessary; that
who undertook to rid France of that unclean monster must go prepared for
self-immolation. She counted the cost calmly and soberly--for calm and
sober was now her every act.

She made her packages, and set out one morning by the Paris coach from
Caen, leaving a note for her father, in which she had written:

"I am going to England, because I do not believe that it will be
possible for a long time to live happily and tranquilly in France. On
leaving I post this letter to you. When you receive it I shall no longer
be here. Heaven denied us the happiness of living together, as it has
denied us other happinesses. May it show itself more clement to our
country. Good-by, dear Father. Embrace my sister for me, and do not
forget me."

That was all. The fiction that she was going to England was intended to
save him pain. For she had so laid her plans that her identity should
remain undisclosed. She would seek Marat in the very Hall of the
Convention, and publicly slay him in his seat. Thus Paris should behold
Nemesis overtaking the false Republican in the very Assembly which he
corrupted, and anon should adduce a moral from the spectacle of the
monster's death. For herself she counted upon instant destruction at the
hands of the furious spectators. Thus, thinking to die unidentified,
she trusted that her father, hearing, as all France must hear, the great
tidings that Marat was dead, would never connect her with the instrument
of Fate shattered by the fury of the mob.

You realize, then, how great and how terrible was the purpose of
this maid of twenty-five, who so demurely took her seat in the Paris
diligence on that July morning of the Year 2 of the Republic--1793, old
style. She was becomingly dressed in brown cloth, a lace fichu folded
across her well-developed breast, a conical hat above her light brown
hair. She was of a good height and finely proportioned, and her carriage
as full of dignity as of grace. Her skin was of such white loveliness
that a contemporary compares it with the lily. Like Athene, she was
gray-eyed, and, like Athene, noble-featured, the oval of her face
squaring a little at the chin, in which there was a cleft. Calm was her
habit, calm her slow-moving eyes, calm and deliberate her movements, and
calm the mind reflected in all this.

And as the heavy diligence trundles out of Caen and takes the open
country and the Paris road, not even the thought of the errand upon
which she goes, of her death-dealing and death-receiving mission,
can shake that normal calm. Here is no wild exaltation, no hysterical
obedience to hotly-conceived impulse. Here is purpose, as cold as it
is lofty, to liberate France and pay with her life for the privilege of
doing so.

That lover of hers, whom we are presently to see, has compared her
ineptly with Joan of Arc, that other maid of France. But Joan moved with
pomp in a gorgeous pageantry, amid acclamations, sustained by the heady
wine of combat and of enthusiasm openly indulged, towards a goal of
triumph. Charlotte travelled quietly in the stuffy diligence with the
quiet conviction that her days were numbered.

So normal did she appear to her travelling companions, that one among
them, with an eye for beauty, pestered her with amorous attentions, and
actually proposed marriage to her before the coach had rolled over the
bridge of Neuilly into Paris two days later.

She repaired to the Providence Inn in the Rue des Vieux Augustine, where
she engaged a room on the first floor, and then she set out in quest of
the Deputy Duperret. She had a letter of introduction to him from the
Girondin Barbaroux, with whom she had been on friendly terms at Caen.
Duperret was to assist her to obtain an interview with the Minister of
the Interior. She had undertaken to see the latter on the subject of
certain papers relating to the affairs of a nun of Caen, an old convent
friend of her own, and she was in haste to discharge this errand, so as
to be free for the great task upon which she was come.

From inquiries that she made, she learnt at once that Marat was ill, and
confined to his house. This rendered necessary a change of plans, and
the relinquishing of her project of affording him a spectacular death in
the crowded hall of the Convention.

The next day, which was Friday, she devoted to furthering the business
of her friend the nun. On Saturday morning she rose early, and by
six o'clock she was walking in the cool gardens of the Palais Royal,
considering with that almost unnatural calm of hers the ways and means
of accomplishing her purpose in the unexpected conditions that she
found.

Towards eight o'clock, when Paris was awakening to the business of the
day and taking down its shutters, she entered a cutler's shop in the
Palais Royal, and bought for two francs a stout kitchen knife in
a shagreen case. She then returned to her hotel to breakfast, and
afterwards, dressed in her brown travelling-gown and conical hat, she
went forth again, and, hailing a hackney carnage, drove to Marat's house
in the Rue de l'Ecole de MÃ©decine.

But admittance to that squalid dwelling was denied her. The Citizen
Marat was ill, she was told, and could receive no visitors. It was
Simonne Everard, the triumvir's mistress--later to be known as the Widow
Marat--who barred her ingress with this message.

Checked, she drove back to the Providence Inn and wrote a letter to the
triumvir:

"Paris, 13th July, Year 2 of the Republic.

"Citizen,--I have arrived from Caen. Your love for your country leads me
to assume that you will be anxious to hear of the unfortunate events
which are taking place in that part of the Republic. I shall therefore
call upon you towards one o'clock. Have the kindness to receive me, and
accord me a moment's audience. I shall put you in the way of rendering a
great service to France.

"Marie Corday."


Having dispatched that letter to Marat, she sat until late afternoon
waiting vainly for an answer. Despairing at last of receiving any, she
wrote a second note, more peremptory in tone:

"I wrote to you this morning, Marat. Have you received my letter? May I
hope for a moment's audience? If you have received my letter, I hope you
will not refuse me, considering the importance of the matter. It should
suffice for you that I am very unfortunate to give me the right to your
protection."

Having changed into a gray-striped dimity gown--you observe this further
manifestation of a calm so complete that it admits of no departure from
the ordinary habits of life--she goes forth to deliver in person this
second letter, the knife concealed in the folds of the muslin fichu
crossed high upon her breast.

In a mean, brick-paved, ill-lighted, and almost unfurnished room of that
house in the Rue de l'Ecole de MÃ©decine, the People's Friend is seated
in a bath. It is no instinct of cleanliness he is obeying, for in all
France there is no man more filthy in his person and his habits than
this triumvir. His bath is medicated. The horrible, loathsome disease
that corrodes his flesh demands these long immersions to quiet the
gnawing pains which distract his active, restless mind. In these baths
he can benumb the torment of the body with which he is encumbered.

For Marat is an intellect, and nothing more--leastways, nothing more
that matters. What else there is to him of trunk and limbs and organs
he has neglected until it has all fallen into decay. His very lack of
personal cleanliness, the squalor in which he lives, the insufficient
sleep which he allows himself, his habit of careless feeding at
irregular intervals, all have their source in his contempt for
the physical part of him. This talented man of varied attainments,
accomplished linguist, skilled physician, able naturalist and profound
psychologist, lives in his intellect alone, impatient of all physical
interruptions. If he consents to these immersions, if he spends whole
days seated in this medicated bath, it is solely because it quenches or
cools the fires that are devouring him, and thus permits him to bend
his mind to the work that is his life. But his long-suffering body is
avenging upon the mind the neglect to which it has been submitted. The
morbid condition of the former is being communicated to the latter,
whence results that disconcerting admixture of cold, cynical cruelty and
exalted sensibility which marked his nature in the closing years of his
life.

In his bath, then, sat the People's Friend on that July evening,
immersed to the hips, his head swathed in a filthy turban, his emaciated
body cased in a sleeveless waistcoat. He is fifty years of age, dying of
consumption and other things, so that, did Charlotte but know it, there
is no need to murder him. Disease and Death have marked him for their
own, and grow impatient.

A board covering the bath served him for writing-table; an empty wooden
box at his side bore an inkstand, some pens, sheets of paper, and two or
three copies of L'Ami do Peuple. There was no sound in the room but the
scratch and splutter of his quill. He was writing diligently, revising
and editing a proof of the forthcoming issue of his paper.

A noise of voices raised in the outer room invaded the quiet in which he
was at work, and gradually penetrated his absorption, until it disturbed
and irritated him. He moved restlessly in his bath, listened a moment,
then, with intent to make an end of the interruption, he raised a
hoarse, croaking voice to inquire what might be taking place.

The door opened, and Simonne, his mistress and household drudge, entered
the room. She was fully twenty years younger than himself, and under the
slattern appearance which life in that house had imposed upon her there
were vestiges of a certain comeliness.

"There is a young woman here from Caen, who demands insistently to see
you upon a matter of national importance."

The dull eyes kindle at the mention of Caen; interest quickens in that
leaden-hued countenance. Was it not in Caen that those old foes of his,
the Girondins, were stirring up rebellion?

"She says," Simonne continued, "that she wrote a letter to you this
morning, and she brings you a second note herself. I have told her that
you will not receive anyone, and..."

"Give me the note," he snapped. Setting down his pen, he thrust out an
unclean paw to snatch the folded sheet from Simonne's hand. He spread
it, and read, his bloodless lips compressed, his eyes narrowing to
slits.

"Let her in," he commanded sharply, and Simonne obeyed him without more
ado. She admitted Charlotte, and left them alone together--the avenger
and her victim. For a moment each regarded the other. Marat beheld
a handsome young woman, elegantly attired. But these things had no
interest for the People's Friend. What to him was woman and the lure of
beauty? Charlotte beheld a feeble man of a repulsive hideousness, and
was full satisfied, for in this outward loathsomeness she imagined a
confirmation of the vileness of the mind she was come to blot out.

Then Marat spoke. "So you are from Caen, child?" he said. "And what is
doing in Caen that makes you so anxious to see me?"

She approached him.

"Rebellion is stirring there, Citizen Marat."

"Rebellion, ha!" It was a sound between a laugh and a croak. "Tell me
what deputies are sheltered in Caen. Come, child, their names." He took
up and dipped his quill, and drew a sheet of paper towards him.

She approached still nearer; she came to stand close beside him, erect
and calm. She recited the names of her friends, the Girondins, whilst
hunched there in his bath his pen scratched briskly.

"So many for the guillotine," he snarled, when it was done.

But whilst he was writing, she had drawn the knife from her fichu, and
as he uttered those words of doom to others his own doom descended upon
him in a lightning stroke. Straight driven by that strong young arm, the
long, stout blade was buried to its black hilt in his breast.

He looked at her with eyes in which there was a faint surprise as he
sank back. Then he raised his voice for the last time.

"Help, chÃ©re amie! Help!" he cried, and was for ever silent.

The hand still grasping the pen trailed on the ground beside the bath at
the end of his long, emaciated arm. His body sank sideways in the same
direction, the head lolling nervelessly upon his right shoulder, whilst
from the great rent in his breast the blood gushed forth, embruing
the water of his bath, trickling to the brick-paved floor,
bespattering--symbolically almost--a copy of L'Ami du Peuple, the
journal to which he had devoted so much of his uneasy life.

In answer to that cry of his came now Simonne in haste. A glance
sufficed to reveal to her the horrible event, and, like a tigress, she
sprang upon the unresisting slayer, seizing her by the head, and calling
loudly the while for assistance. Came instantly from the anteroom
Jeanne, the old cook, the Fortress of the house, and Laurent Basse, a
folder of Marat's paper; and now Charlotte found herself confronted
by four maddened, vociferous beings, at whose hands she may well have
expected to receive the death for which she was prepared.

Laurent, indeed, snatched up a chair, and felled her by a blow of it
across her head. He would, no doubt, have proceeded in his fury to
have battered her to death, but for the arrival of gens d'armes and the
police commissioner of the district, who took her in their protecting
charge.

The soul of Paris was convulsed by the tragedy when it became known.
All night terror and confusion were abroad. All night the revolutionary
rabble, in angry grief, surged about and kept watch upon the house
wherein the People's Friend lay dead.

That night, and for two days and nights thereafter, Charlotte Corday lay
in the Prison of the Abbaye, supporting with fortitude the indignities
that for a woman were almost inseparable from revolutionary
incarceration. She preserved throughout her imperturbable calm, based
now upon a state of mind content in the contemplation of accomplished
purpose, duty done. She had saved France, she believed; saved Liberty,
by slaying the man who would have strangled it. In that illusion she
was content. Her own life was a small price to pay for the splendid
achievement.

Some of her time of waiting she spent in writing letters to her friends,
in which tranquilly and sanely she dwelt upon what she had done,
expounding fully the motives that had impelled her, dwelling upon
the details of the execution, and of all that had followed. Among the
letters written by her during those "days of the preparation of peace
"--as she calls that period, dating in such terms a long epistle to
Barbaroux--was one to the Committee of Public Safety, in which she begs
that a miniature-painter may be sent to her to paint her portrait, so
that she may leave this token of remembrance to her friends. It is only
in this, as the end approaches, that we see in her conduct any thought
for her own self, any suggestion that she is anything more than a
instrument in the hands of Fate.

On the 15th, at eight o'clock in the morning, her trial began before the
Revolutionary Tribunal. A murmur ran through the hall as she appeared in
her gown of grey-striped dimity, composed and calm--always calm.

The trial opened with the examination of witnesses; into that of the
cutler, who had sold her the knife, she broke impatiently.

"These details are a waste of time. It is I who killed Marat."

The audience gasped, and rumbled ominously. Montane turned to examine
her.

"What was the object of your visit to Paris?" he asks.

"To kill Marat."

"What motives induced you to this horrible deed?"

"His many crimes."

"Of what crimes do you accuse him?"

"That he instigated the massacre of September; that he kept alive the
fires of civil war, so that he might be elected dictator; that he sought
to infringe upon the sovereignty of the People by causing the arrest and
imprisonment of the deputies to the Convention on May 31st."

"What proof have you of this?"

"The future will afford the proof. Marat hid his designs behind a mask
of patriotism."

Montane shifted the ground of his interrogatory.

"Who were your accomplices in this atrocious act?"

"I have none."

Montane shook his head. "You cannot convince anyone that a person of
your age and sex could have conceived such a crime unless instigated by
some person or persons whom you are unwilling to name."

Charlotte almost smiled. "That shows but a poor knowledge of the human
heart. It is easier to carry out such a project upon the strength of
one's own hatred than upon that of others." And then, raising her voice,
she proclaimed: "I killed one man to save a hundred thousand; I killed
a villain to save innocents; I killed a savage Wild-beast to give repose
to France. I was a Republican before the Revolution. I never lacked for
energy."

What more was there to say? Her guilt was completely established. Her
fearless self-obssession was not to be ruffled. Yet Fouquier-Tinville,
the dread prosecutor, made the attempt. Beholding her so virginal and
fair and brave, feeling perhaps that the Tribunal had not had the best
of it, he sought with a handful of revolutionary filth to restore the
balance. He rose slowly, his ferrety eyes upon her.

"How many children have you had?" he rasped, sardonic, his tone a slur,
an insult.

Faintly her cheeks crimsoned. But her voice was composed, disdainful, as
she answered coldly:

"Have I not stated that I am not married?"

A leer, a dry laugh, a shrug from Tinville to complete the impression he
sought to convey, and he sat down again.

It was the turn of Chauveau de la Garde, the advocate instructed
to defend her. But what defence was possible? And Chauveau had been
intimidated. He had received a note from the jury ordering him to remain
silent, another from the President bidding him declare her mad.

Yet Chauveau took a middle course. His brief speech is admirable; it
satisfied his self-respect, without derogating from his client. It
uttered the whole truth.

"The prisoner," he said, "confesses with calm the horrible crime she has
committed; she confesses with calm its premeditation; she confesses its
most dreadful details; in short, she confesses everything, and does
not seek to justify herself. That, citizens of the jury, is her whole
defence. This imperturbable calm, this utter abnegation of self, which
displays no remorse even in the very presence of death, are contrary
to nature. They can only be explained by the excitement of political
fanaticism which armed her hand. It is for you, citizens of the jury, to
judge what weight that moral consideration should have in the scales of
justice."

The jury voted her guilty, and Tinville rose to demand the full sentence
of the law.

It was the end. She was removed to the Conciergerie, the antechamber
of the guillotine. A constitutional priest was sent to her, but
she dismissed him with thanks, not requiring his ministrations.
She preferred the painter Hauer, who had received the Revolutionary
Tribunal's permission to paint her portrait in accordance with her
request. And during the sitting, which lasted half an hour, she
conversed with him quietly on ordinary topics, the tranquillity of
her spirit unruffled by any fear of the death that was so swiftly
approaching.

The door opened, and Sanson, the public executioner, came in. He carried
the red smock worn by those convicted of assassination. She showed no
dismay; no more, indeed, than a faint surprise that the time spent with
Hauer should have gone so quickly. She begged for a few moments in
which to write a note, and, the request being granted, acquitted herself
briskly of that task, then announcing herself ready, she removed her
cap that Sanson might cut her luxuriant hair. Yet first, taking
his scissors, she herself cut off a lock and gave it to Hauer for
remembrance. When Sanson would have bound her hands, she begged that she
might be allowed to wear gloves, as her wrists were bruised and cut by
the cord with which she had been pinioned in Marat's house. He answered
that she might do so if she wished, but that it was unnecessary, as he
could bind her without causing pain.

"To be sure," she said, "those others had not your experience," and she
proffered her bare wrists to his cord without further demur. "If this
toilet of death is performed by rude hands," she commented, "at least it
leads to immortality."

She mounted the tumbril awaiting in the prison yard, and, disdaining
the chair offered her by Sanson, remained standing, to show herself
dauntless to the mob and brave its rage. And fierce was that rage,
indeed. So densely thronged were the streets that the tumbril proceeded
at a crawl, and the people surging about the cart screamed death and
insult at the doomed woman. It took two hours to reach the Place de la
RÃ©volution, and meanwhile a terrific summer thunderstorm had broken
over Paris, and a torrential rain had descended upon the densely packed
streets. Charlotte's garments were soaked through and through, so that
her red smock, becoming glued now to her body and fitting her like a
skin, threw into relief its sculptural beauty, whilst a reflection of
the vivid crimson of the garment faintly tinged her cheeks, and thus
heightened her appearance of complete composure.

And it is now in the Rue St. HonorÃ© that at long last we reach the
opening of our tragic love-story.

A tall, slim, fair young man, named Adam Lux--sent to Paris by the
city of Mayence as Deputy Extraordinary to the National Convention--was
standing there in the howling press of spectators. He was an
accomplished, learned young gentleman, doctor at once of philosophy
and of medicine, although in the latter capacity he had never practiced
owing to an extreme sensibility of nature, which rendered anatomical
work repugnant to him. He was a man of a rather exalted imagination,
unhappily married--the not uncommon fate of such delicate
temperaments--and now living apart from his wife. He had heard, as all
Paris had heard, every detail of the affair, and of the trial, and he
waited there, curious to see this woman, with whose deed he was secretly
in sympathy.

The tumbril slowly approached, the groans and execrations swelled up
around him, and at last he beheld her--beautiful, serene, full of
life, a still smile upon her lips. For a long moment he gazed upon her,
standing as if stricken into stone. Then heedless of those about him,
he bared his head, and thus silently saluted and paid homage to her. She
did not see him. He had not thought that she would. He saluted her as
the devout salute the unresponsive image of a saint. The tumbril crawled
on. He turned his head, and followed her with his eyes for awhile; then,
driving his elbows into the ribs of those about him, he clove himself a
passage through the throng, and so followed, bare-headed now, with fixed
gaze, a man entranced.

He was at the foot of the scaffold when her head fell. To the last he
had seen that noble countenance preserve its immutable calm, and in
the hush that followed the sibilant fall of the great knife his voice
suddenly rang out.

"She is greater than Brutus!" was his cry; and he added, addressing
those who stared at him in stupefaction: "It were beautiful to have died
with her!"

He was suffered to depart unmolested. Chiefly, perhaps because at that
moment the attention of the crowd was upon the executioner's attendant,
who, in holding up Charlotte's truncated head, slapped the cheek with
his hand. The story runs that the dead face reddened under the blow.
Scientists of the day disputed over this, some arguing from it a proof
that consciousness does not at once depart the brain upon decapitation.

That night, while Paris slept, its walls were secretly placarded with
copies of a eulogy of Charlotte Corday, the martyr of Republicanism, the
deliverer of France, in which occurs the comparison with Joan of Arc,
that other great heroine of France. This was the work of Adam Lux.
He made no secret of it. The vision of her had so wrought upon the
imagination of this susceptible dreamer, had fired his spirit with such
enthusiasm, that he was utterly reckless in yielding to his emotions, in
expressing the phrenetic, immaterial love with which in her last moments
of life she had inspired him.

Two days after her execution he issued a long manifesto, in which he
urged the purity of her motive as the fullest justification of her act,
placed her on the level of Brutus and Cato, and passionately demanded
for her the honour and veneration of posterity. It is in this manifesto
that he applies euphemistically to her deed the term "tyrannicide." That
document he boldly signed with his own name, realizing that he would pay
for that temerity with his life.

He was arrested on the 24th of July--exactly a week from the day on
which he had seen her die. He had powerful friends, and they exerted
themselves to obtain for him a promise of pardon and release if he would
publicly retract what he had written. But he laughed the proposal to
scorn, ardently resolved to follow into death the woman who had aroused
the hopeless, immaterial love that made his present torment.

Still his friends strove for him. His trial was put off. A doctor named
Wetekind was found to testify that Adam Lux was mad, that the sight of
Charlotte Corday had turned his head. He wrote a paper on this plea,
recommending that clemency be shown to the young doctor on the score of
his affliction, and that he should be sent to a hospital or to America.
Adam Lux was angry when he heard of this, and protested indignantly
against the allegations of Dr. Wetekind. He wrote to the Journal de la
Montagne, which published his declaration on the 26th of September, to
the effect that he was not mad enough to desire to live, and that his
anxiety to meet death half-way was a crowning proof of his sanity.

He languished on in the prison of La Force until the 10th of October,
when at last he was brought to trial. He stood it joyously, in a mood of
exultation at his approaching deliverance. He assured the court that he
did not fear the guillotine, and that all ignominy had been removed from
such a death by the pure blood of Charlotte.

They sentenced him to death, and he thanked them for the boon.

"Forgive me, sublime Charlotte," he exclaimed, "if I should find it
impossible to exhibit at the last the courage and gentleness that were
yours. I glory in your superiority, for it is right that the adored
should be above the adorer."

Yet his courage did not fail him. Far from it, indeed; if hers had
been a mood of gentle calm, his was one of ecstatic exaltation. At five
o'clock that same afternoon he stepped from the tumbril under the gaunt
shadow of the guillotine. He turned to the people, his eyes bright, a
flush on his cheeks.

"At last I am to have the happiness of dying for Charlotte," he told
them, and mounted the scaffold with the eager step of the bridegroom on
his way to the nuptial altar.



