
Vailima Letters




CHAPTER I



IN THE MOUNTAIN, APIA, SAMOA,
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 2ND, 1890


MY DEAR COLVIN, - This is a hard and interesting and 
beautiful life that we lead now.  Our place is in a deep 
cleft of Vaea Mountain, some six hundred feet above the sea, 
embowered in forest, which is our strangling enemy, and which 
we combat with axes and dollars.  I went crazy over outdoor 
work, and had at last to confine myself to the house, or 
literature must have gone by the board.  NOTHING is so 
interesting as weeding, clearing, and path-making; the 
oversight of labourers becomes a disease; it is quite an 
effort not to drop into the farmer; and it does make you feel 
so well.  To come down covered with mud and drenched with 
sweat and rain after some hours in the bush, change, rub 
down, and take a chair in the verandah, is to taste a quiet 
conscience.  And the strange thing that I mark is this: If I 
go out and make sixpence, bossing my labourers and plying the 
cutlass or the spade, idiot conscience applauds me; if I sit 
in the house and make twenty pounds, idiot conscience wails 
over my neglect and the day wasted.  For near a fortnight I 
did not go beyond the verandah; then I found my rush of work 
run out, and went down for the night to Apia; put in Sunday 
afternoon with our consul, 'a nice young man,' dined with my 
friend H. J. Moors in the evening, went to church - no less - 
at the white and half-white church - I had never been before, 
and was much interested; the woman I sat next LOOKED a full-
blood native, and it was in the prettiest and readiest 
English that she sang the hymns; back to Moors', where we 
yarned of the islands, being both wide wanderers, till bed-
time; bed, sleep, breakfast, horse saddled; round to the 
mission, to get Mr. Clarke to be my interpreter; over with 
him to the King's, whom I have not called on since my return; 
received by that mild old gentleman; have some interesting 
talk with him about Samoan superstitions and my land - the 
scene of a great battle in his (Malietoa Laupepa's) youth - 
the place which we have cleared the platform of his fort - 
the gulley of the stream full of dead bodies - the fight 
rolled off up Vaea mountain-side; back with Clarke to the 
Mission; had a bit of lunch and consulted over a queer point 
of missionary policy just arisen, about our new Town Hall and 
the balls there - too long to go into, but a quaint example 
of the intricate questions which spring up daily in the 
missionary path.

Then off up the hill; Jack very fresh, the sun (close on 
noon) staring hot, the breeze very strong and pleasant; the 
ineffable green country all round - gorgeous little birds (I 
think they are humming birds, but they say not) skirmishing 
in the wayside flowers.  About a quarter way up I met a 
native coming down with the trunk of a cocoa palm across his 
shoulder; his brown breast glittering with sweat and oil: 
'Talofa' - 'Talofa, alii - You see that white man?  He speak 
for you.'  'White man he gone up here?' - 'Ioe (Yes)' - 
'Tofa, alii' - 'Tofa, soifua!'  I put on Jack up the steep 
path, till he is all as white as shaving stick - Brown's 
euxesis, wish I had some - past Tanugamanono, a bush village 
- see into the houses as I pass - they are open sheds 
scattered on a green - see the brown folk sitting there, 
suckling kids, sleeping on their stiff wooden pillows - then 
on through the wood path - and here I find the mysterious 
white man (poor devil!) with his twenty years' certificate of 
good behaviour as a book-keeper, frozen out by the strikes in 
the colonies, come up here on a chance, no work to be found, 
big hotel bill, no ship to leave in - and come up to beg 
twenty dollars because he heard I was a Scotchman, offering 
to leave his portmanteau in pledge.  Settle this, and on 
again; and here my house comes in view, and a war whoop 
fetches my wife and Henry (or Simele), our Samoan boy, on the 
front balcony; and I am home again, and only sorry that I 
shall have to go down again to Apia this day week.  I could, 
and would, dwell here unmoved, but there are things to be 
attended to.

Never say I don't give you details and news.  That is a 
picture of a letter.

I have been hard at work since I came; three chapters of THE 
WRECKER, and since that, eight of the South Sea book, and, 
along and about and in between, a hatful of verses.  Some day 
I'll send the verse to you, and you'll say if any of it is 
any good.  I have got in a better vein with the South Sea 
book, as I think you will see; I think these chapters will do 
for the volume without much change.  Those that I did in the 
JANET NICOLL, under the most ungodly circumstances, I fear 
will want a lot of suppling and lightening, but I hope to 
have your remarks in a month or two upon that point.  It 
seems a long while since I have heard from you.  I do hope 
you are well.  I am wonderful, but tired from so much work; 
'tis really immense what I have done; in the South Sea book I 
have fifty pages copied fair, some of which has been four 
times, and all twice written, certainly fifty pages of solid 
scriving inside a fortnight, but I was at it by seven a.m. 
till lunch, and from two till four or five every day; between 
whiles, verse and blowing on the flageolet; never outside.  
If you could see this place! but I don't want any one to see 
it till my clearing is done, and my house built.  It will be 
a home for angels.

So far I wrote after my bit of dinner, some cold meat and 
bananas, on arrival.  Then out to see where Henry and some of 
the men were clearing the garden; for it was plain there was 
to be no work to-day indoors, and I must set in consequence 
to farmering.  I stuck a good while on the way up, for the 
path there is largely my own handiwork, and there were a lot 
of sprouts and saplings and stones to be removed.  Then I 
reached our clearing just where the streams join in one; it 
had a fine autumn smell of burning, the smoke blew in the 
woods, and the boys were pretty merry and busy.  Now I had a 
private design:-

[Map which cannot be reproduced]

The Vaita'e I had explored pretty far up; not yet the other 
stream, the Vaituliga (g=nasal n, as ng in sing); and up 
that, with my wood knife, I set off alone.  It is here quite 
dry; it went through endless woods; about as broad as a 
Devonshire lane, here and there crossed by fallen trees; huge 
trees overhead in the sun, dripping lianas and tufted with 
orchids, tree ferns, ferns depending with air roots from the 
steep banks, great arums - I had not skill enough to say if 
any of them were the edible kind, one of our staples here! - 
hundreds of bananas - another staple - and alas!  I had skill 
enough to know all of these for the bad kind that bears no 
fruit.  My Henry moralised over this the other day; how hard 
it was that the bad banana flourished wild, and the good must 
be weeded and tended; and I had not the heart to tell him how 
fortunate they were here, and how hungry were other lands by 
comparison.  The ascent of this lovely lane of my dry stream 
filled me with delight.  I could not but be reminded of old 
Mayne Reid, as I have been more than once since I came to the 
tropics; and I thought, if Reid had been still living, I 
would have written to tell him that, for, me, IT HAD COME 
TRUE; and I thought, forbye, that, if the great powers go on 
as they are going, and the Chief Justice delays, it would 
come truer still; and the war-conch will sound in the hills, 
and my home will be inclosed in camps, before the year is 
ended.  And all at once - mark you, how Mayne Reid is on the 
spot - a strange thing happened.  I saw a liana stretch 
across the bed of the brook about breast-high, swung up my 
knife to sever it, and - behold, it was a wire!  On either 
hand it plunged into thick bush; to-morrow I shall see where 
it goes and get a guess perhaps of what it means.  To-day I 
know no more than - there it is.  A little higher the brook 
began to trickle, then to fill.  At last, as I meant to do 
some work upon the homeward trail, it was time to turn.  I 
did not return by the stream; knife in hand, as long as my 
endurance lasted, I was to cut a path in the congested bush.

At first it went ill with me; I got badly stung as high as 
the elbows by the stinging plant; I was nearly hung in a 
tough liana - a rotten trunk giving way under my feet; it was 
deplorable bad business.  And an axe - if I dared swing one - 
would have been more to the purpose than my cutlass.  Of a 
sudden things began to go strangely easier; I found stumps, 
bushing out again; my body began to wonder, then my mind; I 
raised my eyes and looked ahead; and, by George, I was no 
longer pioneering, I had struck an old track overgrown, and 
was restoring an old path.  So I laboured till I was in such 
a state that Carolina Wilhelmina Skeggs could scarce have 
found a name for it.  Thereon desisted; returned to the 
stream; made my way down that stony track to the garden, 
where the smoke was still hanging and the sun was still in 
the high tree-tops, and so home.  Here, fondly supposing my 
long day was over, I rubbed down; exquisite agony; water 
spreads the poison of these weeds; I got it all over my 
hands, on my chest, in my eyes, and presently, while eating 
an orange, A LA Raratonga, burned my lip and eye with orange 
juice.  Now, all day, our three small pigs had been adrift, 
to the mortal peril of our corn, lettuce, onions, etc., and 
as I stood smarting on the back verandah, behold the three 
piglings issuing from the wood just opposite.  Instantly I 
got together as many boys as I could - three, and got the 
pigs penned against the rampart of the sty, till the others 
joined; whereupon we formed a cordon, closed, captured the 
deserters, and dropped them, squeaking amain, into their 
strengthened barracks where, please God, they may now stay!

Perhaps you may suppose the day now over; you are not the 
head of a plantation, my juvenile friend.  Politics 
succeeded: Henry got adrift in his English, Bene was too 
cowardly to tell me what he was after: result, I have lost 
seven good labourers, and had to sit down and write to you to 
keep my temper.  Let me sketch my lads. - Henry - Henry has 
gone down to town or I could not be writing to you - this 
were the hour of his English lesson else, when he learns what 
he calls 'long expessions' or 'your chief's language' for the 
matter of an hour and a half - Henry is a chiefling from 
Savaii; I once loathed, I now like and - pending fresh 
discoveries - have a kind of respect for Henry.  He does good 
work for us; goes among the labourers, bossing and watching; 
helps Fanny; is civil, kindly, thoughtful; O SI SIC SEMPER!  
But will he be 'his sometime self throughout the year'?  
Anyway, he has deserved of us, and he must disappoint me 
sharply ere I give him up. - Bene - or Peni-Ben, in plain 
English - is supposed to be my ganger; the Lord love him!  
God made a truckling coward, there is his full history.  He 
cannot tell me what he wants; he dares not tell me what is 
wrong; he dares not transmit my orders or translate my 
censures.  And with all this, honest, sober, industrious, 
miserably smiling over the miserable issue of his own 
unmanliness. - Paul - a German - cook and steward - a glutton 
of work - a splendid fellow; drawbacks, three: (1) no cook; 
(2) an inveterate bungler; a man with twenty thumbs, 
continually falling in the dishes, throwing out the dinner, 
preserving the garbage; (3) a dr-, well, don't let us say 
that - but we daren't let him go to town, and he - poor, good 
soul - is afraid to be let go. - Lafaele (Raphael), a strong, 
dull, deprecatory man; splendid with an axe, if watched; the 
better for a rowing, when he calls me 'Papa' in the most 
wheedling tones; desperately afraid of ghosts, so that he 
dare not walk alone up in the banana patch - see map.  The 
rest are changing labourers; and to-night, owing to the 
miserable cowardice of Peni, who did not venture to tell me 
what the men wanted - and which was no more than fair - all 
are gone - and my weeding in the article of being finished!  
Pity the sorrows of a planter.

I am, Sir, yours, and be jowned to you, The Planter,
R. L. S.


Tuesday 3rd


I begin to see the whole scheme of letter-writing; you sit 
down every day and pour out an equable stream of twaddle.

This morning all my fears were fled, and all the trouble had 
fallen to the lot of Peni himself, who deserved it; my field 
was full of weeders; and I am again able to justify the ways 
of God.  All morning I worked at the South Seas, and finished 
the chapter I had stuck upon on Saturday.  Fanny, awfully 
hove-to with rheumatics and injuries received upon the field 
of sport and glory, chasing pigs, was unable to go up and 
down stairs, so she sat upon the back verandah, and my work 
was chequered by her cries.  'Paul, you take a spade to do 
that - dig a hole first.  If you do that, you'll cut your 
foot off!  Here, you boy, what you do there?  You no get 
work?  You go find Simele; he give you work.  Peni, you tell 
this boy he go find Simele; suppose Simele no give him work, 
you tell him go 'way.  I no want him here.  That boy no 
good.' - PENI (from the distance in reassuring tones), 'All 
right, sir!' - FANNY (after a long pause), 'Peni, you tell 
that boy go find Simele!  I no want him stand here all day.  
I no pay that boy.  I see him all day.  He no do nothing.' - 
Luncheon, beef, soda-scones, fried bananas, pine-apple in 
claret, coffee.  Try to write a poem; no go.  Play the 
flageolet.  Then sneakingly off to farmering and pioneering.  
Four gangs at work on our place; a lively scene; axes 
crashing and smoke blowing; all the knives are out.  But I 
rob the garden party of one without a stock, and you should 
see my hand - cut to ribbons.  Now I want to do my path up 
the Vaituliga single-handed, and I want it to burst on the 
public complete.  Hence, with devilish ingenuity, I begin it 
at different places; so that if you stumble on one section, 
you may not even then suspect the fulness of my labours.  
Accordingly, I started in a new place, below the wire, and 
hoping to work up to it.  It was perhaps lucky I had so bad a 
cutlass, and my smarting hand bid me stay before I had got up 
to the wire, but just in season, so that I was only the 
better of my activity, not dead beat as yesterday.

A strange business it was, and infinitely solitary; away 
above, the sun was in the high tree-tops; the lianas noosed 
and sought to hang me; the saplings struggled, and came up 
with that sob of death that one gets to know so well; great, 
soft, sappy trees fell at a lick of the cutlass, little tough 
switches laughed at and dared my best endeavour.  Soon, 
toiling down in that pit of verdure, I heard blows on the far 
side, and then laughter.  I confess a chill settled on my 
heart.

Being so dead alone, in a place where by rights none should 
be beyond me, I was aware, upon interrogation, if those blows 
had drawn nearer, I should (of course quite unaffectedly) 
have executed a strategic movement to the rear; and only the 
other day I was lamenting my insensibility to superstition!  
Am I beginning to be sucked in?  Shall I become a midnight 
twitterer like my neighbours?  At times I thought the blows 
were echoes; at times I thought the laughter was from birds.  
For our birds are strangely human in their calls.  Vaea 
mountain about sundown sometimes rings with shrill cries, 
like the hails of merry, scattered children.  As a matter of 
fact, I believe stealthy wood-cutters from Tanugamanono were 
above me in the wood and answerable for the blows; as for the 
laughter, a woman and two children had come and asked Fanny's 
leave to go up shrimp-fishing in the burn; beyond doubt, it 
was these I heard.  Just at the right time I returned; to 
wash down, change, and begin this snatch of letter before 
dinner was ready, and to finish it afterwards, before Henry 
has yet put in an appearance for his lesson in 'long 
explessions.'

Dinner: stewed beef and potatoes, baked bananas, new loaf-
bread hot from the oven, pine-apple in claret.  These are 
great days; we have been low in the past; but now are we as 
belly-gods, enjoying all things.


WEDNESDAY.  (HIST. VAILIMA RESUMED.)


A gorgeous evening of after-glow in the great tree-tops and 
behind the mountain, and full moon over the lowlands and the 
sea, inaugurated a night of horrid cold.  To you effete 
denizens of the so-called temperate zone, it had seemed 
nothing; neither of us could sleep; we were up seeking extra 
coverings, I know not at what hour - it was as bright as day.  
The moon right over Vaea - near due west, the birds strangely 
silent, and the wood of the house tingling with cold; I 
believe it must have been 60 degrees!  Consequence; Fanny has 
a headache and is wretched, and I could do no work.  (I am 
trying all round for a place to hold my pen; you will hear 
why later on; this to explain penmanship.)  I wrote two 
pages, very bad, no movement, no life or interest; then I 
wrote a business letter; then took to tootling on the 
flageolet, till glory should call me farmering.

I took up at the fit time Lafaele and Mauga - Mauga, accent 
on the first, is a mountain, I don't know what Mauga means - 
mind what I told you of the value of g - to the garden, and 
set them digging, then turned my attention to the path.  I 
could not go into my bush path for two reasons: 1st, sore 
hands; 2nd, had on my trousers and good shoes.  Lucky it was.  
Right in the wild lime hedge which cuts athwart us just 
homeward of the garden, I found a great bed of kuikui - 
sensitive plant - our deadliest enemy.  A fool brought it to 
this island in a pot, and used to lecture and sentimentalise 
over the tender thing.  The tender thing has now taken charge 
of this island, and men fight it, with torn hands, for bread 
and life.  A singular, insidious thing, shrinking and biting 
like a weasel; clutching by its roots as a limpet clutches to 
a rock.  As I fought him, I bettered some verses in my poem, 
the WOODMAN; the only thought I gave to letters.  Though the 
kuikui was thick, there was but a small patch of it, and when 
I was done I attacked the wild lime, and had a hand-to-hand 
skirmish with its spines and elastic suckers.  All this time, 
close by, in the cleared space of the garden, Lafaele and 
Mauga were digging.  Suddenly quoth Lafaele, 'Somebody he 
sing out.' - 'Somebody he sing out?  All right.  I go.'  And 
I went and found they had been whistling and 'singing out' 
for long, but the fold of the hill and the uncleared bush 
shuts in the garden so that no one heard, and I was late for 
dinner, and Fanny's headache was cross; and when the meal was 
over, we had to cut up a pineapple which was going bad, to 
make jelly of; and the next time you have a handful of broken 
blood-blisters, apply pine-apple juice, and you will give me 
news of it, and I request a specimen of your hand of write 
five minutes after - the historic moment when I tackled this 
history.  My day so far.

Fanny was to have rested.  Blessed Paul began making a duck-
house; she let him be; the duck-house fell down, and she had 
to set her hand to it.  He was then to make a drinking-place 
for the pigs; she let him be again - he made a stair by which 
the pigs will probably escape this evening, and she was near 
weeping.  Impossible to blame the indefatigable fellow; 
energy is too rare and goodwill too noble a thing to 
discourage; but it's trying when she wants a rest.  Then she 
had to cook the dinner; then, of course - like a fool and a 
woman - must wait dinner for me, and make a flurry of 
herself.  Her day so far.  CETERA ADHUC DESUNT.


FRIDAY - I THINK.


I have been too tired to add to this chronicle, which will at 
any rate give you some guess of our employment.  All goes 
well; the kuikui - (think of this mispronunciation having 
actually infected me to the extent of misspelling! tuitui is 
the word by rights) - the tuitui is all out of the paddock - 
a fenced park between the house and boundary; Peni's men 
start to-day on the road; the garden is part burned, part 
dug; and Henry, at the head of a troop of underpaid 
assistants, is hard at work clearing.  The part clearing you 
will see from the map; from the house run down to the stream 
side, up the stream nearly as high as the garden; then back 
to the star which I have just added to the map.

My long, silent contests in the forest have had a strange 
effect on me.  The unconcealed vitality of these vegetables, 
their exuberant number and strength, the attempts - I can use 
no other word - of lianas to enwrap and capture the intruder, 
the awful silence, the knowledge that all my efforts are only 
like the performance of an actor, the thing of a moment, and 
the wood will silently and swiftly heal them up with fresh 
effervescence; the cunning sense of the tuitui, suffering 
itself to be touched with wind-swayed grasses and not minding 
- but let the grass be moved by a man, and it shuts up; the 
whole silent battle, murder, and slow death of the contending 
forest; weigh upon the imagination.  My poem the WOODMAN 
stands; but I have taken refuge in a new story, which just 
shot through me like a bullet in one of my moments of awe, 
alone in that tragic jungle:-


THE HIGH WOODS OF ULUFANUA.

1. A South Sea Bridal.
2. Under the Ban.
3. Savao and Faavao.
4. Cries in the High Wood.
5. Rumour full of Tongues.
6. The Hour of Peril.
7. The Day of Vengeance.


It is very strange, very extravagant, I daresay; but it's 
varied, and picturesque, and has a pretty love affair, and 
ends well.  Ulufanua is a lovely Samoan word, ulu=grove; 
fanua=land; grove-land - 'the tops of the high trees.'  
Savao, 'sacred to the wood,' and Faavao, 'wood-ways,' are the 
names of two of the characters, Ulufanua the name of the 
supposed island.

I am very tired, and rest off to-day from all but letters.  
Fanny is quite done up; she could not sleep last night, 
something it seemed like asthma - I trust not.  I suppose 
Lloyd will be about, so you can give him the benefit of this 
long scrawl.  Never say that I CAN'T write a letter, say that 
I don't. - Yours ever, my dearest fellow,
R. L. S.


LATER ON FRIDAY.


The guid wife had bread to bake, and she baked it in a pan, 
O!  But between whiles she was down with me weeding sensitive 
in the paddock.  The men have but now passed over it; I was 
round in that very place to see the weeding was done 
thoroughly, and already the reptile springs behind our heels.  
Tuitui is a truly strange beast, and gives food for thought.  
I am nearly sure - I cannot yet be quite, I mean to 
experiment, when I am less on the hot chase of the beast - 
that, even at the instant he shrivels up his leaves, he 
strikes his prickles downward so as to catch the uprooting 
finger; instinctive, say the gabies; but so is man's impulse 
to strike out.  One thing that takes and holds me is to see 
the strange variation in the propagation of alarm among these 
rooted beasts; at times it spreads to a radius (I speak by 
the guess of the eye) of five or six inches; at times only 
one individual plant appears frightened at a time.  We tried 
how long it took one to recover; 'tis a sanguine creature; it 
is all abroad again before (I guess again) two minutes.  It 
is odd how difficult in this world it is to be armed.  The 
double armour of this plant betrays it.  In a thick tuft, 
where the leaves disappear, I thrust in my hand, and the bite 
of the thorns betrays the topmost stem.  In the open again, 
and when I hesitate if it be clover, a touch on the leaves, 
and its fine sense and retractile action betrays its identity 
at once.  Yet it has one gift incomparable.  Rome had virtue 
and knowledge; Rome perished.  The sensitive plant has 
indigestible seeds - so they say - and it will flourish for 
ever.  I give my advice thus to a young plant - have a strong 
root, a weak stem, and an indigestible seed; so you will 
outlast the eternal city, and your progeny will clothe 
mountains, and the irascible planter will blaspheme in vain.  
The weak point of tuitui is that its stem is strong.


SUPPLEMENTARY PAGE.


Here beginneth the third lesson, which is not from the 
planter but from a less estimable character, the writer of 
books.

I want you to understand about this South Sea Book.  The job 
is immense; I stagger under material.  I have seen the first 
big TACHE.  It was necessary to see the smaller ones; the 
letters were at my hand for the purpose, but I was not going 
to lose this experience; and, instead of writing mere 
letters, have poured out a lot of stuff for the book.  How 
this works and fits, time is to show.  But I believe, in 
time, I shall get the whole thing in form.  Now, up to date, 
that is all my design, and I beg to warn you till we have the 
whole (or much) of the stuff together, you can hardly judge - 
and I can hardly judge.  Such a mass of stuff is to be 
handled, if possible without repetition - so much foreign 
matter to be introduced - if possible with perspicuity - and, 
as much as can be, a spirit of narrative to be preserved.  
You will find that come stronger as I proceed, and get the 
explanations worked through.  Problems of style are (as yet) 
dirt under my feet; my problem is architectural, creative - 
to get this stuff jointed and moving.  If I can do that, I 
will trouble you for style; anybody might write it, and it 
would be splendid; well-engineered, the masses right, the 
blooming thing travelling - twig?

This I wanted you to understand, for lots of the stuff sent 
home is, I imagine, rot - and slovenly rot - and some of it 
pompous rot; and I want you to understand it's a LAY-IN.

Soon, if the tide of poeshie continues, I'll send you a whole 
lot to damn.  You never said thank-you for the handsome 
tribute addressed to you from Apemama; such is the gratitude 
of the world to the God-sent poick.  Well, well:- 'Vex not 
thou the poick's mind, With thy coriaceous ingratitude, The 
P. will be to your faults more than a little blind, And yours 
is a far from handsome attitude.'  Having thus dropped into 
poetry in a spirit of friendship, I have the honour to 
subscribe myself, Sir,

Your obedient humble servant,
SILAS WEGG.


I suppose by this you will have seen the lad - and his feet 
will have been in the Monument - and his eyes beheld the face 
of George.  Well!

There is much eloquence in a well!
I am, Sir
Yours

The Epigrammatist

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

FINIS - EXPLICIT



CHAPTER II



VAILIMA, TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 25TH, 1890.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - I wanted to go out bright and early to go 
on with my survey.  You never heard of that.  The world has 
turned, and much water run under bridges, since I stopped my 
diary.  I have written six more chapters of the book, all 
good I potently believe, and given up, as a deception of the 
devil's, the High Woods.  I have been once down to Apia, to a 
huge native feast at Seumanutafa's, the chief of Apia.  There 
was a vast mass of food, crowds of people, the police 
charging among them with whips, the whole in high good humour 
on both sides; infinite noise; and a historic event - Mr. 
Clarke, the missionary, and his wife, assisted at a native 
dance.  On my return from this function, I found work had 
stopped; no more South Seas in my belly.  Well, Henry had 
cleared a great deal of our bush on a contract, and it ought 
to be measured.  I set myself to the task with a tape-line; 
it seemed a dreary business; then I borrowed a prismatic 
compass, and tackled the task afresh.  I have no books; I had 
not touched an instrument nor given a thought to the business 
since the year of grace 1871; you can imagine with what 
interest I sat down yesterday afternoon to reduce my 
observations; five triangles I had taken; all five came 
right, to my ineffable joy.  Our dinner - the lowest we have 
ever been - consisted of ONE AVOCADO PEAR between Fanny and 
me, a ship's biscuit for the guidman, white bread for the 
Missis, and red wine for the twa.  No salt horse, even, in 
all Vailima!  After dinner Henry came, and I began to teach 
him decimals; you wouldn't think I knew them myself after so 
long desuetude!

I could not but wonder how Henry stands his evenings here; 
the Polynesian loves gaiety - I feed him with decimals, the 
mariner's compass, derivations, grammar, and the like; 
delecting myself, after the manner of my race, MOULT 
TRISTEMENT.  I suck my paws; I live for my dexterities and by 
my accomplishments; even my clumsinesses are my joy - my 
woodcuts, my stumbling on the pipe, this surveying even - and 
even weeding sensitive; anything to do with the mind, with 
the eye, with the hand - with a part of ME; diversion flows 
in these ways for the dreary man.  But gaiety is what these 
children want; to sit in a crowd, tell stories and pass 
jests, to hear one another laugh and scamper with the girls.  
It's good fun, too, I believe, but not for R. L. S., AETAT. 
40.  Which I am now past forty, Custodian, and not one penny 
the worse that I can see; as amusable as ever; to be on board 
ship is reward enough for me; give me the wages of going on - 
in a schooner!  Only, if ever I were gay, which I 
misremember, I am gay no more.  And here is poor Henry 
passing his evenings on my intellectual husks, which the 
professors masticated; keeping the accounts of the estate - 
all wrong I have no doubt - I keep no check, beyond a very 
rough one; marching in with a cloudy brow, and the day-book 
under his arm; tackling decimals, coming with cases of 
conscience - how would an English chief behave in such a 
case? etc.; and, I am bound to say, on any glimmer of a jest, 
lapsing into native hilarity as a tree straightens itself 
after the wind is by.  The other night I remembered my old 
friend - I believe yours also - Scholastikos, and 
administered the crow and the anchor - they were quite fresh 
to Samoan ears (this implies a very early severance) - and I 
thought the anchor would have made away with my Simele 
altogether.

Fanny's time, in this interval, has been largely occupied in 
contending publicly with wild swine.  We have a black sow; we 
call her Jack Sheppard; impossible to confine her - 
impossible also for her to be confined!  To my sure knowledge 
she has been in an interesting condition for longer than any 
other sow in story; else she had long died the death; as soon 
as she is brought to bed, she shall count her days.  I 
suppose that sow has cost us in days' labour from thirty to 
fifty dollars; as many as eight boys (at a dollar a day) have 
been twelve hours in chase of her.  Now it is supposed that 
Fanny has outwitted her; she grins behind broad planks in 
what was once the cook-house.  She is a wild pig; far 
handsomer than any tame; and when she found the cook-house 
was too much for her methods of evasion, she lay down on the 
floor and refused food and drink for a whole Sunday.  On 
Monday morning she relapsed, and now eats and drinks like a 
little man.  I am reminded of an incident.  Two Sundays ago, 
the sad word was brought that the sow was out again; this 
time she had carried another in her flight.  Moors and I and 
Fanny were strolling up to the garden, and there by the 
waterside we saw the black sow, looking guilty.  It seemed to 
me beyond words; but Fanny's CRI DU COEUR was delicious: 'G-
r-r!' she cried; 'nobody loves you!'

I would I could tell you the moving story of our cart and 
cart-horses; the latter are dapple-grey, about sixteen hands, 
and of enormous substance; the former was a kind of red and 
green shandry-dan with a driving bench; plainly unfit to 
carry lumber or to face our road.  (Remember that the last 
third of my road, about a mile, is all made out of a bridle-
track by my boys - and my dollars.)  It was supposed a white 
man had been found - an ex-German artilleryman - to drive 
this last; he proved incapable and drunken; the gallant 
Henry, who had never driven before, and knew nothing about 
horses - except the rats and weeds that flourish on the 
islands - volunteered; Moors accepted, proposing to follow 
and supervise: despatched his work and started after.  No 
cart! he hurried on up the road - no cart.  Transfer the 
scene to Vailima, where on a sudden to Fanny and me, the cart 
appears, apparently at a hard gallop, some two hours before 
it was expected; Henry radiantly ruling chaos from the bench.  
It stopped: it was long before we had time to remark that the 
axle was twisted like the letter L. Our first care was the 
horses.  There they stood, black with sweat, the sweat 
raining from them - literally raining - their heads down, 
their feet apart - and blood running thick from the nostrils 
of the mare.  We got out Fanny's under-clothes - couldn't 
find anything else but our blankets - to rub them down, and 
in about half an hour we had the blessed satisfaction to see 
one after the other take a bite or two of grass.  But it was 
a toucher; a little more and these steeds would have been 
foundered.


MONDAY, 31ST? NOVEMBER.


Near a week elapsed, and no journal.  On Monday afternoon, 
Moors rode up and I rode down with him, dined, and went over 
in the evening to the American Consulate; present, Consul-
General Sewall, Lieut. Parker and Mrs. Parker, Lafarge the 
American decorator, Adams an American historian; we talked 
late, and it was arranged I was to write up for Fanny, and we 
should both dine on the morrow.

On the Friday, I was all forenoon in the Mission House, 
lunched at the German Consulate, went on board the SPERBER 
(German war ship) in the afternoon, called on my lawyer on my 
way out to American Consulate, and talked till dinner time 
with Adams, whom I am supplying with introductions and 
information for Tahiti and the Marquesas.  Fanny arrived a 
wreck, and had to lie down.  The moon rose, one day past 
full, and we dined in the verandah, a good dinner on the 
whole; talk with Lafarge about art and the lovely dreams of 
art students.  Remark by Adams, which took me briskly home to 
the Monument - 'I only liked one YOUNG woman - and that was 
Mrs. Procter.'  Henry James would like that.  Back by 
moonlight in the consulate boat - Fanny being too tired to 
walk - to Moors's.  Saturday, I left Fanny to rest, and was 
off early to the Mission, where the politics are thrilling 
just now.  The native pastors (to every one's surprise) have 
moved of themselves in the matter of the native dances, 
desiring the restrictions to be removed, or rather to be made 
dependent on the character of the dance.  Clarke, who had 
feared censure and all kinds of trouble, is, of course, 
rejoicing greatly.  A characteristic feature: the argument of 
the pastors was handed in in the form of a fictitious 
narrative of the voyage of one Mr. Pye, an English traveller, 
and his conversation with a chief; there are touches of 
satire in this educational romance.  Mr. Pye, for instance, 
admits that he knows nothing about the Bible.  At the Mission 
I was sought out by Henry in a devil of an agitation; he has 
been made the victim of a forgery  - a crime hitherto unknown 
in Samoa.  I had to go to Folau, the chief judge here, in the 
matter.  Folau had never heard of the offence, and begged to 
know what was the punishment; there may be lively times in 
forgery ahead.  It seems the sort of crime to tickle a 
Polynesian.  After lunch - you can see what a busy three days 
I am describing - we set off to ride home.  My Jack was full 
of the devil of corn and too much grass, and no work.  I had 
to ride ahead and leave Fanny behind.  He is a most gallant 
little rascal is my Jack, and takes the whole way as hard as 
the rider pleases.  Single incident: half-way up, I find my 
boys upon the road and stop and talk with Henry in his 
character of ganger, as long as Jack will suffer me.  Fanny 
drones in after; we make a show of eating - or I do - she 
goes to bed about half-past six!  I write some verses, read 
Irving's WASHINGTON, and follow about half-past eight.  O, 
one thing more I did, in a prophetic spirit.  I had made sure 
Fanny was not fit to be left alone, and wrote before turning 
in a letter to Chalmers, telling him I could not meet him in 
Auckland at this time.  By eleven at night, Fanny got me 
wakened - she had tried twice in vain - and I found her very 
bad.  Thence till three, we laboured with mustard poultices, 
laudanum, soda and ginger - Heavens! wasn't it cold; the land 
breeze was as cold as a river; the moon was glorious in the 
paddock, and the great boughs and the black shadows of our 
trees were inconceivable.  But it was a poor time.

Sunday morning found Fanny, of course, a complete wreck, and 
myself not very brilliant.  Paul had to go to Vailele RE 
cocoa-nuts; it was doubtful if he could be back by dinner; 
never mind, said I, I'll take dinner when you return.  Off 
set Paul.  I did an hour's work, and then tackled the house 
work.  I did it beautiful: the house was a picture, it 
resplended of propriety.  Presently Mr. Moors' Andrew rode 
up; I heard the doctor was at the Forest House and sent a 
note to him; and when he came, I heard my wife telling him 
she had been in bed all day, and that was why the house was 
so dirty!  Was it grateful?  Was it politic?  Was it TRUE? - 
Enough!  In the interval, up marched little L. S., one of my 
neighbours, all in his Sunday white linens; made a fine 
salute, and demanded the key of the kitchen in German and 
English.  And he cooked dinner for us, like a little man, and 
had it on the table and the coffee ready by the hour.  Paul 
had arranged me this surprise.  Some time later, Paul 
returned himself with a fresh surprise on hand; he was almost 
sober; nothing but a hazy eye distinguished him from Paul of 
the week days: VIVAT!

On the evening I cannot dwell.  All the horses got out of the 
paddock, went across, and smashed my neighbour's garden into 
a big hole.  How little the amateur conceives a farmer's 
troubles.  I went out at once with a lantern, staked up a gap 
in the hedge, was kicked at by a chestnut mare, who 
straightway took to the bush; and came back.  A little after, 
they had found another gap, and the crowd were all abroad 
again.  What has happened to our own garden nobody yet knows.

Fanny had a fair night, and we are both tolerable this 
morning, only the yoke of correspondence lies on me heavy.  I 
beg you will let this go on to my mother.  I got such a good 
start in your letter, that I kept on at it, and I have 
neither time nor energy for more.

Yours ever,
R. L. S.


SOMETHING NEW.


I was called from my letters by the voice of Mr. -, who had 
just come up with a load of wood, roaring, 'Henry!  Henry!  
Bring six boys!'  I saw there was something wrong, and ran 
out.  The cart, half unloaded, had upset with the mare in the 
shafts; she was all cramped together and all tangled up in 
harness and cargo, the off shaft pushing her over, Mr. - 
holding her up by main strength, and right along-side of her 
- where she must fall if she went down - a deadly stick of a 
tree like a lance.  I could not but admire the wisdom and 
faith of this great brute; I never saw the riding-horse that 
would not have lost its life in such a situation; but the 
cart-elephant patiently waited and was saved.  It was a 
stirring three minutes, I can tell you.

I forgot in talking of Saturday to tell of one incident which 
will particularly interest my mother.  I met Dr. D. from 
Savaii, and had an age-long talk about Edinburgh folk; it was 
very pleasant.  He has been studying in Edinburgh, along with 
his son; a pretty relation.  He told me he knew nobody but 
college people: 'I was altogether a student,' he said with 
glee.  He seems full of cheerfulness and thick-set energy.  I 
feel as if I could put him in a novel with effect; and ten to 
one, if I know more of him, the image will be only blurred.


TUESDAY, DEC. 2ND.


I should have told you yesterday that all my boys were got up 
for their work in moustaches and side-whiskers of some sort 
of blacking - I suppose wood-ash.  It was a sight of joy to 
see them return at night, axe on shoulder, feigning to march 
like soldiers, a choragus with a loud voice singing out, 
'March-step!  March-step!' in imperfect recollection of some 
drill.

Fanny seems much revived.

R. L. S.



CHAPTER III



MONDAY, TWENTY-SOMETHINGTH OF DECEMBER, 1890.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - I do not say my Jack is anything 
extraordinary; he is only an island horse; and the profane 
might call him a Punch; and his face is like a donkey's; and 
natives have ridden him, and he has no mouth in consequence, 
and occasionally shies.  But his merits are equally 
surprising; and I don't think I should ever have known Jack's 
merits if I had not been riding up of late on moonless 
nights. Jack is a bit of a dandy; he loves to misbehave in a 
gallant manner, above all on Apia Street, and when I stop to 
speak to people, they say (Dr. Stuebel the German consul said 
about three days ago), 'O what a wild horse! it cannot be 
safe to ride him.'  Such a remark is Jack's reward, and 
represents his ideal of fame.  Now when I start out of Apia 
on a dark night, you should see my changed horse; at a fast 
steady walk, with his head down, and sometimes his nose to 
the ground - when he wants to do that, he asks for his head 
with a little eloquent polite movement indescribable - he 
climbs the long ascent and threads the darkest of the wood.  
The first night I came it was starry; and it was singular to 
see the starlight drip down into the crypt of the wood, and 
shine in the open end of the road, as bright as moonlight at 
home; but the crypt itself was proof, blackness lived in it.  
The next night it was raining.  We left the lights of Apia 
and passed into limbo.  Jack finds a way for himself, but he 
does not calculate for my height above the saddle; and I am 
directed forward, all braced up for a crouch and holding my 
switch upright in front of me.  It is curiously interesting.  
In the forest, the dead wood is phosphorescent; some nights 
the whole ground is strewn with it, so that it seems like a 
grating over a pale hell; doubtless this is one of the things 
that feed the night fears of the natives; and I am free to 
confess that in a night of trackless darkness where all else 
is void, these pallid IGNES SUPPOSITI have a fantastic 
appearance, rather bogey even.  One night, when it was very 
dark, a man had put out a little lantern by the wayside to 
show the entrance to his ground.  I saw the light, as I 
thought, far ahead, and supposed it was a pedestrian coming 
to meet me; I was quite taken by surprise when it struck in 
my face and passed behind me.  Jack saw it, and he was 
appalled; do you think he thought of shying?  No, sir, not in 
the dark; in the dark Jack knows he is on duty; and he went 
past that lantern steady and swift; only, as he went, he 
groaned and shuddered.  For about 2500 of Jack's steps we 
only pass one house - that where the lantern was; and about 
1500 of these are in the darkness of the pit.  But now the 
moon is on tap again, and the roads lighted.

I have been exploring up the Vaituliga; see your map.  It 
comes down a wonderful fine glen; at least 200 feet of cliffs 
on either hand, winding like a corkscrew, great forest trees 
filling it.  At the top there ought to be a fine double fall; 
but the stream evades it by a fault and passes underground.  
Above the fall it runs (at this season) full and very gaily 
in a shallow valley, some hundred yards before the head of 
the glen.  Its course is seen full of grasses, like a flooded 
meadow; that is the sink! beyond the grave of the grasses, 
the bed lies dry.  Near this upper part there is a great show 
of ruinous pig-walls; a village must have stood near by.

To walk from our house to Wreck Hill (when the path is buried 
in fallen trees) takes one about half an hour, I think; to 
return, not more than twenty minutes; I daresay fifteen.  
Hence I should guess it was three-quarters of a mile.  I had 
meant to join on my explorations passing eastward by the 
sink; but, Lord! how it rains.

(LATER.)

I went out this morning with a pocket compass and walked in a 
varying direction, perhaps on an average S. by W., 1754 
paces.  Then I struck into the bush, N.W. by N., hoping to 
strike the Vaituliga above the falls.  Now I have it plotted 
out I see I should have gone W. or even W. by S.; but it is 
not easy to guess.  For 600 weary paces I struggled through 
the bush, and then came on the stream below the gorge, where 
it was comparatively easy to get down to it.  In the place 
where I struck it, it made cascades about a little isle, and 
was running about N.E., 20 to 30 feet wide, as deep as to my 
knee, and piercing cold.  I tried to follow it down, and keep 
the run of its direction and my paces; but when I was wading 
to the knees and the waist in mud, poison brush, and rotted 
wood, bound hand and foot in lianas, shovelled 
unceremoniously off the one shore and driven to try my luck 
upon the other - I saw I should have hard enough work to get 
my body down, if my mind rested.  It was a damnable walk; 
certainly not half a mile as the crow flies, but a real 
bucketer for hardship.  Once I had to pass the stream where 
it flowed between banks about three feet high.  To get the 
easier down, I swung myself by a wild-cocoanut - (so called, 
it bears bunches of scarlet nutlets) - which grew upon the 
brink.  As I so swung, I received a crack on the head that 
knocked me all abroad.  Impossible to guess what tree had 
taken a shy at me.  So many towered above, one over the 
other, and the missile, whatever it was, dropped in the 
stream and was gone before I had recovered my wits.  (I 
scarce know what I write, so hideous a Niagara of rain roars, 
shouts, and demonizes on the iron roof - it is pitch dark too 
- the lamp lit at 5!)  It was a blessed thing when I struck 
my own road; and I got home, neat for lunch time, one of the 
most wonderful mud statues ever witnessed.  In the afternoon 
I tried again, going up the other path by the garden, but was 
early drowned out; came home, plotted out what I had done, 
and then wrote this truck to you.

Fanny has been quite ill with ear-ache.  She won't go, hating 
the sea at this wild season; I don't like to leave her; so it 
drones on, steamer after steamer, and I guess it'll end by no 
one going at all.  She is in a dreadful misfortune at this 
hour; a case of kerosene having burst in the kitchen.  A 
little while ago it was the carpenter's horse that trod in a 
nest of fourteen eggs, and made an omelette of our hopes.  
The farmer's lot is not a happy one.  And it looks like some 
real uncompromising bad weather too.  I wish Fanny's ear were 
well.  Think of parties in Monuments! think of me in 
Skerryvore, and now of this.  It don't look like a part of 
the same universe to me.  Work is quite laid aside; I have 
worked myself right out.


CHRISTMAS EVE.


Yesterday, who could write?  My wife near crazy with ear-
ache; the rain descending in white crystal rods and playing 
hell's tattoo, like a TUTTI of battering rams, on our sheet-
iron roof; the wind passing high overhead with a strange dumb 
mutter, or striking us full, so that all the huge trees in 
the paddock cried aloud, and wrung their hands, and 
brandished their vast arms.  The horses stood in the shed 
like things stupid.  The sea and the flagship lying on the 
jaws of the bay vanished in sheer rain.  All day it lasted; I 
locked up my papers in the iron box, in case it was a 
hurricane, and the house might go.  We went to bed with 
mighty uncertain feelings; far more than on shipboard, where 
you have only drowning ahead - whereas here you have a smash 
of beams, a shower of sheet-iron, and a blind race in the 
dark and through a whirlwind for the shelter of an unfinished 
stable - and my wife with ear-ache!  Well, well, this 
morning, we had word from Apia; a hurricane was looked for, 
the ships were to leave the bay by 10 A.M.; it is now 3.30, 
and the flagship is still a fixture, and the wind round in 
the blessed east, so I suppose the danger is over.  But 
heaven is still laden; the day dim, with frequent rattling 
bucketfuls of rain; and just this moment (as I write) a 
squall went overhead, scarce striking us, with that singular, 
solemn noise of its passage, which is to me dreadful.  I have 
always feared the sound of wind beyond everything.  In my 
hell it would always blow a gale.

I have been all day correcting proofs, and making out a new 
plan for our house.  The other was too dear to be built now, 
and it was a hard task to make a smaller house that would 
suffice for the present, and not be a mere waste of money in 
the future.  I believe I have succeeded; I have taken care of 
my study anyway.

Two favours I want to ask of you.  First, I wish you to get 
'Pioneering in New Guinea,' by J. Chalmers.  It's a 
missionary book, and has less pretensions to be literature 
than Spurgeon's sermons.  Yet I think even through that, you 
will see some of the traits of the hero that wrote it; a man 
that took me fairly by storm for the most attractive, simple, 
brave, and interesting man in the whole Pacific.  He is away 
now to go up the Fly River; a desperate venture, it is 
thought; he is quite a Livingstone card.

Second, try and keep yourself free next winter; and if my 
means can be stretched so far, I'll come to Egypt and we'll 
meet at Shepheard's Hotel, and you'll put me in my place, 
which I stand in need of badly by this time.  Lord, what 
bully times!  I suppose I'll come per British Asia, or 
whatever you call it, and avoid all cold, and might be in 
Egypt about November as ever was - eleven months from now or 
rather less.  But do not let us count our chickens.

Last night three piglings were stolen from one of our pig-
pens.  The great Lafaele appeared to my wife uneasy, so she 
engaged him in conversation on the subject, and played upon 
him the following engaging trick.  You advance your two 
forefingers towards the sitter's eyes; he closes them, 
whereupon you substitute (on his eyelids) the fore and middle 
fingers of the left hand; and with your right (which he 
supposes engaged) you tap him on the head and back.  When you 
let him open his eyes, he sees you withdrawing the two 
forefingers.  'What that?' asked Lafaele.  'My devil,' says 
Fanny.  'I wake um, my devil.  All right now.  He go catch 
the man that catch my pig.'  About an hour afterwards, 
Lafaele came for further particulars.  'O, all right,' my 
wife says.  'By and by, that man he sleep, devil go sleep 
same place.  By and by, that man plenty sick.  I no care.  
What for he take my pig?'  Lafaele cares plenty; I don't 
think he is the man, though he may be; but he knows him, and 
most likely will eat some of that pig to-night.  He will not 
eat with relish.


SATURDAY 27TH.


It cleared up suddenly after dinner, and my wife and I 
saddled up and off to Apia, whence we did not return till 
yesterday morning.  Christmas Day I wish you could have seen 
our party at table.  H. J. Moors at one end with my wife, I 
at the other with Mrs. M., between us two native women, 
Carruthers the lawyer, Moors's two shop-boys - Walters and A. 
M. the quadroon - and the guests of the evening, Shirley 
Baker, the defamed and much-accused man of Tonga, and his 
son, with the artificial joint to his arm - where the 
assassins shot him in shooting at his father.  Baker's 
appearance is not unlike John Bull on a cartoon; he is highly 
interesting to speak to, as I had expected; I found he and I 
had many common interests, and were engaged in puzzling over 
many of the same difficulties.  After dinner it was quite 
pretty to see our Christmas party, it was so easily pleased 
and prettily behaved.  In the morning I should say I had been 
to lunch at the German consulate, where I had as usual a very 
pleasant time.  I shall miss Dr. Stuebel much when he leaves, 
and when Adams and Lafarge go also, it will be a great blow.  
I am getting spoiled with all this good society.

On Friday morning, I had to be at my house affairs before 
seven; and they kept me in Apia till past ten, disputing, and 
consulting about brick and stone and native and hydraulic 
lime, and cement and sand, and all sorts of otiose details 
about the chimney - just what I fled from in my father's 
office twenty years ago; I should have made a languid 
engineer.  Rode up with the carpenter.  Ah, my wicked Jack! 
on Christmas Eve, as I was taking the saddle bag off, he 
kicked at me, and fetched me too, right on the shin.  On 
Friday, being annoyed at the carpenter's horse having a 
longer trot, he uttered a shrill cry and tried to bite him!  
Alas, alas, these are like old days; my dear Jack is a Bogue, 
but I cannot strangle Jack into submission.

I have given up the big house for just now; we go ahead right 
away with a small one, which should be ready in two months, 
and I suppose will suffice for just now.

O I know I haven't told you about our AITU, have I?  It is a 
lady, AITU FAFINE: she lives on the mountain-side; her 
presence is heralded by the sound of a gust of wind; a sound 
very common in the high woods; when she catches you, I do not 
know what happens; but in practice she is avoided, so I 
suppose she does more than pass the time of day.  The great 
AITU SAUMAI-AFE was once a living woman; and became an AITU, 
no one understands how; she lives in a stream at the well-
head, her hair is red, she appears as a lovely young lady, 
her bust particularly admired, to handsome young men; these 
die, her love being fatal; - as a handsome youth she has been 
known to court damsels with the like result, but this is very 
rare; as an old crone she goes about and asks for water, and 
woe to them who are uncivil!  SAUMAI-AFE means literally, 
'Come here a thousand!'  A good name for a lady of her 
manners.  My AITU FAFINE does not seem to be in the same line 
of business.  It is unsafe to be a handsome youth in Samoa; a 
young man died from her favours last month - so we said on 
this side of the island; on the other, where he died, it was 
not so certain.  I, for one, blame it on Madam SAUMAI-AFE 
without hesitation.

Example of the farmer's sorrows.  I slipped out on the 
balcony a moment ago.  It is a lovely morning, cloudless, 
smoking hot, the breeze not yet arisen.  Looking west, in 
front of our new house, I saw, two heads of Indian corn 
wagging, and the rest and all nature stock still.  As I 
looked, one of the stalks subsided and disappeared.  I dashed 
out to the rescue; two small pigs were deep in the grass - 
quite hid till within a few yards - gently but swiftly 
demolishing my harvest.  Never be a farmer.


12.30 P.M.


I while away the moments of digestion by drawing you a 
faithful picture of my morning.  When I had done writing as 
above it was time to clean our house.  When I am working, it 
falls on my wife alone, but to-day we had it between us; she 
did the bedroom, I the sitting-room, in fifty-seven minutes 
of really most unpalatable labour.  Then I changed every 
stitch, for I was wet through, and sat down and played on my 
pipe till dinner was ready, mighty pleased to be in a mildly 
habitable spot once more.  The house had been neglected for 
near a week, and was a hideous spot; my wife's ear and our 
visit to Apia being the causes: our Paul we prefer not to see 
upon that theatre, and God knows he has plenty to do 
elsewhere.

I am glad to look out of my back door and see the boys 
smoothing the foundations of the new house; this is all very 
jolly, but six months of it has satisfied me; we have too 
many things for such close quarters; to work in the midst of 
all the myriad misfortunes of the planter's life, seated in a 
Dyonisius' (can't spell him) ear, whence I catch every 
complaint, mishap and contention, is besides the devil; and 
the hope of a cave of my own inspires me with lust.  O to be 
able to shut my own door and make my own confusion!  O to 
have the brown paper and the matches and 'make a hell of my 
own' once more!

I do not bother you with all my troubles in these 
outpourings; the troubles of the farmer are inspiriting - 
they are like difficulties out hunting - a fellow rages at 
the time and rejoices to recall and to commemorate them.  My 
troubles have been financial.  It is hard to arrange wisely 
interests so distributed.  America, England, Samoa, Sydney, 
everywhere I have an end of liability hanging out and some 
shelf of credit hard by; and to juggle all these and build a 
dwelling-place here, and check expense - a thing I am ill 
fitted for - you can conceive what a nightmare it is at 
times.  Then God knows I have not been idle.  But since THE 
MASTER nothing has come to raise any coins.  I believe the 
springs are dry at home, and now I am worked out, and can no 
more at all.  A holiday is required.

DEC. 28TH.  I have got unexpectedly to work again, and feel 
quite dandy.  Good-bye.

R. L. S.



CHAPTER IV



S. S. LUBECK, BETWEEN APIA AND SYDNEY,
JAN. 17TH, 1891.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - The Faamasino Sili, or Chief Justice, to 
speak your low language, has arrived.  I had ridden down with 
Henry and Lafaele; the sun was down, the night was close at 
hand, so we rode fast; just as I came to the corner of the 
road before Apia, I heard a gun fire; and lo, there was a 
great crowd at the end of the pier, and the troops out, and a 
chief or two in the height of Samoa finery, and Seumanu 
coming in his boat (the oarsmen all in uniform), bringing the 
Faamasino Sili sure enough.  It was lucky he was no longer; 
the natives would not have waited many weeks.  But think of 
it, as I sat in the saddle at the outside of the crowd 
(looking, the English consul said, as if I were commanding 
the manoeuvres), I was nearly knocked down by a stampede of 
the three consuls; they had been waiting their guest at the 
Matafele end, and some wretched intrigue among the whites had 
brought him to Apia, and the consuls had to run all the 
length of the town and come too late.

The next day was a long one; I was at a marriage of G. the 
banker to Fanua, the virgin of Apia.  Bride and bridesmaids 
were all in the old high dress; the ladies were all native; 
the men, with the exception of Seumanu, all white.

It was quite a pleasant party, and while we were writing, we 
had a bird's-eye view of the public reception of the Chief 
Justice.  The best part of it were some natives in war array; 
with blacked faces, turbans, tapa kilts, and guns, they 
looked very manly and purposelike.  No, the best part was 
poor old drunken Joe, the Portuguese boatman, who seemed to 
think himself specially charged with the reception, and ended 
by falling on his knees before the Chief Justice on the end 
of the pier and in full view of the whole town and bay.  The 
natives pelted him with rotten bananas; how the Chief Justice 
took it I was too far off to see; but it was highly absurd.

I have commemorated my genial hopes for the regimen of the 
Faamasino Sili in the following canine verses, which, if you 
at all guess how to read them, are very pretty in movement, 
and (unless he be a mighty good man) too true in sense.


We're quarrelling, the villages, we've beaten the wooden 
drum's,
Sa femisai o nu'u, sa taia o pate,
Is expounded there by the justice,
Ua Atuatuvale a le faamasino e,
The chief justice, the terrified justice,
Le faamasino sili, le faamasino se,
Is on the point of running away the justice,
O le a solasola le faamasino e,
The justice denied any influence, the terrified justice,
O le faamasino le ai a, le faamasino se,
O le a solasola le faamasino e.


Well, after this excursion into tongues that have never been 
alive - though I assure you we have one capital book in the 
language, a book of fables by an old missionary of the 
unpromising name of Pratt, which is simply the best and the 
most literary version of the fables known to me.  I suppose I 
should except La Fontaine, but L. F. takes a long time; these 
are brief as the books of our childhood, and full of wit and 
literary colour; and O, Colvin, what a tongue it would be to 
write, if one only knew it - and there were only readers.  
Its curse in common use is an incredible left-handed 
wordiness; but in the hands of a man like Pratt it is 
succinct as Latin, compact of long rolling polysyllables and 
little and often pithy particles, and for beauty of sound a 
dream.  Listen, I quote from Pratt - this is good Samoan, not 
canine -


O le afa,

1    2     3
ua taalili ai

        4
le ulu vao,

1
ua pa mai


le faititili.



1 almost WA, 2 the two A'S just distinguished, 3 the AI is 
practically suffixed to the verb, 4 almost VOW.  The 
excursion has prolonged itself.

I started by the LUBECK to meet Lloyd and my mother; there 
were many reasons for and against; the main reason against 
was the leaving of Fanny alone in her blessed cabin, which 
has been somewhat remedied by my carter, Mr. -, putting up in 
the stable and messing with her; but perhaps desire of change 
decided me not well, though I do think I ought to see an 
oculist, being very blind indeed, and sometimes unable to 
read.  Anyway I left, the only cabin passenger, four and a 
kid in the second cabin, and a dear voyage it had like to 
have proved.  Close to Fiji (choose a worse place on the map) 
we broke our shaft early one morning; and when or where we 
might expect to fetch land or meet with any ship, I would 
like you to tell me.  The Pacific is absolutely desert.  I 
have sailed there now some years; and scarce ever seen a ship 
except in port or close by; I think twice.  It was the 
hurricane season besides, and hurricane waters.  Well, our 
chief engineer got the shaft - it was the middle crank shaft 
- mended; thrice it was mended, and twice broke down; but now 
keeps up - only we dare not stop, for it is almost impossible 
to start again.  The captain in the meanwhile crowded her 
with sail; fifteen sails in all, every stay being gratified 
with a stay-sail, a boat-boom sent aloft for a maintop-
gallant yard, and the derrick of a crane brought in service 
as bowsprit.  All the time we have had a fine, fair wind and 
a smooth sea; to-day at noon our run was 203 miles (if you 
please!), and we are within some 360 miles of Sydney.  
Probably there has never been a more gallant success; and I 
can say honestly it was well worked for.  No flurry, no high 
words, no long faces; only hard work and honest thought; a 
pleasant, manly business to be present at.  All the chances 
were we might have been six weeks - ay, or three months at 
sea - or never turned up at all, and now it looks as though 
we should reach our destination some five days too late.




CHAPTER V



[ON BOARD SHIP BETWEEN SYDNEY AND APIA, FEB. 1891.]


MY DEAR COLVIN, - The JANET NICOLL stuff was rather worse 
than I had looked for; you have picked out all that is fit to 
stand, bar two others (which I don't dislike) - the Port of 
Entry and the House of Temoana; that is for a present 
opinion; I may condemn these also ere I have done.  By this 
time you should have another Marquesan letter, the worst of 
the lot, I think; and seven Paumotu letters, which are not 
far out of the vein, as I wish it; I am in hopes the Hawaiian 
stuff is better yet: time will show, and time will make 
perfect.  Is something of this sort practicable for the 
dedication?


TERRA MARIQUE
PER PERICULA PER ARDUA
AMICAE COMITI
D.D.
AMANS VIATOR


'Tis a first shot concocted this morning in my berth: I had 
always before been trying it in English, which insisted on 
being either insignificant or fulsome: I cannot think of a 
better word than COMES, there being not the shadow of a Latin 
book on board; yet sure there is some other.  Then VIATOR 
(though it SOUNDS all right) is doubtful; it has too much, 
perhaps, the sense of wayfarer?  Last, will it mark 
sufficiently that I mean my wife?  And first, how about 
blunders?  I scarce wish it longer.

Have had a swingeing sharp attack in Sydney; beating the 
fields for two nights, Saturday and Sunday.  Wednesday was 
brought on board, TEL QUEL, a wonderful wreck; and now, 
Wednesday week, am a good deal picked up, but yet not quite a 
Samson, being still groggy afoot and vague in the head.  My 
chess, for instance, which is usually a pretty strong game, 
and defies all rivalry aboard, is vacillating, devoid of 
resource and observation, and hitherto not covered with 
customary laurels.  As for work, it is impossible.  We shall 
be in the saddle before long, no doubt, and the pen once more 
couched.  You must not expect a letter under these 
circumstances, but be very thankful for a note.  Once at 
Samoa, I shall try to resume my late excellent habits, and 
delight you with journals, you unaccustomed, I unaccustomed; 
but it is never too late to mend.

It is vastly annoying that I cannot go even to Sydney without 
an attack; and heaven knows my life was anodyne.  I only once 
dined with anybody; at the club with Wise; worked all morning 
- a terrible dead pull; a month only produced the imperfect 
embryos of two chapters; lunched in the boarding-house, 
played on my pipe; went out and did some of my messages; 
dined at a French restaurant, and returned to play draughts, 
whist, or Van John with my family.  This makes a cheery life 
after Samoa; but it isn't what you call burning the candle at 
both ends, is it?  (It appears to me not one word of this 
letter will be legible by the time I am done with it, this 
dreadful ink rubs off.)  I have a strange kind of novel under 
construction; it begins about 1660 and ends 1830, or perhaps 
I may continue it to 1875 or so, with another life.  One, 
two, three, four, five, six generations, perhaps seven, 
figure therein; two of my old stories, 'Delafield' and 
'Shovel,' are incorporated; it is to be told in the third 
person, with some of the brevity of history, some of the 
detail of romance.  THE SHOVELS OF NEWTON FRENCH will be the 
name.  The idea is an old one; it was brought to birth by an 
accident; a friend in the islands who picked up F. Jenkin, 
read a part, and said: 'Do you know, that's a strange book?  
I like it; I don't believe the public will; but I like it.'  
He thought it was a novel!  'Very well,' said I, 'we'll see 
whether the public will like it or not; they shall have the 
chance.'

Yours ever,
R. L. S.



CHAPTER VI



FRIDAY, MARCH 19TH.


MY DEAR S. C., - You probably expect that now I am back at 
Vailima I shall resume the practice of the diary letter.  A 
good deal is changed.  We are more; solitude does not attend 
me as before; the night is passed playing Van John for 
shells; and, what is not less important, I have just 
recovered from a severe illness, and am easily tired.

I will give you to-day.  I sleep now in one of the lower 
rooms of the new house, where my wife has recently joined me.  
We have two beds, an empty case for a table, a chair, a tin 
basin, a bucket and a jug; next door in the dining-room, the 
carpenters camp on the floor, which is covered with their 
mosquito nets.  Before the sun rises, at 5.45 or 5.50, Paul 
brings me tea, bread, and a couple of eggs; and by about six 
I am at work.  I work in bed - my bed is of mats, no 
mattress, sheets, or filth - mats, a pillow, and a blanket - 
and put in some three hours.  It was 9.5 this morning when I 
set off to the stream-side to my weeding; where I toiled, 
manuring the ground with the best enricher, human sweat, till 
the conch-shell was blown from our verandah at 10.30.  At 
eleven we dine; about half-past twelve I tried (by exception) 
to work again, could make nothing on't, and by one was on my 
way to the weeding, where I wrought till three.  Half-past 
five is our next meal, and I read Flaubert's Letters till the 
hour came round; dined, and then, Fanny having a cold, and I 
being tired, came over to my den in the unfinished house, 
where I now write to you, to the tune of the carpenters' 
voices, and by the light - I crave your pardon - by the 
twilight of three vile candles filtered through the medium of 
my mosquito bar.  Bad ink being of the party, I write quite 
blindfold, and can only hope you may be granted to read that 
which I am unable to see while writing.

I said I was tired; it is a mild phrase; my back aches like 
toothache; when I shut my eyes to sleep, I know I shall see 
before them - a phenomenon to which both Fanny and I are 
quite accustomed - endless vivid deeps of grass and weed, 
each plant particular and distinct, so that I shall lie inert 
in body, and transact for hours the mental part of my day 
business, choosing the noxious from the useful.  And in my 
dreams I shall be hauling on recalcitrants, and suffering 
stings from nettles, stabs from citron thorns, fiery bites 
from ants, sickening resistances of mud and slime, evasions 
of slimy roots, dead weight of heat, sudden puffs of air, 
sudden starts from bird-calls in the contiguous forest - some 
mimicking my name, some laughter, some the signal of a 
whistle, and living over again at large the business of my 
day.

Though I write so little, I pass all my hours of field-work 
in continual converse and imaginary correspondence.  I scarce 
pull up a weed, but I invent a sentence on the matter to 
yourself; it does not get written; AUTANT EN EMPORTENT LES 
VENTS; but the intent is there, and for me (in some sort) the 
companionship.  To-day, for instance, we had a great talk.  I 
was toiling, the sweat dripping from my nose, in the hot fit 
after a squall of rain: methought you asked me - frankly, was 
I happy.  Happy (said I); I was only happy once; that was at 
Hyeres; it came to an end from a variety of reasons, decline 
of health, change of place, increase of money, age with his 
stealing steps; since then, as before then, I know not what 
it means.  But I know pleasure still; pleasure with a 
thousand faces, and none perfect, a thousand tongues all 
broken, a thousand hands, and all of them with scratching 
nails.  High among these I place this delight of weeding out 
here alone by the garrulous water, under the silence of the 
high wood, broken by incongruous sounds of birds.  And take 
my life all through, look at it fore and back, and upside 
down, - though I would very fain change myself - I would not 
change my circumstances, unless it were to bring you here.  
And yet God knows perhaps this intercourse of writing serves 
as well; and I wonder, were you here indeed, would I commune 
so continually with the thought of you.  I say 'I wonder' for 
a form; I know, and I know I should not.

So far, and much further, the conversation went, while I 
groped in slime after viscous roots, nursing and sparing 
little spears of grass, and retreating (even with outcry) 
from the prod of the wild lime.  I wonder if any one had ever 
the same attitude to Nature as I hold, and have held for so 
long?  This business fascinates me like a tune or a passion; 
yet all the while I thrill with a strong distaste.  The 
horror of the thing, objective and subjective, is always 
present to my mind; the horror of creeping things, a 
superstitious horror of the void and the powers about me, the 
horror of my own devastation and continual murders.  The life 
of the plants comes through my fingertips, their struggles go 
to my heart like supplications.  I feel myself blood-
boltered; then I look back on my cleared grass, and count 
myself an ally in a fair quarrel, and make stout my heart.

It is but a little while since I lay sick in Sydney, beating 
the fields about the navy and Dean Swift and Dryden's Latin 
hymns; judge if I love this reinvigorating climate, where I 
can already toil till my head swims and every string in the 
poor jumping Jack (as he now lies in bed) aches with a kind 
of yearning strain, difficult to suffer in quiescence.

As for my damned literature, God knows what a business it is, 
grinding along without a scrap of inspiration or a note of 
style.  But it has to be ground, and the mill grinds 
exceeding slowly though not particularly small.  The last two 
chapters have taken me considerably over a month, and they 
are still beneath pity.  This I cannot continue, time not 
sufficing; and the next will just have to be worse.  All the 
good I can express is just this; some day, when style 
revisits me, they will be excellent matter to rewrite.  Of 
course, my old cure of a change of work would probably 
answer, but I cannot take it now.  The treadmill turns; and, 
with a kind of desperate cheerfulness, I mount the idle 
stair.  I haven't the least anxiety about the book; unless I 
die, I shall find the time to make it good; but the Lord 
deliver me from the thought of the Letters!  However, the 
Lord has other things on hand; and about six to-morrow, I 
shall resume the consideration practically, and face (as best 
I may) the fact of my incompetence and disaffection to the 
task.  Toil I do not spare; but fortune refuses me success.  
We can do more, Whatever-his-name-was, we can deserve it.  
But my misdesert began long since, by the acceptation of a 
bargain quite unsuitable to all my methods.

To-day I have had a queer experience.  My carter has from the 
first been using my horses for his own ends; when I left for 
Sydney, I put him on his honour to cease, and my back was 
scarce turned ere he was forfeit.  I have only been waiting 
to discharge him; and to-day an occasion arose.  I am so much 
THE OLD MAN VIRULENT, so readily stumble into anger, that I 
gave a deal of consideration to my bearing, and decided at 
last to imitate that of the late -.  Whatever he might have 
to say, this eminently effective controversialist maintained 
a frozen demeanour and a jeering smile.  The frozen demeanour 
is beyond my reach; but I could try the jeering smile; did 
so, perceived its efficacy, kept in consequence my temper, 
and got rid of my friend, myself composed and smiling still, 
he white and shaking like an aspen.  He could explain 
everything; I said it did not interest me.  He said he had 
enemies; I said nothing was more likely.  He said he was 
calumniated; with all my heart, said I, but there are so many 
liars, that I find it safer to believe them.  He said, in 
justice to himself, he must explain: God forbid I should 
interfere with you, said I, with the same factitious grin, 
but it can change nothing.  So I kept my temper, rid myself 
of an unfaithful servant, found a method of conducting 
similar interviews in the future, and fell in my own liking.  
One thing more: I learned a fresh tolerance for the dead -; 
he too had learned - perhaps had invented - the trick of this 
manner; God knows what weakness, what instability of feeling, 
lay beneath.  CE QUE C'EST QUE DE NOUS! poor human nature; 
that at past forty I must adjust this hateful mask for the 
first time, and rejoice to find it effective; that the effort 
of maintaining an external smile should confuse and embitter 
a man's soul.

To-day I have not weeded; I have written instead from six 
till eleven, from twelve till two; with the interruption of 
the interview aforesaid; a damned letter is written for the 
third time; I dread to read it, for I dare not give it a 
fourth chance - unless it be very bad indeed.  Now I write 
you from my mosquito curtain, to the song of saws and planes 
and hammers, and wood clumping on the floor above; in a day 
of heavenly brightness; a bird twittering near by; my eye, 
through the open door, commanding green meads, two or three 
forest trees casting their boughs against the sky, a forest-
clad mountain-side beyond, and close in by the door-jamb a 
nick of the blue Pacific.  It is March in England, bleak 
March, and I lie here with the great sliding doors wide open 
in an undershirt and p'jama trousers, and melt in the closure 
of mosquito bars, and burn to be out in the breeze.  A few 
torn clouds - not white, the sun has tinged them a warm pink 
- swim in heaven.  In which blessed and fair day, I have to 
make faces and speak bitter words to a man - who has deceived 
me, it is true - but who is poor, and older than I, and a 
kind of a gentleman too.  On the whole, I prefer the massacre 
of weeds.


SUNDAY.


When I had done talking to you yesterday, I played on my pipe 
till the conch sounded, then went over to the old house for 
dinner, and had scarce risen from table ere I was submerged 
with visitors.  The first of these despatched, I spent the 
rest of the evening going over the Samoan translation of my 
BOTTLE IMP with Claxton the missionary; then to bed, but 
being upset, I suppose, by these interruptions, and having 
gone all day without my weeding, not to sleep.  For hours I 
lay awake and heard the rain fall, and saw faint, far-away 
lightning over the sea, and wrote you long letters which I 
scorn to reproduce.  This morning Paul was unusually early; 
the dawn had scarce begun when he appeared with the tray and 
lit my candle; and I had breakfasted and read (with 
indescribable sinkings) the whole of yesterday's work before 
the sun had risen.  Then I sat and thought, and sat and 
better thought.  It was not good enough, nor good; it was as 
slack as journalism, but not so inspired; it was excellent 
stuff misused, and the defects stood gross on it like humps 
upon a camel.  But could I, in my present disposition, do 
much more with it? in my present pressure for time, were I 
not better employed doing another one about as ill, than 
making this some thousandth fraction better?  Yes, I thought; 
and tried the new one, and behold, I could do nothing: my 
head swims, words do not come to me, nor phrases, and I 
accepted defeat, packed up my traps, and turned to 
communicate the failure to my esteemed correspondent.  I 
think it possible I overworked yesterday.  Well, we'll see 
to-morrow - perhaps try again later.  It is indeed the hope 
of trying later that keeps me writing to you.  If I take to 
my pipe, I know myself - all is over for the morning.  
Hurray, I'll correct proofs!


PAGO-PAGO, WEDNESDAY.


After I finished on Sunday I passed a miserable day; went out 
weeding, but could not find peace.  I do not like to steal my 
dinner, unless I have given myself a holiday in a canonical 
manner; and weeding after all is only fun, the amount of its 
utility small, and the thing capable of being done faster and 
nearly as well by a hired boy.  In the evening Sewall came up 
(American consul) and proposed to take me on a malaga, which 
I accepted.  Monday I rode down to Apia, was nearly all day 
fighting about drafts and money; the silver problem does not 
touch you, but it is (in a strange and I hope passing phase) 
making my situation difficult in Apia.  About eleven, the 
flags were all half-masted; it was old Captain Hamilton 
(Samesoni the natives called him) who had passed away.  In 
the evening I walked round to the U.S. Consulate; it was a 
lovely night with a full moon; and as I got round to the hot 
corner of Matautu I heard hymns in front.  The balcony of the 
dead man's house was full of women singing; Mary (the widow, 
a native) sat on a chair by the doorstep, and I was set 
beside her on a bench, and next to Paul the carpenter; as I 
sat down I had a glimpse of the old captain, who lay in a 
sheet on his own table.  After the hymn was over, a native 
pastor made a speech which lasted a long while; the light 
poured out of the door and windows; the girls were sitting 
clustered at my feet; it was choking hot.  After the speech 
was ended, Mary carried me within; the captain's hands were 
folded on his bosom, his face and head were composed; he 
looked as if he might speak at any moment; I have never seen 
this kind of waxwork so express or more venerable; and when I 
went away, I was conscious of a certain envy for the man who 
was out of the battle.  All night it ran in my head, and the 
next day when we sighted Tutuila, and ran into this beautiful 
land-locked loch of Pago Pago (whence I write), Captain 
Hamilton's folded hands and quiet face said a great deal more 
to me than the scenery.

I am living here in a trader's house; we have a good table, 
Sewall doing things in style; and I hope to benefit by the 
change, and possibly get more stuff for Letters.  In the 
meanwhile, I am seized quite MAL-A-PROPOS with desire to 
write a story, THE BLOODY WEDDING, founded on fact - very 
possibly true, being an attempt to read a murder case - not 
yet months old, in this very place and house where I now 
write.  The indiscretion is what stops me; but if I keep on 
feeling as I feel just now it will have to be written.  Three 
Star Nettison, Kit Nettison, Field the Sailor, these are the 
main characters: old Nettison, and the captain of the man of 
war, the secondary.  Possible scenario.  Chapter I....




CHAPTER VII



SATURDAY, APRIL 18TH.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - I got back on Monday night, after twenty-
three hours in an open boat; the keys were lost; the Consul 
(who had promised us a bottle of Burgundy) nobly broke open 
his store-room, and we got to bed about midnight.  Next 
morning the blessed Consul promised us horses for the 
daybreak; forgot all about it, worthy man; set us off at last 
in the heat of the day, and by a short cut which caused 
infinite trouble, and we were not home till dinner.  I was 
extenuated, and have had a high fever since, or should have 
been writing before.  To-day for the first time, I risk it.  
Tuesday I was pretty bad; Wednesday had a fever to kill a 
horse; Thursday I was better, but still out of ability to do 
aught but read awful trash.  This is the time one misses 
civilisation; I wished to send out for some police novels; 
Montepin would have about suited my frozen brain.  It is a 
bother when all one's thought turns on one's work in some 
sense or other; could not even think yesterday; I took to 
inventing dishes by way of entertainment.  Yesterday, while I 
lay asleep in the afternoon, a very lucky thing happened; the 
Chief Justice came to call; met one of our employes on the 
road; and was shown what I had done to the road.

'Is this the road across the island?' he asked.

'The only one,' said Innes.

'And has one man done all this?'

'Three times,' said the trusty Innes.  'It has had to be made 
three times, and when Mr. Stevenson came, it was a track like 
what you see beyond.'

'This must be put right,' said the Chief Justice.


SUNDAY.


The truth is, I broke down yesterday almost as soon as I 
began, and have been surreptitiously finishing the entry to-
day.  For all that I was much better, ate all the time, and 
had no fever.  The day was otherwise uneventful.  I am 
reminded; I had another visitor on Friday; and Fanny and 
Lloyd, as they returned from a forest raid, met in our 
desert, untrodden road, first Father Didier, Keeper of the 
conscience of Mataafa, the rising star; and next the Chief 
justice, sole stay of Laupepa, the present and unsteady star, 
and remember, a few days before we were close to the sick bed 
and entertained by the amateur physician of Tamasese, the 
late and sunken star.  'That is the fun of this place,' 
observed Lloyd; 'everybody you meet is so important.'  
Everybody is also so gloomy.  It will come to war again, is 
the opinion of all the well informed - and before that to 
many bankruptcies; and after that, as usual, to famine.  
Here, under the microscope, we can see history at work.


WEDNESDAY.


I have been very neglectful.  A return to work, perhaps 
premature, but necessary, has used up all my possible 
energies and made me acquainted with the living headache.  I 
just jot down some of the past notabilia.  Yesterday B., a 
carpenter, and K., my (unsuccessful) white man, were absent 
all morning from their work; I was working myself, where I 
hear every sound with morbid certainty, and I can testify 
that not a hammer fell.  Upon inquiry I found they had passed 
the morning making ice with our ice machine and taking the 
horizon with a spirit level!  I had no sooner heard this than 
- a violent headache set in; I am a real employer of labour 
now, and have much of the ship captain when aroused; and if I 
had a headache, I believe both these gentlemen had aching 
hearts.  I promise you, the late - was to the front; and K., 
who was the most guilty, yet (in a sense) the least 
blameable, having the brains and character of a canary-bird, 
fared none the better for B.'s repartees.  I hear them hard 
at work this morning, so the menace may be blessed.  It was 
just after my dinner, just before theirs, that I administered 
my redoubtable tongue - it is really redoubtable - to these 
skulkers (Paul used to triumph over Mr. J. for weeks.  'I am 
very sorry for you,' he would say; 'you're going to have a 
talk with Mr. Stevenson when he comes home: you don't know 
what that is!')  In fact, none of them do, till they get it.  
I have known K., for instance, for months; he has never heard 
me complain, or take notice, unless it were to praise; I have 
used him always as my guest, and there seems to be something 
in my appearance which suggests endless, ovine long-
suffering!  We sat in the upper verandah all evening, and 
discussed the price of iron roofing, and the state of the 
draught-horses, with Innes, a new man we have taken, and who 
seems to promise well.

One thing embarrasses me.  No one ever seems to understand my 
attitude about that book; the stuff sent was never meant for 
other than a first state; I never meant it to appear as a 
book.  Knowing well that I have never had one hour of 
inspiration since it was begun, and have only beaten out my 
metal by brute force and patient repetition, I hoped some day 
to get a 'spate of style' and burnish it - fine mixed 
metaphor.  I am now so sick that I intend, when the Letters 
are done and some more written that will be wanted, simply to 
make a book of it by the pruning-knife.

I cannot fight longer; I am sensible of having done worse 
than I hoped, worse than I feared; all I can do now is to do 
the best I can for the future, and clear the book, like a 
piece of bush, with axe and cutlass.  Even to produce the MS. 
of this will occupy me, at the most favourable opinion, till 
the middle of next year; really five years were wanting, when 
I could have made a book; but I have a family, and - perhaps 
I could not make the book after all.



CHAPTER VIII



APRIL 29TH, '91.


MY DEAR COLVIN,  - I begin again.  I was awake this morning 
about half-past four.  It was still night, but I made my 
fire, which is always a delightful employment, and read 
Lockhart's 'Scott' until the day began to peep.  It was a 
beautiful and sober dawn, a dove-coloured dawn, insensibly 
brightening to gold.  I was looking at it some while over the 
down-hill profile of our eastern road, when I chanced to 
glance northward, and saw with extraordinary pleasure the sea 
lying outspread.  It seemed as smooth as glass, and yet I 
knew the surf was roaring all along the reef, and indeed, if 
I had listened, I could have heard it - and saw the white 
sweep of it outside Matautu.

I am out of condition still, and can do nothing, and toil to 
be at my pen, and see some ink behind me.  I have taken up 
again THE HIGH WOODS OF ULUFANUA.  I still think the fable 
too fantastic and far-fetched.  But, on a re-reading, fell in 
love with my first chapter, and for good or evil I must 
finish it.  It is really good, well fed with facts, true to 
the manners, and (for once in my works) rendered pleasing by 
the presence of a heroine who is pretty.  Miss Uma is pretty; 
a fact.  All my other women have been as ugly as sin, and 
like Falconet's horse (I have just been reading the anecdote 
in Lockhart), MORTES forbye.

News: Our old house is now half demolished; it is to be 
rebuilt on a new site; now we look down upon and through the 
open posts of it like a bird-cage, to the woods beyond.  My 
poor Paulo has lost his father and succeeded to thirty 
thousand thalers (I think); he had to go down to the 
Consulate yesterday to send a legal paper; got drunk, of 
course, and is still this morning in so bemused a condition 
that our breakfasts all went wrong.  Lafaele is absent at the 
deathbed of his fair spouse; fair she was, but not in deed, 
acting as harlot to the wreckers at work on the warships, to 
which society she probably owes her end, having fallen off a 
cliff, or been thrust off it -INTER POCULA.  Henry is the 
same, our stand-by.  In this transition stage he has been 
living in Apia; but the other night he stayed up, and sat 
with us about the chimney in my room.  It was the first time 
he had seen a fire in a hearth; he could not look at it 
without smiles, and was always anxious to put on another 
stick.  We entertained him with the fairy tales of 
civilisation - theatres, London, blocks in the street, 
Universities,  the Underground, newspapers, etc., and 
projected once more his visit to Sydney.  If we can manage, 
it will be next Christmas.  (I see it will be impossible for 
me to afford a further journey THIS winter.)  We have spent 
since we have been here about 2500 pounds, which is not much 
if you consider we have built on that three houses, one of 
them of some size, and a considerable stable, made two miles 
of road some three times, cleared many acres of bush, made 
some miles of path, planted quantities of food, and enclosed 
a horse paddock and some acres of pig run; but 'tis a good 
deal of money regarded simply as money.  K. is bosh; I have 
no use for him; but we must do what we can with the fellow 
meanwhile; he is good-humoured and honest, but inefficient, 
idle himself, the cause of idleness in others, grumbling, a 
self-excuser - all the faults in a bundle.  He owes us thirty 
weeks' service - the wretched Paul about half as much.  Henry 
is almost the only one of our employes who has a credit.


MAY 17TH.


Well, am I ashamed of myself?  I do not think so.  I have 
been hammering Letters ever since, and got three ready and a 
fourth about half through; all four will go by the mail, 
which is what I wish, for so I keep at least my start.  Days 
and days of unprofitable stubbing and digging, and the result 
still poor as literature, left-handed, heavy, unillumined, 
but I believe readable and interesting as matter.  It has 
been no joke of a hard time, and when my task was done, I had 
little taste for anything but blowing on the pipe.  A few 
necessary letters filled the bowl to overflowing.

My mother has arrived, young, well, and in good spirits.  By 
desperate exertions, which have wholly floored Fanny, her 
room was ready for her, and the dining-room fit to eat in.  
It was a famous victory.  Lloyd never told me of your 
portrait till a few days ago; fortunately, I had no pictures 
hung yet; and the space over my chimney waits your 
counterfeit presentment.  I have not often heard anything 
that pleased me more; your severe head shall frown upon me 
and keep me to the mark.  But why has it not come?  Have you 
been as forgetful as Lloyd?


18TH.


Miserable comforters are ye all!  I read your esteemed pages 
this morning by lamplight and the glimmer of the dawn, and as 
soon as breakfast was over, I must turn to and tackle these 
despised labours!  Some courage was necessary, but not 
wanting.  There is one thing at least by which I can avenge 
myself for my drubbing, for on one point you seem 
impenetrably stupid.  Can I find no form of words which will 
at last convey to your intelligence the fact that THESE 
LETTERS WERE NEVER MEANT, AND ARE NOT NOW MEANT, TO BE OTHER 
THAN A QUARRY OF MATERIALS FROM WHICH THE BOOK MAY BE DRAWN?  
There seems something incommunicable in this (to me) simple 
idea; I know Lloyd failed to comprehend it, I doubt if he has 
grasped it now; and I despair, after all these efforts, that 
you should ever be enlightened.  Still, oblige me by reading 
that form of words once more, and see if a light does not 
break.  You may be sure, after the friendly freedoms of your 
criticism (necessary I am sure, and wholesome I know, but 
untimely to the poor labourer in his landslip) that mighty 
little of it will stand.

Our Paul has come into a fortune, and wishes to go home to 
the Hie Germanie.  This is a tile on our head, and if a 
shower, which is now falling, lets up, I must go down to 
Apia, and see if I can find a substitute of any kind.  This 
is, from any point of view, disgusting; above all, from that 
of work; for, whatever the result, the mill has to be kept 
turning; apparently dust, and not flour, is the proceed.  
Well, there is gold in the dust, which is a fine consolation, 
since - well, I can't help it; night or morning, I do my 
darndest, and if I cannot charge for merit, I must e'en 
charge for toil, of which I have plenty and plenty more ahead 
before this cup is drained; sweat and hyssop are the 
ingredients.

We are clearing from Carruthers' Road to the pig fence, 
twenty-eight powerful natives with Catholic medals about 
their necks, all swiping in like Trojans; long may the sport 
continue!

The invoice to hand.  Ere this goes out, I hope to see your 
expressive, but surely not benignant countenance!  Adieu, O 
culler of offensive expressions - 'and a' -  to be a posy to 
your ain dear May!' - Fanny seems a little revived again 
after her spasm of work.  Our books and furniture keep slowly 
draining up the road, in a sad state of scatterment and 
disrepair; I wish the devil had had K. by his red beard 
before he had packed my library.  Odd leaves and sheets and 
boards - a thing to make a bibliomaniac shed tears - are 
fished out of odd corners.  But I am no bibliomaniac, praise 
Heaven, and I bear up, and rejoice when I find anything safe.


19TH.


However, I worked five hours on the brute, and finished my 
Letter all the same, and couldn't sleep last night by 
consequence.  Haven't had a bad night since I don't know 
when; dreamed a large, handsome man (a New Orleans planter) 
had insulted my wife, and, do what I pleased, I could not 
make him fight me; and woke to find it was the eleventh 
anniversary of my marriage.  A letter usually takes me from a 
week to three days; but I'm sometimes two days on a page - I 
was once three - and then my friends kick me.  C'EST-Y-BETE!  
I wish letters of that charming quality could be so timed as 
to arrive when a fellow wasn't working at the truck in 
question; but, of course, that can't be.  Did not go down 
last night.  It showered all afternoon, and poured heavy and 
loud all night.

You should have seen our twenty-five popes (the Samoan phrase 
for a Catholic, lay or cleric) squatting when the day's work 
was done on the ground outside the verandah, and pouring in 
the rays of forty-eight eyes through the back and the front 
door of the dining-room, while Henry and I and the boss pope 
signed the contract.  The second boss (an old man) wore a 
kilt (as usual) and a Balmoral bonnet with a little tartan 
edging and the tails pulled off.  I told him that hat belong 
to my country - Sekotia; and he said, yes, that was the place 
that he belonged to right enough.  And then all the Papists 
laughed till the woods rang; he was slashing away with a 
cutlass as he spoke.

The pictures have decidedly not come; they may probably 
arrive Sunday.



CHAPTER IX



JUNE, 1891.


SIR, - To you, under your portrait, which is, in expression, 
your true, breathing self, and up to now saddens me; in time, 
and soon, I shall be glad to have it there; it is still only 
a reminder of your absence.  Fanny wept when we unpacked it, 
and you know how little she is given to that mood; I was 
scarce Roman myself, but that does not count - I lift up my 
voice so readily.  These are good compliments to the artist.  
I write in the midst of a wreck of books, which have just 
come up, and have for once defied my labours to get straight.  
The whole floor is filled with them, and (what's worse) most 
of the shelves forbye; and where they are to go to, and what 
is to become of the librarian, God knows.  It is hot to-
night, and has been airless all day, and I am out of sorts, 
and my work sticks, the devil fly away with it and me.  We 
had an alarm of war since last I wrote my screeds to you, and 
it blew over, and is to blow on again, and the rumour goes 
they are to begin by killing all the whites.  I have no 
belief in this, and should be infinitely sorry if it came to 
pass - I do not mean for US, that were otiose - but for the 
poor, deluded schoolboys, who should hope to gain by such a 
step.


[LETTER RESUMED.]
JUNE 20TH.


No diary this time.  Why? you ask.  I have only sent out four 
Letters, and two chapters of the WRECKER.  Yes, but to get 
these I have written 132 pp., 66,000 words in thirty days; 
2200 words a day; the labours of an elephant.  God knows what 
it's like, and don't ask me, but nobody shall say I have 
spared pains.  I thought for some time it wouldn't come at 
all.  I was days and days over the first letter of the lot - 
days and days writing and deleting and making no headway 
whatever, till I thought I should have gone bust; but it came 
at last after a fashion, and the rest went a thought more 
easily, though I am not so fond as to fancy any better.

Your opinion as to the letters as a whole is so damnatory 
that I put them by.  But there is a 'hell of a want of' money 
this year.  And these Gilbert Island papers, being the most 
interesting in matter, and forming a compact whole, and being 
well illustrated, I did think of as a possible resource.

It would be called


SIX MONTHS IN MELANESIA,
TWO ISLAND KINGS,
- MONARCHIES,
GILBERT ISLAND KINGS,
- MONARCHIES,


and I daresay I'll think of a better yet - and would divide 
thus:-


BUTARITATI.


I.    A Town asleep.
II.   The Three Brothers.
III.  Around our House.
IV.   A Tale of a Tapu.
V.    The Five Day's Festival.
VI.   Domestic Life - (which might be omitted, but not well, 
better be recast).


THE KING OF APEMAMA.


VII.  The Royal Traders.
VIII. Foundation of Equator Town.
IX.   The Palace of Mary Warren.
X.    Equator Town and the Palace.
XI.   King and Commons.
XII.  The Devil Work Box.
XIII. The Three Corslets.
XIV.  Tail piece; the Court upon a Journey.


I wish you to watch these closely, judging them as a whole, 
and treating them as I have asked you, and favour me with 
your damnatory advice.  I look up at your portrait, and it 
frowns upon me.  You seem to view me with reproach.  The 
expression is excellent; Fanny wept when she saw it, and you 
know she is not given to the melting mood.  She seems really 
better; I have a touch of fever again, I fancy overwork, and 
to-day, when I have overtaken my letters, I shall blow on my 
pipe.  Tell Mrs. S. I have been playing LE CHANT D'AMOUR 
lately, and have arranged it, after awful trouble, rather 
prettily for two pipes; and it brought her before me with an 
effect scarce short of hallucination.  I could hear her voice 
in every note; yet I had forgot the air entirely, and began 
to pipe it from notes as something new, when I was brought up 
with a round turn by this reminiscence.  We are now very much 
installed; the dining-room is done, and looks lovely.  Soon 
we shall begin to photograph and send you our circumstances.  
My room is still a howling wilderness.  I sleep on a platform 
in a window, and strike my mosquito bar and roll up my 
bedclothes every morning, so that the bed becomes by day a 
divan.  A great part of the floor is knee-deep in books, yet 
nearly all the shelves are filled, alas!  It is a place to 
make a pig recoil, yet here are my interminable labours begun 
daily by lamp-light, and sometimes not yet done when the lamp 
has once more to be lighted.  The effect of pictures in this 
place is surprising.  They give great pleasure.


JUNE 21ST.


A word more.  I had my breakfast this morning at 4.30!  My 
new cook has beaten me and (as Lloyd says) revenged all the 
cooks in the world.  I have been hunting them to give me 
breakfast early since I was twenty; and now here comes Mr. 
Ratke, and I have to plead for mercy.  I cannot stand 4.30; I 
am a mere fevered wreck; it is now half-past eight, and I can 
no more, and four hours divide me from lunch, the devil take 
the man!  Yesterday it was about 5.30, which I can stand; day 
before 5, which is bad enough; to-day, I give out.  It is 
like a London season, and as I do not take a siesta once in a 
month, and then only five minutes, I am being worn to the 
bones, and look aged and anxious.

We have Rider Haggard's brother here as a Land Commissioner; 
a nice kind of a fellow; indeed, all the three Land 
Commissioners are very agreeable.



CHAPTER X



SUNDAY, SEPT. 5 (?), 1891.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - Yours from Lochinver has just come.  You 
ask me if I am ever homesick for the Highlands and the Isles.  
Conceive that for the last month I have been living there 
between 1786 and 1850, in my grandfather's diaries and 
letters.  I HAD to take a rest; no use talking; so I put in a 
month over my LIVES OF THE STEVENSONS with great pleasure and 
profit and some advance; one chapter and a part drafted.  The 
whole promises well Chapter I. Domestic Annals.  Chapter II.  
The Northern Lights.  Chapter III. The Bell Rock.  Chapter 
IV. A Family of Boys.  Chap.  V. The Grandfather.  VI. Alan 
Stevenson.  VII. Thomas Stevenson.  My materials for my 
great-grandfather are almost null; for my grandfather copious 
and excellent.  Name, a puzzle.  A SCOTTISH FAMILY, A FAMILY 
OF ENGINEERS, NORTHERN LIGHTS, THE ENGINEERS OF THE NORTHERN 
LIGHTS: A FAMILY HISTORY.  Advise; but it will take long.  
Now, imagine if I have been homesick for Barrahead and Island 
Glass, and Kirkwall, and Cape Wrath, and the Wells of the 
Pentland Firth; I could have wept.

Now for politics.  I am much less alarmed; I believe the MALO 
(=RAJ, government) will collapse and cease like an overlain 
infant, without a shot fired.  They have now been months here 
on their big salaries - and Cedarcrantz, whom I specially 
like as a man, has done nearly nothing, and the Baron, who is 
well-meaning, has done worse.  They have these large 
salaries, and they have all the taxes; they have made scarce 
a foot of road; they have not given a single native a 
position - all to white men; they have scarce laid out a 
penny on Apia, and scarce a penny on the King; they have 
forgot they were in Samoa, or that such a thing as Samoans 
existed, and had eyes and some intelligence.  The Chief 
Justice has refused to pay his customs!  The President 
proposed to have an expensive house built for himself, while 
the King, his master, has none!  I had stood aside, and been 
a loyal, and, above all, a silent subject, up to then; but 
now I snap my fingers at their MALO.  It is damned, and I'm 
damned glad of it.  And this is not all.  Last 'WAINIU,' when 
I sent Fanny off to Fiji, I hear the wonderful news that the 
Chief Justice is going to Fiji and the Colonies to improve 
his mind.  I showed my way of thought to his guest, Count 
Wachtmeister, whom I have sent to you with a letter - he will 
tell you all the news.  Well, the Chief Justice stayed, but 
they said he was to leave yesterday.  I had intended to go 
down, and see and warn him!  But the President's house had 
come up in the meanwhile, and I let them go to their doom, 
which I am only anxious to see swiftly and (if it may be) 
bloodlessly fall.

Thus I have in a way withdrawn my unrewarded loyalty.  Lloyd 
is down to-day with Moors to call on Mataafa; the news of the 
excursion made a considerable row in Apia, and both the 
German and the English consuls besought Lloyd not to go.  But 
he stuck to his purpose, and with my approval.  It's a poor 
thing if people are to give up a pleasure party for a MALO 
that has never done anything for us but draw taxes, and is 
going to go pop, and leave us at the mercy of the identical 
Mataafa, whom I have not visited for more than a year, and 
who is probably furious.

The sense of my helplessness here has been rather bitter; I 
feel it wretched to see this dance of folly and injustice and 
unconscious rapacity go forward from day to day, and to be 
impotent.  I was not consulted - or only by one man, and that 
on particular points; I did not choose to volunteer advice 
till some pressing occasion; I have not even a vote, for I am 
not a member of the municipality.

What ails you, miserable man, to talk of saving material?  I 
have a whole world in my head, a whole new society to work, 
but I am in no hurry; you will shortly make the acquaintance 
of the Island of Ulufanua, on which I mean to lay several 
stories; the BLOODY WEDDING, possibly the HIGH WOODS - (O, 
it's so good, the High Woods, but the story is craziness; 
that's the trouble,) - a political story, the LABOUR SLAVE, 
etc.  Ulufanua is an imaginary island; the name is a 
beautiful Samoan word for the TOP of a forest; ulu - leaves 
or hair, fanua=land.  The ground or country of the leaves.  
'Ulufanua the isle of the sea,' read that verse dactylically 
and you get the beat; the u's are like our double oo; did 
ever you hear a prettier word?

I do not feel inclined to make a volume of Essays, but if I 
did, and perhaps the idea is good - and any idea is better 
than South Seas - here would be my choice of the Scribner 
articles: DREAMS, BEGGARS, LANTERN-BEARERS, RANDOM MEMORIES.  
There was a paper called the OLD PACIFIC CAPITAL in Fraser, 
in Tulloch's time, which had merit; there were two on 
Fontainebleau in the MAGAZINE OF ART in Henley's time.  I 
have no idea if they're any good; then there's the EMIGRANT 
TRAIN.  PULVIS ET UMBRA is in a different key, and wouldn't 
hang on with the rest.

I have just interrupted my letter and read through the 
chapter of the HIGH WOODS that is written, a chapter and a 
bit, some sixteen pages, really very fetching, but what do 
you wish? the story is so wilful, so steep, so silly - it's a 
hallucination I have outlived, and yet I never did a better 
piece of work, horrid, and pleasing, and extraordinarily 
TRUE; it's sixteen pages of the South Seas; their essence.  
What am I to do?  Lose this little gem - for I'll be bold, 
and that's what I think it - or go on with the rest, which I 
don't believe in, and don't like, and which can never make 
aught but a silly yarn?  Make another end to it?  Ah, yes, 
but that's not the way I write; the whole tale is implied; I 
never use an effect, when I can help it, unless it prepares 
the effects that are to follow; that's what a story consists 
in.  To make another end, that is to make the beginning all 
wrong.  The denouement of a long story is nothing; it is just 
a 'full close,' which you may approach and accompany as you 
please - it is a coda, not an essential member in the rhythm; 
but the body and end of a short story is bone of the bone and 
blood of the blood of the beginning.  Well, I shall end by 
finishing it against my judgment; that fragment is my 
Delilah.  Golly, it's good.  I am not shining by modesty; but 
I do just love the colour and movement of that piece so far 
as it goes.

I was surprised to hear of your fishing.  And you saw the 
'Pharos,' thrice fortunate man; I wish I dared go home, I 
would ask the Commissioners to take me round for old sake's 
sake, and see all my family pictures once more from the Mull 
of Galloway to Unst.  However, all is arranged for our 
meeting in Ceylon, except the date and the blooming pounds.  
I have heard of an exquisite hotel in the country, airy, 
large rooms, good cookery, not dear; we shall have a couple 
of months there, if we can make it out, and converse or - as 
my grandfather always said - 'commune.'  'Communings with Mr. 
Kennedy as to Lighthouse Repairs.'  He was a fine old fellow, 
but a droll.


EVENING.


Lloyd has returned.  Peace and war were played before his 
eyes at heads or tails.  A German was stopped with levelled 
guns; he raised his whip; had it fallen, we might have been 
now in war.  Excuses were made by Mataafa himself.  Doubtless 
the thing was done - I mean the stopping of the German - a 
little to show off before Lloyd.  Meanwhile - was up here, 
telling how the Chief Justice was really gone for five or 
eight weeks, and begging me to write to the TIMES and 
denounce the state of affairs; many strong reasons he 
advanced; and Lloyd and I have been since his arrival and -'s 
departure, near half an hour, debating what should be done.  
Cedarcrantz is gone; it is not my fault; he knows my views on 
that point - alone of all points; - he leaves me with my 
mouth sealed.  Yet this is a nice thing that because he is 
guilty of a fresh offence - his flight - the mouth of the 
only possible influential witness should be closed?  I do not 
like this argument.  I look like a cad, if I do in the man's 
absence what I could have done in a more manly manner in his 
presence.  True; but why did he go?  It is his last sin.  And 
I, who like the man extremely - that is the word - I love his 
society - he is intelligent, pleasant, even witty, a 
gentleman - and you know how that attaches - I loathe to seem 
to play a base part; but the poor natives - who are like 
other folk, false enough, lazy enough, not heroes, not saints 
- ordinary men damnably misused - are they to suffer because 
I like Cedarcrantz, and Cedarcrantz has cut his lucky?  This 
is a little tragedy, observe well - a tragedy!  I may be 
right, I may be wrong in my judgment, but I am in treaty with 
my honour.  I know not how it will seem to-morrow.  Lloyd 
thought the barrier of honour insurmountable, and it is an 
ugly obstacle.  He (Cedarcrantz) will likely meet my wife 
three days from now, may travel back with her, will be 
charming if he does; suppose this, and suppose him to arrive 
and find that I have sprung a mine - or the nearest approach 
to it I could find - behind his back?  My position is pretty.  
Yes, I am an aristocrat.  I have the old petty, personal view 
of honour?  I should blush till I die if I do this; yet it is 
on the cards that I may do it.  So much I have written you in 
bed, as a man writes, or talks, in a BITTRE WAHL.  Now I 
shall sleep, and see if I am more clear.  I will consult the 
missionaries at least - I place some reliance in M. also - or 
I should if he were not a partisan; but a partisan he is.  
There's the pity.  To sleep!  A fund of wisdom in the 
prostrate body and the fed brain.  Kindly observe R. L. S. in 
the talons of politics!  'Tis funny - 'tis sad.  Nobody but 
these cursed idiots could have so driven me; I cannot bear 
idiots.

My dear Colvin, I must go to sleep; it is long past ten - a 
dreadful hour for me.  And here am I lingering (so I feel) in 
the dining-room at the Monument, talking to you across the 
table, both on our feet, and only the two stairs to mount, 
and get to bed, and sleep, and be waked by dear old George - 
to whom I wish my kindest remembrances - next morning.  I 
look round, and there is my blue room, and my long lines of 
shelves, and the door gaping on a moonless night, and no word 
of S. C. but his twa portraits on the wall.  Good-bye, my 
dear fellow, and goodnight.  Queer place the world!


MONDAY.


No clearness of mind with the morning; I have no guess what I 
should do.  'Tis easy to say that the public duty should 
brush aside these little considerations of personal dignity; 
so it is that politicians begin, and in a month you find them 
rat and flatter and intrigue with brows of brass.  I am 
rather of the old view, that a man's first duty is to these 
little laws; the big he does not, he never will, understand; 
I may be wrong about the Chief Justice and the Baron and the 
state of Samoa; I cannot be wrong about the vile attitude I 
put myself in if I blow the gaff on Cedarcrantz behind his 
back.


TUESDAY.


One more word about the South Seas, in answer to a question I 
observe I have forgotten to answer.  The Tahiti part has 
never turned up, because it has never been written.  As for 
telling you where I went or when, or anything about Honolulu, 
I would rather die; that is fair and plain.  How can anybody 
care when or how I left Honolulu?  A man of upwards of forty 
cannot waste his time in communicating matter of that 
indifference.  The letters, it appears, are tedious; they 
would be more tedious still if I wasted my time upon such 
infantile and sucking-bottle details.  If ever I put in any 
such detail, it is because it leads into something or serves 
as a transition.  To tell it for its own sake, never!  The 
mistake is all through that I have told too much; I had not 
sufficient confidence in the reader, and have overfed him; 
and here are you anxious to learn how I - O Colvin!  Suppose 
it had made a book, all such information is given to one 
glance of an eye by a map with a little dotted line upon it.  
But let us forget this unfortunate affair.


WEDNESDAY.


Yesterday I went down to consult Clarke, who took the view of 
delay.  Has he changed his mind already?  I wonder: here at 
least is the news.  Some little while back some men of Manono 
- what is Manono? - a Samoan rotten borough, a small isle of 
huge political importance, heaven knows why, where a handful 
of chiefs make half the trouble in the country.  Some men of 
Manono (which is strong Mataafa) burned down the houses and 
destroyed the crops of some Malietoa neighbours.  The 
President went there the other day and landed alone on the 
island, which (to give him his due) was plucky.  Moreover, he 
succeeded in persuading the folks to come up and be judged on 
a particular day in Apia.  That day they did not come; but 
did come the next, and, to their vast surprise, were given 
six months' imprisonment and clapped in gaol.  Those who had 
accompanied them cried to them on the streets as they were 
marched to prison, 'Shall we rescue you?'  The condemned, 
marching in the hands of thirty men with loaded rifles, cried 
out 'No'!  And the trick was done.  But it was ardently 
believed a rescue would be attempted; the gaol was laid about 
with armed men day and night; but there was some question of 
their loyalty, and the commandant of the forces, a very nice 
young beardless Swede, became nervous, and conceived a plan.  
How if he should put dynamite under the gaol, and in case of 
an attempted rescue blow up prison and all?  He went to the 
President, who agreed; he went to the American man-of-war for 
the dynamite and machine, was refused, and got it at last 
from the Wreckers.  The thing began to leak out, and there 
arose a muttering in town.  People had no fancy for amateur 
explosions, for one thing.  For another, it did not clearly 
appear that it was legal; the men had been condemned to six 
months' prison, which they were peaceably undergoing; they 
had not been condemned to death.  And lastly, it seemed a 
somewhat advanced example of civilisation to set before 
barbarians.  The mutter in short became a storm, and 
yesterday, while I was down, a cutter was chartered, and the 
prisoners were suddenly banished to the Tokelaus.  Who has 
changed the sentence?  We are going to stir in the dynamite 
matter; we do not want the natives to fancy us consenting to 
such an outrage.

Fanny has returned from her trip, and on the whole looks 
better.  The HIGH WOODS are under way, and their name is now 
the BEACH OF FALESA, and the yarn is cured.  I have about 
thirty pages of it done; it will be fifty to seventy I 
suppose.  No supernatural trick at all; and escaped out of it 
quite easily; can't think why I was so stupid for so long.  
Mighty glad to have Fanny back to this 'Hell of the South 
Seas,' as the German Captain called it.  What will 
Cedarcrantz think when he comes back?  To do him justice, had 
he been here, this Manono hash would not have been.

Here is a pretty thing.  When Fanny was in Fiji all the Samoa 
and Tokelau folks were agog about our 'flash' house; but the 
whites had never heard of it.


ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON,
Author of THE BEACH OF FALESA.



CHAPTER XI



SEPT. 28.


MY DEAR COLVIN,  - Since I last laid down my pen, I have 
written and rewritten THE BEACH OF FALESA; something like 
sixty thousand words of sterling domestic fiction (the story, 
you will understand, is only half that length); and now I 
don't want to write any more again for ever, or feel so; and 
I've got to overhaul it once again to my sorrow.  I was all 
yesterday revising, and found a lot of slacknesses and (what 
is worse in this kind of thing) some literaryisms.  One of 
the puzzles is this: It is a first person story - a trader 
telling his own adventure in an island.  When I began I 
allowed myself a few liberties, because I was afraid of the 
end; now the end proved quite easy, and could be done in the 
pace; so the beginning remains about a quarter tone out (in 
places); but I have rather decided to let it stay so.  The 
problem is always delicate; it is the only thing that worries 
me in first person tales, which otherwise (quo' Alan) 'set 
better wi' my genius.'  There is a vast deal of fact in the 
story, and some pretty good comedy.  It is the first 
realistic South Sea story; I mean with real South Sea 
character and details of life.  Everybody else who has tried, 
that I have seen, got carried away by the romance, and ended 
in a kind of sugar-candy sham epic, and the whole effect was 
lost - there was no etching, no human grin, consequently no 
conviction.  Now I have got the smell and look of the thing a 
good deal.  You will know more about the South Seas after you 
have read my little tale than if you had read a library.  As 
to whether any one else will read it, I have no guess.  I am 
in an off time, but there is just the possibility it might 
make a hit; for the yarn is good and melodramatic, and there 
is quite a love affair - for me; and Mr. Wiltshire (the 
narrator) is a huge lark, though I say it.  But there is 
always the exotic question, and everything, the life, the 
place, the dialects - trader's talk, which is a strange 
conglomerate of literary expressions and English and American 
slang, and Beach de Mar, or native English, - the very trades 
and hopes and fears of the characters, are all novel, and may 
be found unwelcome to that great, hulking, bullering whale, 
the public.

Since I wrote, I have been likewise drawing up a document to 
send it to the President; it has been dreadfully delayed, not 
by me, but to-day they swear it will be sent in.  A list of 
questions about the dynamite report are herein laid before 
him, and considerations suggested why he should answer.


OCTOBER 5TH.


Ever since my last snatch I have been much chivied about over 
the President business; his answer has come, and is an 
evasion accompanied with schoolboy insolence, and we are 
going to try to answer it.  I drew my answer and took it down 
yesterday; but one of the signatories wants another paragraph 
added, which I have not yet been able to draw, and as to the 
wisdom of which I am not yet convinced.


NEXT DAY, OCT. 7TH, THE RIGHT DAY.


We are all in rather a muddled state with our President 
affair.  I do loathe politics, but at the same time, I cannot 
stand by and have the natives blown in the air treacherously 
with dynamite.  They are still quiet; how long this may 
continue I do not know, though of course by mere prescription 
the Government is strengthened, and is probably insured till 
the next taxes fall due.  But the unpopularity of the whites 
is growing.  My native overseer, the great Henry Simele, 
announced to-day that he was 'weary of whites upon the beach.  
All too proud,' said this veracious witness.  One of the 
proud ones had threatened yesterday to cut off his head with 
a bush knife!  These are 'native outrages'; honour bright, 
and setting theft aside, in which the natives are active, 
this is the main stream of irritation.  The natives are 
generally courtly, far from always civil, but really gentle, 
and with a strong sense of honour of their own, and certainly 
quite as much civilised as our dynamiting President.

We shall be delighted to see Kipling.  I go to bed usually 
about half-past eight, and my lamp is out before ten; I 
breakfast at six.  We may say roughly we have no soda water 
on the island, and just now truthfully no whisky.  I HAVE 
heard the chimes at midnight; now no more, I guess.  BUT - 
Fanny and I, as soon as we can get coins for it, are coming 
to Europe, not to England: I am thinking of Royat.  Bar wars.  
If not, perhaps the Apennines might give us a mountain refuge 
for two months or three in summer.  How is that for high?  
But the money must be all in hand first.


OCTOBER 13TH.


How am I to describe my life these last few days?  I have 
been wholly swallowed up in politics, a wretched business, 
with fine elements of farce in it too, which repay a man in 
passing, involving many dark and many moonlight rides, secret 
counsels which are at once divulged, sealed letters which are 
read aloud in confidence to the neighbours, and a mass of 
fudge and fun, which would have driven me crazy ten years 
ago, and now makes me smile.

On Friday, Henry came and told us he must leave and go to 'my 
poor old family in Savaii'; why?  I do not quite know - but, 
I suspect, to be tattooed - if so, then probably to be 
married, and we shall see him no more.  I told him he must do 
what he thought his duty; we had him to lunch, drank his 
health, and he and I rode down about twelve.  When I got 
down, I sent my horse back to help bring down the family 
later.  My own afternoon was cut out for me; my last draft 
for the President had been objected to by some of the 
signatories.  I stood out, and one of our small number 
accordingly refused to sign.  Him I had to go and persuade, 
which went off very well after the first hottish moments; you 
have no idea how stolid my temper is now.  By about five the 
thing was done; and we sat down to dinner at the Chinaman's - 
the Verrey or Doyen's of Apia - G. and I at each end as 
hosts; G.'s wife - Fanua, late maid of the village; her 
(adopted) father and mother, Seumanu and Faatulia, Fanny, 
Belle, Lloyd, Austin, and Henry Simele, his last appearance.  
Henry was in a kilt of gray shawl, with a blue jacket, white 
shirt and black necktie, and looked like a dark genteel guest 
in a Highland shooting-box.  Seumanu (opposite Fanny, next 
G.) is chief of Apia, a rather big gun in this place, looking 
like a large, fatted, military Englishman, bar the colour.  
Faatulia, next me, is a bigger chief than her husband.  Henry 
is a chief too - his chief name, Iiga (Ee-eeng-a), he has not 
yet 'taken' because of his youth.  We were in fine society, 
and had a pleasant meal-time, with lots of fun.  Then to the 
Opera - I beg your pardon, I mean the Circus.  We occupied 
the first row in the reserved seats, and there in the row 
behind were all our friends - Captain Foss and his Captain-
Lieutenant, three of the American officers, very nice 
fellows, the Dr., etc, so we made a fine show of what an 
embittered correspondent of the local paper called 'the 
shoddy aristocracy of Apia'; and you should have seen how we 
carried on, and how I clapped, and Captain Foss hollered 
'WUNDERSCHON!' and threw himself forward in his seat, and how 
we all in fact enjoyed ourselves like school-children, Austin 
not a shade more than his neighbours.  Then the Circus broke 
up, and the party went home, but I stayed down, having 
business on the morrow.

Yesterday, October 12th, great news reaches me, and Lloyd and 
I, with the mail just coming in, must leave all, saddle, and 
ride down.  True enough, the President had resigned!  Sought 
to resign his presidency of the council, and keep his 
advisership to the King; given way to the Consul's objections 
and resigned all - then fell out with them about the 
disposition of the funds, and was now trying to resign from 
his resignation!  Sad little President, so trim to look at, 
and I believe so kind to his little wife!  Not only so, but I 
meet D. on the beach.  D. calls me in consultation, and we 
make with infinite difficulty a draft of a petition to the 
King. . . . Then to dinner at M.'s, a very merry meal, 
interrupted before it was over by the arrival of the 
committee.  Slight sketch of procedure agreed upon, self 
appointed spokesman, and the deputation sets off.  Walk all 
through Matafele, all along Mulinuu, come to the King's 
house; he has verbally refused to see us in answer to our 
letter, swearing he is gase-gase (chief-sickness, not common 
man's), and indeed we see him inside in bed.  It is a 
miserable low house, better houses by the dozen in the little 
hamlet (Tanugamanono) of bushmen on our way to Vailima; and 
the President's house in process of erection just opposite!  
We are told to return to-morrow; I refuse; and at last we are 
very sourly received, sit on the mats, and I open out, 
through a very poor interpreter, and sometimes hampered by 
unacceptable counsels from my backers.  I can speak fairly 
well in a plain way now.  C. asked me to write out my 
harangue for him this morning; I have done so, and couldn't 
get it near as good.  I suppose (talking and interpreting) I 
was twenty minutes or half-an-hour on the deck; then his 
majesty replied in the dying whisper of a big chief; a few 
words of rejoinder (approving), and the deputation withdrew, 
rather well satisfied.

A few days ago this intervention would have been a deportable 
offence; not now, I bet; I would like them to try.  A little 
way back along Mulinuu, Mrs. G. met us with her husband's 
horse; and he and she and Lloyd and I rode back in a heavenly 
moonlight.  Here ends a chapter in the life of an island 
politician!  Catch me at it again; 'tis easy to go in, but it 
is not a pleasant trade.  I have had a good team, as good as 
I could get on the beach; but what trouble even so, and what 
fresh troubles shaping.  But I have on the whole carried all 
my points; I believe all but one, and on that (which did not 
concern me) I had no right to interfere.  I am sure you would 
be amazed if you knew what a good hand I am at keeping my 
temper, talking people over, and giving reasons which are not 
my reasons, but calculated for the meridian of the particular 
objection; so soon does falsehood await the politician in his 
whirling path.



CHAPTER XII



MAY, OCTOBER 24TH.


MY DEAR CARTHEW, - See what I have written, but it's Colvin 
I'm after - I have written two chapters, about thirty pages 
of WRECKER since the mail left, which must be my excuse, and 
the bother I've had with it is not to be imagined, you might 
have seen me the day before yesterday weighing British sov.'s 
and Chili dollars to arrange my treasure chest.  And there 
was such a calculation, not for that only, but for the ship's 
position and distances when - but I am not going to tell you 
the yarn - and then, as my arithmetic is particularly lax, 
Lloyd had to go over all my calculations; and then, as I had 
changed the amount of money, he had to go over all HIS as to 
the amount of the lay; and altogether, a bank could be run 
with less effusion of figures than it took to shore up a 
single chapter of a measly yarn.  However, it's done, and I 
have but one more, or at the outside two, to do, and I am 
Free! and can do any damn thing I like.

Before falling on politics, I shall give you my day.  Awoke 
somewhere about the first peep of day, came gradually to, and 
had a turn on the verandah before 5.55, when 'the child' (an 
enormous Wallis Islander) brings me an orange; at 6, 
breakfast; 6.10, to work; which lasts till, at 10.30, Austin 
comes for his history lecture; this is rather dispiriting, 
but education must be gone about in faith - and charity, both 
of which pretty nigh failed me to-day about (of all things) 
Carthage; 11, luncheon; after luncheon in my mother's room, I 
read Chapter XXIII. of THE WRECKER, then Belle, Lloyd, and I 
go up and make music furiously till about 2 (I suppose), when 
I turn into work again till 4; fool from 4 to half-past, 
tired out and waiting for the bath hour; 4.30, bath; 4.40, 
eat two heavenly mangoes on the verandah, and see the boys 
arrive with the pack-horses; 5, dinner; smoke, chat on 
verandah, then hand of cards, and at last at 8 come up to my 
room with a pint of beer and a hard biscuit, which I am now 
consuming, and as soon as they are consumed I shall turn in.

Such are the innocent days of this ancient and outworn 
sportsman; to-day there was no weeding, usually there is 
however, edge in somewhere.  My books for the moment are a 
crib to Phaedo, and the second book of Montaigne; and a 
little while back I was reading Frederic Harrison, 'Choice of 
Books,' etc. - very good indeed, a great deal of sense and 
knowledge in the volume, and some very true stuff, CONTRA 
Carlyle, about the eighteenth century.  A hideous idea came 
over me that perhaps Harrison is now getting OLD.  Perhaps 
you are.  Perhaps I am.  Oh, this infidelity must be stared 
firmly down.  I am about twenty-three - say twenty-eight; you 
about thirty, or, by'r lady, thirty-four; and as Harrison 
belongs to the same generation, there is no good bothering 
about him.

Here has just been a fine alert; I gave my wife a dose of 
chlorodyne.  'Something wrong,' says she.  'Nonsense,' said 
I.  'Embrocation,' said she.  I smelt it, and - it smelt very 
funny.  'I think it's just gone bad, and to-morrow will 
tell.'  Proved to be so.


WEDNESDAY.


HISTORY OF TUESDAY. - Woke at usual time, very little work, 
for I was tired, and had a job for the evening - to write 
parts for a new instrument, a violin.  Lunch, chat, and up to 
my place to practise; but there was no practising for me - my 
flageolet was gone wrong, and I had to take it all to pieces, 
clean it, and put it up again.  As this is a most intricate 
job - the thing dissolves into seventeen separate members, 
most of these have to be fitted on their individual springs 
as fine as needles, and sometimes two at once with the 
springs shoving different ways - it took me till two.  Then 
Lloyd and I rode forth on our errands; first to Motootua, 
where we had a really instructive conversation on weeds and 
grasses.  Thence down to Apia, where we bought a fresh bottle 
of chlorodyne and conversed on politics.

My visit to the King, which I thought at the time a 
particularly nugatory and even schoolboy step, and only 
consented to because I had held the reins so tight over my 
little band before, has raised a deuce of a row - new 
proclamation, no one is to interview the sacred puppet 
without consuls' permission, two days' notice, and an 
approved interpreter - read (I suppose) spy.  Then back; I 
should have said I was trying the new horse; a tallish 
piebald, bought from the circus; he proved steady and safe, 
but in very bad condition, and not so much the wild Arab 
steed of the desert as had been supposed.  The height of his 
back, after commodious Jack, astonished me, and I had a great 
consciousness of exercise and florid action, as I posted to 
his long, emphatic trot.  We had to ride back easy; even so 
he was hot and blown; and when we set a boy to lead him to 
and fro, our last character for sanity perished.  We returned 
just neat for dinner; and in the evening our violinist 
arrived, a young lady, no great virtuoso truly, but plucky, 
industrious, and a good reader; and we played five pieces 
with huge amusement, and broke up at nine.  This morning I 
have read a splendid piece of Montaigne, written this page of 
letter, and now turn to the WRECKER.

WEDNESDAY - November 16th or 17th - and I am ashamed to say 
mail day.  The WRECKER is finished, that is the best of my 
news; it goes by this mail to Scribner's; and I honestly 
think it a good yarn on the whole and of its measly kind.  
The part that is genuinely good is Nares, the American 
sailor; that is a genuine figure; had there been more Nares 
it would have been a better book; but of course it didn't set 
up to be a book, only a long tough yarn with some pictures of 
the manners of to-day in the greater world - not the shoddy 
sham world of cities, clubs, and colleges, but the world 
where men still live a man's life.  The worst of my news is 
the influenza; Apia is devastate; the shops closed, a ball 
put off, etc.  As yet we have not had it at Vailima, and, who 
knows? we may escape.  None of us go down, but of course the 
boys come and go.

Your letter had the most wonderful 'I told you so' I ever 
heard in the course of my life.  Why, you madman, I wouldn't 
change my present installation for any post, dignity, honour, 
or advantage conceivable to me.  It fills the bill; I have 
the loveliest time.  And as for wars and rumours of wars, you 
surely know enough of me to be aware that I like that also a 
thousand times better than decrepit peace in Middlesex?  I do 
not quite like politics; I am too aristocratic, I fear, for 
that.  God knows I don't care who I chum with; perhaps like 
sailors best; but to go round and sue and sneak to keep a 
crowd together - never.  My imagination, which is not the 
least damped by the idea of having my head cut off in the 
bush, recoils aghast from the idea of a life like 
Gladstone's, and the shadow of the newspaper chills me to the 
bone.  Hence my late eruption was interesting, but not what I 
like.  All else suits me in this (killed a mosquito) A1 
abode.

About politics.  A determination was come to by the President 
that he had been an idiot; emissaries came to G. and me to 
kiss and be friends.  My man proposed I should have a 
personal interview; I said it was quite useless, I had 
nothing to say; I had offered him the chance to inform me, 
had pressed it on him, and had been very unpleasantly 
received, and now 'Time was.'  Then it was decided that I was 
to be made a culprit against Germany; the German Captain - a 
delightful fellow and our constant visitor - wrote to say 
that as 'a German officer' he could not come even to say 
farewell.  We all wrote back in the most friendly spirit, 
telling him (politely) that some of these days he would be 
sorry, and we should be delighted to see our friend again.  
Since then I have seen no German shadow.

Mataafa has been proclaimed a rebel; the President did this 
act, and then resigned.  By singular good fortune, Mataafa 
has not yet moved; no thanks to our idiot governors.  They 
have shot their bolt; they have made a rebel of the only man 
(TO THEIR OWN KNOWLEDGE, ON THE REPORT OF THEIR OWN SPY) who 
held the rebel party in check; and having thus called on war 
to fall, they can do no more, sit equally 'expertes' of VIS 
and counsel, regarding their handiwork.  It is always a cry 
with these folk that he (Mataafa) had no ammunition.  I 
always said it would be found; and we know of five boat-loads 
that have found their way to Malie already.  Where there are 
traders, there will be ammunition; aphorism by R. L. S.

Now what am I to do next?

Lives of the Stevensons?  HISTORIA SAMOAE?  A History for 
Children?  Fiction?  I have had two hard months at fiction; I 
want a change.  Stevensons?  I am expecting some more 
material; perhaps better wait.  Samoa; rather tempting; might 
be useful to the islands - and to me; for it will be written 
in admirable temper; I have never agreed with any party, and 
see merits and excuses in all; should do it (if I did) very 
slackly and easily, as if half in conversation.  History for 
Children?  This flows from my lessons to Austin; no book is 
any good.  The best I have seen is Freeman's OLD ENGLISH 
HISTORY; but his style is so rasping, and a child can learn 
more, if he's clever.  I found my sketch of general Aryan 
History, given in conversation, to have been practically 
correct - at least what I mean is, Freeman had very much the 
same stuff in his early chapters, only not so much, and I 
thought not so well placed; and the child remembered some of 
it.  Now the difficulty is to give this general idea of main 
place, growth, and movement; it is needful to tack it on a 
yarn.  Now Scotch is the only History I know; it is the only 
history reasonably represented in my library; it is a very 
good one for my purpose, owing to two civilisations having 
been face to face throughout - or rather Roman civilisation 
face to face with our ancient barbaric life and government, 
down to yesterday, to 1750 anyway.  But the TALES OF A 
GRANDFATHER stand in my way; I am teaching them to Austin 
now, and they have all Scott's defects and all Scott's 
hopeless merit.  I cannot compete with that; and yet, so far 
as regards teaching History, how he has missed his chances!  
I think I'll try; I really have some historic sense, I feel 
that in my bones.  Then there's another thing.  Scott never 
knew the Highlands; he was always a Borderer.  He has missed 
that whole, long, strange, pathetic story of our savages, 
and, besides, his style is not very perspicuous to childhood.  
Gad, I think I'll have a flutter.  Buridan's Ass!  Whether to 
go, what to attack.  Must go to other letters; shall add to 
this, if I have time.



CHAPTER XIII



NOV. 25TH, 1891.


MY DEAR COLVIN, MY DEAR COLVIN, - I wonder how often I'm 
going to write it.  In spite of the loss of three days, as I 
have to tell, and a lot of weeding and cacao planting, I have 
finished since the mail left four chapters, forty-eight pages 
of my Samoa history.  It is true that the first three had 
been a good deal drafted two years ago, but they had all to 
be written and re-written, and the fourth chapter is all new.  
Chapter I. Elements of Discord-Native.  II. Elements of 
Discord-Foreign.  III. The Success of Laupepa.  IV. Brandeis.  
V. Will probably be called 'The Rise of Mataafa.'  VI. FUROR 
CONSULARIS - a devil of a long chapter.  VII. Stuebel the 
Pacificator.  VIII. Government under the Treaty of Berlin.  
IX. Practical Suggestions.  Say three-sixths of it are done, 
maybe more; by this mail five chapters should go, and that 
should be a good half of it; say sixty pages.  And if you 
consider that I sent by last mail the end of the WRECKER, 
coming on for seventy or eighty pages, and the mail before 
that the entire Tale of the BEACH OF FALESA, I do not think I 
can be accused of idleness.  This is my season; I often work 
six and seven, and sometimes eight hours; and the same day I 
am perhaps weeding or planting for an hour or two more - and 
I daresay you know what hard work weeding is - and it all 
agrees with me at this time of the year - like - like 
idleness, if a man of my years could be idle.

My first visit to Apia was a shock to me; every second person 
the ghost of himself, and the place reeking with infection.  
But I have not got the thing yet, and hope to escape.  This 
shows how much stronger I am; think of me flitting through a 
town of influenza patients seemingly unscathed.  We are all 
on the cacao planting.

The next day my wife and I rode over to the German 
plantation, Vailele, whose manager is almost the only German 
left to speak to us.  Seventy labourers down with influenza!  
It is a lovely ride, half-way down our mountain towards Apia, 
then turn to the right, ford the river, and three miles of 
solitary grass and cocoa palms, to where the sea beats and 
the wild wind blows unceasingly about the plantation house.  
On the way down Fanny said, 'Now what would you do if you saw 
Colvin coming up?'

Next day we rode down to Apia to make calls.

Yesterday the mail came, and the fat was in the fire.


NOV. 29TH?


BOOK.  All right.  I must say I like your order.  And the 
papers are some of them up to dick, and no mistake.  I agree 
with you the lights seem a little turned down.  The truth is, 
I was far through (if you understand Scots), and came none 
too soon to the South Seas, where I was to recover peace of 
body and mind.  No man but myself knew all my bitterness in 
those days.  Remember that, the next time you think I regret 
my exile.  And however low the lights are, the stuff is true, 
and I believe the more effective; after all, what I wish to 
fight is the best fought by a rather cheerless presentation 
of the truth.  The world must return some day to the word 
duty, and be done with the word reward.  There are no 
rewards, and plenty duties.  And the sooner a man sees that 
and acts upon it like a gentleman or a fine old barbarian, 
the better for himself.

There is my usual puzzle about publishers.  Chatto ought to 
have it, as he has all the other essays; these all belong to 
me, and Chatto publishes on terms.  Longman has forgotten the 
terms we are on; let him look up our first correspondence, 
and he will see I reserved explicitly, as was my habit, the 
right to republish as I choose.  Had the same arrangement 
with Henley, Magazine of Art, and with Tulloch Fraser's. - 
For any necessary note or preface, it would be a real service 
if you would undertake the duty yourself.  I should love a 
preface by you, as short or as long as you choose, three 
sentences, thirty pages, the thing I should like is your 
name.  And the excuse of my great distance seems sufficient.  
I shall return with this the sheets corrected as far as I 
have them; the rest I will leave, if you will, to you 
entirely; let it be your book, and disclaim what you dislike 
in the preface.  You can say it was at my eager prayer.  I 
should say I am the less willing to pass Chatto over, because 
he behaved the other day in a very handsome manner.  He asked 
leave to reprint DAMIEN; I gave it to him as a present, 
explaining I could receive no emolument for a personal 
attack.  And he took out my share of profits, and sent them 
in my name to the Leper Fund.  I could not bear after that to 
take from him any of that class of books which I have always 
given him.  Tell him the same terms will do.  Clark to print, 
uniform with the others.

I have lost all the days since this letter began re-handling 
Chapter IV. of the Samoa racket.  I do not go in for 
literature; address myself to sensible people rather than to 
sensitive.  And, indeed, it is a kind of journalism, I have 
no right to dally; if it is to help, it must come soon.  In 
two months from now it shall be done, and should be published 
in the course of March.  I propose Cassell gets it.  I am 
going to call it 'A Footnote to History: Eight Years of 
Trouble in Samoa,' I believe.  I recoil from serious names; 
they seem so much too pretentious for a pamphlet.  It will be 
about the size of TREASURE ISLAND, I believe.  Of course, as 
you now know, my case of conscience cleared itself off, and I 
began my intervention directly to one of the parties.  The 
other, the Chief Justice, I am to inform of my book the first 
occasion.  God knows if the book will do any good - or harm; 
but I judge it right to try.  There is one man's life 
certainly involved; and it may be all our lives.  I must not 
stand and slouch, but do my best as best I can.  But you may 
conceive the difficulty of a history extending to the present 
week, at least, and where almost all the actors upon all 
sides are of my personal acquaintance.  The only way is to 
judge slowly, and write boldly, and leave the issue to fate. 
. . . I am far indeed from wishing to confine myself to 
creative work; that is a loss, the other repairs; the one 
chance for a man, and, above all, for one who grows elderly, 
ahem, is to vary drainage and repair.  That is the one thing 
I understand - the cultivation of the shallow SOLUM of my 
brain.  But I would rather, from soon on, be released from 
the obligation to write.  In five or six years this 
plantation - suppose it and us still to exist - should pretty 
well support us and pay wages; not before, and already the 
six years seem long to me.  If literature were but a pastime!

I have interrupted myself to write the necessary notification 
to the Chief Justice.

I see in looking up Longman's letter that it was as usual the 
letter of an obliging gentleman; so do not trouble him with 
my reminder.  I wish all my publishers were not so nice.  And 
I have a fourth and a fifth baying at my heels; but for 
these, of course, they must go wanting.


DEC. 2ND.


No answer from the Chief Justice, which is like him, but 
surely very wrong in such a case.  The lunch bell!  I have 
been off work, playing patience and weeding all morning.  
Yesterday and the day before I drafted eleven and revised 
nine pages of Chapter V., and the truth is, I was extinct by 
lunch-time, and played patience sourly the rest of the day.  
To-morrow or next day I hope to go in again and win.  Lunch 
2nd Bell.


DEC. 2ND, AFTERNOON.


I have kept up the idleness; blew on the pipe to Belle's 
piano; then had a ride in the forest all by my nainsel; back 
and piped again, and now dinner nearing.  Take up this sheet 
with nothing to say.  The weird figure of Faauma is in the 
room washing my windows, in a black lavalava (kilt) with a 
red handkerchief hanging from round her neck between her 
breasts; not another stitch; her hair close cropped and 
oiled; when she first came here she was an angelic little 
stripling, but she is now in full flower - or half-flower - 
and grows buxom.  As I write, I hear her wet cloth moving and 
grunting with some industry; for I had a word this day with 
her husband on the matter of work and meal-time, when she is 
always late.  And she has a vague reverence for Papa, as she 
and her enormous husband address me when anything is wrong.  
Her husband is Lafaele, sometimes called the archangel, of 
whom I have writ you often.  Rest of our household, Talolo, 
cook; Pulu, kitchen boy, good, steady, industrious lads; 
Henry, back again from Savaii, where his love affair seems 
not to have prospered, with what looks like a spear-wound in 
the back of his head, of which Mr. Reticence says nothing; 
Simi, Manuele, and two other labourers out-doors.  Lafaele is 
provost of the live-stock, whereof now, three milk-cows, one 
bull-calf, one heifer, Jack, Macfarlane, the mare, Harold, 
Tifaga Jack, Donald and Edinburgh - seven horses - O, and the 
stallion - eight horses; five cattle; total, if my arithmetic 
be correct, thirteen head of beasts; I don't know how the 
pigs stand, or the ducks, or the chickens; but we get a good 
many eggs, and now and again a duckling or a chickling for 
the table; the pigs are more solemn, and appear only on 
birthdays and sich.


MONDAY, DEC. 7.


On Friday morning about eleven 1500 cacao seeds arrived, and 
we set to and toiled from twelve that day to six, and went to 
bed pretty tired.  Next day I got about an hour and a half at 
my History, and was at it again by 8.10, and except an hour 
for lunch kept at it till four P.M.  Yesterday, I did some 
History in the morning, and slept most of the afternoon; and 
to-day, being still averse from physical labour, and the mail 
drawing nigh, drew out of the squad, and finished for press 
the fifth chapter of my History; fifty-nine pages in one 
month; which (you will allow me to say) is a devil of a large 
order; it means at least 177 pages of writing; 89,000 words! 
and hours going to and fro among my notes.  However, this is 
the way it has to be done; the job must be done fast, or it 
is of no use.  And it is a curious yarn.  Honestly, I think 
people should be amused and convinced, if they could be at 
the pains to look at such a damned outlandish piece of 
machinery, which of course they won't.  And much I care.

When I was filling baskets all Saturday, in my dull mulish 
way, perhaps the slowest worker there, surely the most 
particular, and the only one that never looked up or knocked 
off, I could not but think I should have been sent on 
exhibition as an example to young literary men.  Here is how 
to learn to write, might be the motto.  You should have seen 
us; the verandah was like an Irish bog; our hands and faces 
were bedaubed with soil; and Faauma was supposed to have 
struck the right note when she remarked (A PROPOS of 
nothing), 'Too much ELEELE (soil) for me!'  The cacao (you 
must understand) has to be planted at first in baskets of 
plaited cocoa-leaf.  From four to ten natives were plaiting 
these in the wood-shed.  Four boys were digging up soil and 
bringing it by the boxful to the verandah.  Lloyd and I and 
Belle, and sometimes S. (who came to bear a hand), were 
filling the baskets, removing stones and lumps of clay; 
Austin and Faauma carried them when full to Fanny, who 
planted a seed in each, and then set them, packed close, in 
the corners of the verandah.  From twelve on Friday till five 
P.M. on Saturday we planted the first 1500, and more than 700 
of a second lot.  You cannot dream how filthy we were, and we 
were all properly tired.  They are all at it again to-day, 
bar Belle and me, not required, and glad to be out of it.  
The Chief Justice has not yet replied, and I have news that 
he received my letter.  What a man!

I have gone crazy over Bourget's SENSATIONS D'ITALIE; hence 
the enclosed dedications, a mere cry of gratitude for the 
best fun I've had over a new book this ever so!



CHAPTER XIV



TUESDAY, DEC. 1891.


SIR, - I have the honour to report further explorations of 
the course of the river Vaea, with accompanying sketch plan.  
The party under my command consisted of one horse, and was 
extremely insubordinate and mutinous, owing to not being used 
to go into the bush, and being half-broken anyway - and that 
the wrong half.  The route indicated for my party was up the 
bed of the so-called river Vaea, which I accordingly followed 
to a distance of perhaps two or three furlongs eastward from 
the house of Vailima, where the stream being quite dry, the 
bush thick, and the ground very difficult, I decided to leave 
the main body of the force under my command tied to a tree, 
and push on myself with the point of the advance guard, 
consisting of one man.  The valley had become very narrow and 
airless; foliage close shut above; dry bed of the stream much 
excavated, so that I passed under fallen trees without 
stooping.  Suddenly it turned sharply to the north, at right 
angles to its former direction; I heard living water, and 
came in view of a tall face of rock and the stream spraying 
down it; it might have been climbed, but it would have been 
dangerous, and I had to make my way up the steep earth banks, 
where there is nowhere any footing for man, only fallen 
trees, which made the rounds of my ladder.  I was near the 
top of this climb, which was very hot and steep, and the 
pulses were buzzing all over my body, when I made sure there 
was one external sound in my ears, and paused to listen.  No 
mistake; a sound of a mill-wheel thundering, I thought, close 
by, yet below me, a huge mill-wheel, yet not going steadily, 
but with a SCHOTTISCHE movement, and at each fresh impetus 
shaking the mountain.  There, where I was, I just put down 
the sound to the mystery of the bush; where no sound now 
surprises me - and any sound alarms; I only thought it would 
give Jack a fine fright, down where he stood tied to a tree 
by himself, and he was badly enough scared when I left him.  
The good folks at home identified it; it was a sharp 
earthquake.

At the top of the climb I made my way again to the water-
course; it is here running steady and pretty full; strange 
these intermittencies - and just a little below the main 
stream is quite dry, and all the original brook has gone down 
some lava gallery of the mountain - and just a little further 
below, it begins picking up from the left hand in little 
boggy tributaries, and in the inside of a hundred yards has 
grown a brook again.  The general course of the brook was, I 
guess, S.E.; the valley still very deep and whelmed in wood.  
It seemed a swindle to have made so sheer a climb and still 
find yourself at the bottom of a well.  But gradually the 
thing seemed to shallow, the trees to seem poorer and 
smaller; I could see more and more of the silver sprinkles of 
sky among the foliage, instead of the sombre piling up of 
tree behind tree.  And here I had two scares - first, away up 
on my right hand I heard a bull low; I think it was a bull 
from the quality of the low, which was singularly songful and 
beautiful; the bulls belong to me, but how did I know that 
the bull was aware of that? and my advance guard not being at 
all properly armed, we advanced with great precaution until I 
was satisfied that I was passing eastward of the enemy.  It 
was during this period that a pool of the river suddenly 
boiled up in my face in a little fountain.  It was in a very 
dreary, marshy part among dilapidated trees that you see 
through holes in the trunks of; and if any kind of beast or 
elf or devil had come out of that sudden silver ebullition, I 
declare I do not think I should have been surprised.  It was 
perhaps a thing as curious - a fish, with which these head 
waters of the stream are alive.  They are some of them as 
long as my finger, should be easily caught in these shallows, 
and some day I'll have a dish of them.

Very soon after I came to where the stream collects in 
another banana swamp, with the bananas bearing well.  Beyond, 
the course is again quite dry; it mounts with a sharp turn a 
very steep face of the mountain, and then stops abruptly at 
the lip of a plateau, I suppose the top of Vaea mountain: 
plainly no more springs here - there was no smallest furrow 
of a watercourse beyond - and my task might be said to be 
accomplished.  But such is the animated spirit in the service 
that the whole advance guard expressed a sentiment of 
disappointment that an exploration, so far successfully 
conducted, should come to a stop in the most promising view 
of fresh successes.  And though unprovided either with 
compass or cutlass, it was determined to push some way along 
the plateau, marking our direction by the laborious process 
of bending down, sitting upon, and thus breaking the wild 
cocoanut trees.  This was the less regretted by all from a 
delightful discovery made of a huge banyan growing here in 
the bush, with flying-buttressed flying buttresses, and huge 
arcs of trunk hanging high overhead and trailing down new 
complications of root.  I climbed some way up what seemed the 
original beginning; it was easier to climb than a ship's 
rigging, even rattled; everywhere there was foot-hold and 
hand-hold.  It was judged wise to return and rally the main 
body, who had now been left alone for perhaps forty minutes 
in the bush.

The return was effected in good order, but unhappily I only 
arrived (like so many other explorers) to find my main body 
or rear-guard in a condition of mutiny; the work, it is to be 
supposed, of terror.  It is right I should tell you the Vaea 
has a bad name, an AITU FAFINE - female devil of the woods - 
succubus - haunting it, and doubtless Jack had heard of her; 
perhaps, during my absence, saw her; lucky Jack!  Anyway, he 
was neither to hold nor to bind, and finally, after nearly 
smashing me by accident, and from mere scare and 
insubordination several times, deliberately set in to kill 
me; but poor Jack! the tree he selected for that purpose was 
a banana!  I jumped off and gave him the heavy end of my whip 
over the buttocks!  Then I took and talked in his ear in 
various voices; you should have heard my alto - it was a 
dreadful, devilish note - I KNEW Jack KNEW it was an AITU.  
Then I mounted him again, and he carried me fairly steadily.  
He'll learn yet.  He has to learn to trust absolutely to his 
rider; till he does, the risk is always great in thick bush, 
where a fellow must try different passages, and put back and 
forward, and pick his way by hair's-breadths.

The expedition returned to Vailima in time to receive the 
visit of the R. C. Bishop.  He is a superior man, much above 
the average of priests.


THURSDAY.


Yesterday the same expedition set forth to the southward by 
what is known as Carruthers' Road.  At a fallen tree which 
completely blocks the way, the main body was as before left 
behind, and the advance guard of one now proceeded with the 
exploration.  At the great tree known as MEPI TREE, after 
Maben the surveyor, the expedition struck forty yards due 
west till it struck the top of a steep bank which it 
descended.  The whole bottom of the ravine is filled with 
sharp lava blocks quite unrolled and very difficult and 
dangerous to walk among; no water in the course, scarce any 
sign of water.  And yet surely water must have made this bold 
cutting in the plateau.  And if so, why is the lava sharp?  
My science gave out; but I could not but think it ominous and 
volcanic.  The course of the stream was tortuous, but with a 
resultant direction a little by west of north; the sides the 
whole way exceeding steep, the expedition buried under 
fathoms of foliage.  Presently water appeared in the bottom, 
a good quantity; perhaps thirty or forty cubic feet, with 
pools and waterfalls.  A tree that stands all along the banks 
here must be very fond of water; its roots lie close-packed 
down the stream, like hanks of guts, so as to make often a 
corrugated walk, each root ending in a blunt tuft of 
filaments, plainly to drink water.  Twice there came in small 
tributaries from the left or western side - the whole plateau 
having a smartish inclination to the east; one of the 
tributaries in a handsome little web of silver hanging in the 
forest.  Twice I was startled by birds; one that barked like 
a dog; another that whistled loud ploughman's signals, so 
that I vow I was thrilled, and thought I had fallen among 
runaway blacks, and regretted my cutlass which I had lost and 
left behind while taking bearings.  A good many fishes in the 
brook, and many cray-fish; one of the last with a queer glow-
worm head.  Like all our brooks, the water is pure as air, 
and runs over red stones like rubies.  The foliage along both 
banks very thick and high, the place close, the walking 
exceedingly laborious.  By the time the expedition reached 
the fork, it was felt exceedingly questionable whether the 
MORAL of the force were sufficiently good to undertake more 
extended operations.  A halt was called, the men refreshed 
with water and a bath, and it was decided at a drumhead 
council of war to continue the descent of the Embassy Water 
straight for Vailima, whither the expedition returned, in 
rather poor condition, and wet to the waist, about 4. P.M.

Thus in two days the two main watercourses of this country 
have been pretty thoroughly explored, and I conceive my 
instructions fully carried out.  The main body of the second 
expedition was brought back by another officer despatched for 
that purpose from Vailima.  Casualties: one horse wounded; 
one man bruised; no deaths - as yet, but the bruised man 
feels to-day as if his case was mighty serious.


DEC. 25, '91.


Your note with a very despicable bulletin of health arrived 
only yesterday, the mail being a day behind.  It contained 
also the excellent TIMES article, which was a sight for sore 
eyes.  I am still TABOO; the blessed Germans will have none 
of me; and I only hope they may enjoy the TIMES article.  
'Tis my revenge!  I wish you had sent the letter too, as I 
have no copy, and do not even know what I wrote the last day, 
with a bad headache, and the mail going out.  However, it 
must have been about right, for the TIMES article was in the 
spirit I wished to arouse.  I hope we can get rid of the man 
before it is too late.  He has set the natives to war; but 
the natives, by God's blessing, do not want to fight, and I 
think it will fizzle out - no thanks to the man who tried to 
start it.  But I did not mean to drift into these politics; 
rather to tell you what I have done since I last wrote.

Well, I worked away at my History for a while, and only got 
one chapter done; no doubt this spate of work is pretty low 
now, and will be soon dry; but, God bless you, what a lot I 
have accomplished; WRECKER done, BEACH OF FALESA done, half 
the HISTORY: C'EST ETONNANT.  (I hear from Burlingame, by the 
way, that he likes the end of the WRECKER; 'tis certainly a 
violent, dark yarn with interesting, plain turns of human 
nature), then Lloyd and I went down to live in Haggard's 
rooms, where Fanny presently joined us.  Haggard's rooms are 
in a strange old building - old for Samoa, and has the effect 
of the antique like some strange monastery; I would tell you 
more of it, but I think I'm going to use it in a tale.  The 
annexe close by had its door sealed; poor Dowdney lost at sea 
in a schooner.  The place is haunted.  The vast empty sheds, 
the empty store, the airless, hot, long, low rooms, the claps 
of wind that set everything flying - a strange uncanny house 
to spend Christmas in.


JAN. 1ST, '92.


For a day or two I have sat close and wrought hard at the 
HISTORY, and two more chapters are all but done.  About 
thirty pages should go by this mail, which is not what should 
be, but all I could overtake.  Will any one ever read it?  I 
fancy not; people don't read history for reading, but for 
education and display - and who desires education in the 
history of Samoa, with no population, no past, no future, or 
the exploits of Mataafa, Malietoa, and Consul Knappe?  
Colkitto and Galasp are a trifle to it.  Well, it can't be 
helped, and it must be done, and, better or worse, it's 
capital fun.  There are two to whom I have not been kind - 
German Consul Becker and English Captain Hand, R.N.

On Dec. 30th I rode down with Belle to go to (if you please) 
the Fancy Ball.  When I got to the beach, I found the 
barometer was below 29 degrees, the wind still in the east 
and steady, but a huge offensive continent of clouds and 
vapours forming to leeward.  It might be a hurricane; I dared 
not risk getting caught away from my work, and, leaving 
Belle, returned at once to Vailima.  Next day - yesterday - 
it was a tearer; we had storm shutters up; I sat in my room 
and wrote by lamplight - ten pages, if you please, seven of 
them draft, and some of these compiled from as many as seven 
different and conflicting authorities, so that was a brave 
day's work.  About two a huge tree fell within sixty paces of 
our house; a little after, a second went; and we sent out 
boys with axes and cut down a third, which was too near the 
house, and buckling like a fishing rod.  At dinner we had the 
front door closed and shuttered, the back door open, the lamp 
lit.  The boys in the cook-house were all out at the cook-
house door, where we could see them looking in and smiling.  
Lauilo and Faauma waited on us with smiles.  The excitement 
was delightful.  Some very violent squalls came as we sat 
there, and every one rejoiced; it was impossible to help it; 
a soul of putty had to sing.  All night it blew; the roof was 
continually sounding under missiles; in the morning the 
verandahs were half full of branches torn from the forest.  
There was a last very wild squall about six; the rain, like a 
thick white smoke, flying past the house in volleys, and as 
swift, it seemed, as rifle balls; all with a strange, 
strident hiss, such as I have only heard before at sea, and, 
indeed, thought to be a marine phenomenon.  Since then the 
wind has been falling with a few squalls, mostly rain.  But 
our road is impassable for horses; we hear a schooner has 
been wrecked and some native houses blown down in Apia, where 
Belle is still and must remain a prisoner.  Lucky I returned 
while I could!  But the great good is this; much bread-fruit 
and bananas have been destroyed; if this be general through 
the islands, famine will be imminent; and WHOEVER BLOWS THE 
COALS, THERE CAN BE NO WAR.  Do I then prefer a famine to a 
war? you ask.  Not always, but just now.  I am sure the 
natives do not want a war; I am sure a war would benefit no 
one but the white officials, and I believe we can easily meet 
the famine - or at least that it can be met.  That would give 
our officials a legitimate opportunity to cover their past 
errors.


JAN. 2ND.


I woke this morning to find the blow quite ended.  The heaven 
was all a mottled gray; even the east quite colourless; the 
downward slope of the island veiled in wafts of vapour, blue 
like smoke; not a leaf stirred on the tallest tree; only, 
three miles away below me on the barrier reef, I could see 
the individual breakers curl and fall, and hear their 
conjunct roaring rise, as it still rises at 1 P.M., like the 
roar of a thoroughfare close by.  I did a good morning's 
work, correcting and clarifying my draft, and have now 
finished for press eight chapters, ninety-one pages, of this 
piece of journalism.  Four more chapters, say fifty pages, 
remain to be done; I should gain my wager and finish this 
volume in three months, that is to say, the end should leave 
me per February mail; I cannot receive it back till the mail 
of April.  Yes, it can be out in time; pray God that it be in 
time to help.

How do journalists fetch up their drivel?  I aim only at 
clearness and the most obvious finish, positively at no 
higher degree of merit, not even at brevity - I am sure it 
could have been all done, with double the time, in two-thirds 
of the space.  And yet it has taken me two months to write 
45,500 words; and, be damned to my wicked prowess, I am proud 
of the exploit!  The real journalist must be a man not of 
brass only, but bronze.  Chapter IX. gapes for me, but I 
shrink on the margin, and go on chattering to you.  This last 
part will be much less offensive (strange to say) to the 
Germans.  It is Becker they will never forgive me for; Knappe 
I pity and do not dislike; Becker I scorn and abominate.  
Here is the tableau.  I. Elements of Discord: Native.  II. 
Elements of Discord: Foreign.   III. The Sorrows of Laupepa.  
IV. Brandeis.  V. The Battle of Matautu.  VI. Last Exploits 
of Becker.  VII. The Samoan Camps.  VIII. Affairs of Lautii 
and Fangalii.  IX. 'FUROR CONSULARIS.'  X. The Hurricane.  
XI. Stuebel Recluse.  XII. The Present Government.  I 
estimate the whole roughly at 70,000 words.  Should anybody 
ever dream of reading it, it would be found amusing. 
70000/300=233 printed pages; a respectable little five-bob 
volume, to bloom unread in shop windows.  After that, I'll 
have a spank at fiction.  And rest?  I shall rest in the 
grave, or when I come to Italy.  If only the public will 
continue to support me!  I lost my chance not dying; there 
seems blooming little fear of it now.  I worked close on five 
hours this morning; the day before, close on nine; and unless 
I finish myself off with this letter, I'll have another hour 
and a half, or AIBLINS TWA, before dinner.  Poor man, how you 
must envy me, as you hear of these orgies of work, and you 
scarce able for a letter.  But Lord, Colvin, how lucky the 
situations are not reversed, for I have no situation, nor am 
fit for any.  Life is a steigh brae.  Here, have at Knappe, 
and no more clavers!


3RD.


There was never any man had so many irons in the fire, except 
Jim Pinkerton.  I forgot to mention I have the most gallant 
suggestion from Lang, with an offer of MS. authorities, which 
turns my brain.  It's all about the throne of Poland and 
buried treasure in the Mackay country, and Alan Breck can 
figure there in glory.

Yesterday, J. and I set off to Blacklock's (American Consul) 
who lives not far from that little village I have so often 
mentioned as lying between us and Apia.  I had some questions 
to ask him for my History; thence we must proceed to Vailele, 
where I had also to cross-examine the plantation manager 
about the battle there.  We went by a track I had never 
before followed down the hill to Vaisigano, which flows here 
in a deep valley, and was unusually full, so that the horses 
trembled in the ford.  The whole bottom of the valley is full 
of various streams posting between strips of forest with a 
brave sound of waters.  In one place we had a glimpse of a 
fall some way higher up, and then sparkling in sunlight in 
the midst of the green valley.  Then up by a winding path 
scarce accessible to a horse for steepness, to the other 
side, and the open cocoanut glades of the plantation.  Here 
we rode fast, did a mighty satisfactory afternoon's work at 
the plantation house, and still faster back.  On the return 
Jack fell with me, but got up again; when I felt him 
recovering I gave him his head, and he shoved his foot 
through the rein; I got him by the bit however, and all was 
well; he had mud over all his face, but his knees were not 
broken.  We were scarce home when the rain began again; that 
was luck.  It is pouring now in torrents; we are in the 
height of the bad season.  Lloyd leaves along with this 
letter on a change to San Francisco; he had much need of it, 
but I think this will brace him up.  I am, as you see, a 
tower of strength.  I can remember riding not so far and not 
near so fast when I first came to Samoa, and being shattered 
next day with fatigue; now I could not tell I have done 
anything; have re-handled my battle of Fangalii according to 
yesterday's information - four pages rewritten; and written 
already some half-dozen pages of letters.

I observe with disgust that while of yore, when I own I was 
guilty, you never spared me abuse, but now, when I am so 
virtuous, where is the praise?  Do admit that I have become 
an excellent letter-writer - at least to you, and that your 
ingratitude is imbecile. - Yours ever,

R. L. S.



CHAPTER XV



JAN 31ST, '92.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - No letter at all from you, and this scratch 
from me!  Here is a year that opens ill.  Lloyd is off to 
'the coast' sick - THE COAST means California over most of 
the Pacific - I have been down all month with influenza, and 
am just recovering - I am overlaid with proofs, which I am 
just about half fit to attend to.  One of my horses died this 
morning, and another is now dying on the front lawn - Lloyd's 
horse and Fanny's.  Such is my quarrel with destiny.  But I 
am mending famously, come and go on the balcony, have 
perfectly good nights, and though I still cough, have no 
oppression and no hemorrhage and no fever.  So if I can find 
time and courage to add no more, you will know my news is not 
altogether of the worst; a year or two ago, and what a state 
I should have been in now!  Your silence, I own, rather 
alarms me.  But I tell myself you have just miscarried; had 
you been too ill to write, some one would have written me.  
Understand, I send this brief scratch not because I am unfit 
to write more, but because I have 58 galleys of the WRECKER 
and 102 of the BEACH OF FALESA to get overhauled somehow or 
other in time for the mail, and for three weeks I have not 
touched a pen with my finger.


FEB. 1ST.


The second horse is still alive, but I still think dying.  
The first was buried this morning.  My proofs are done; it 
was a rough two days of it, but done.  CONSUMMATUM EST; NA 
UMA.  I believe the WRECKER ends well; if I know what a good 
yarn is, the last four chapters make a good yarn - but pretty 
horrible.  THE BEACH OF FALESA I still think well of, but it 
seems it's immoral and there's a to-do, and financially it 
may prove a heavy disappointment.  The plaintive request sent 
to me, to make the young folks married properly before 'that 
night,' I refused; you will see what would be left of the 
yarn, had I consented.  This is a poison bad world for the 
romancer, this Anglo-Saxon world; I usually get out of it by 
not having any women in it at all; but when I remember I had 
the TREASURE OF FRANCHARD refused as unfit for a family 
magazine, I feel despair weigh upon my wrists.

As I know you are always interested in novels, I must tell 
you that a new one is now entirely planned.  It is to be 
called SOPHIA SCARLET, and is in two parts.  Part I. The 
Vanilla Planter.  Part II. The Overseers.  No chapters, I 
think; just two dense blocks of narrative, the first of which 
is purely sentimental, but the second has some rows and 
quarrels, and winds up with an explosion, if you please!  I 
am just burning to get at Sophia, but I MUST do this Samoan 
journalism - that's a cursed duty.  The first part of Sophia, 
bar the first twenty or thirty pages, writes itself; the 
second is more difficult, involving a good many characters - 
about ten, I think - who have to be kept all moving, and give 
the effect of a society.  I have three women to handle, out 
and well-away! but only Sophia is in full tone.  Sophia and 
two men, Windermere, the Vanilla Planter, who dies at the end 
of Part I., and Rainsforth, who only appears in the beginning 
of Part II.  The fact is, I blush to own it, but Sophia is a 
REGULAR NOVEL; heroine and hero, and false accusation, and 
love, and marriage, and all the rest of it - all planted in a 
big South Sea plantation run by ex-English officers - A LA 
Stewart's plantation in Tahiti.  There is a strong 
undercurrent of labour trade, which gives it a kind of Uncle 
Tom flavour, ABSIT OMEN!  The first start is hard; it is hard 
to avoid a little tedium here, but I think by beginning with 
the arrival of the three Miss Scarlets hot from school and 
society in England, I may manage to slide in the information.  
The problem is exactly a Balzac one, and I wish I had his 
fist - for I have already a better method - the kinetic, 
whereas he continually allowed himself to be led into the 
static.  But then he had the fist, and the most I can hope is 
to get out of it with a modicum of grace and energy, but for 
sure without the strong impression, the full, dark brush.  
Three people have had it, the real creator's brush: Scott, 
see much of THE ANTIQUARY and THE HEART OF MIDLOTHIAN 
(especially all round the trial, before, during, and after) - 
Balzac - and Thackeray in VANITY FAIR.  Everybody else either 
paints THIN, or has to stop to paint, or paints excitedly, so 
that you see the author skipping before his canvas.  Here is 
a long way from poor Sophia Scarlet!

This day is published
SOPHIA SCARLET
By
ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



CHAPTER XVI



FEB. 1892.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - This has been a busyish month for a sick 
man.  First, Faauma - the bronze candlestick, whom otherwise 
I called my butler - bolted from the bed and bosom of 
Lafaele, the Archangel Hercules, prefect of the cattle.  
There was the deuce to pay, and Hercules was inconsolable, 
and immediately started out after a new wife, and has had one 
up on a visit, but says she has 'no conversation'; and I 
think he will take back the erring and possibly repentant 
candlestick; whom we all devoutly prefer, as she is not only 
highly decorative, but good-natured, and if she does little 
work makes no rows.  I tell this lightly, but it really was a 
heavy business; many were accused of complicity, and Rafael 
was really very sorry.  I had to hold beds of justice - 
literally - seated in my bed and surrounded by lying Samoans 
seated on the floor; and there were many picturesque and 
still inexplicable passages.  It is hard to reach the truth 
in these islands.

The next incident overlapped with this.  S. and Fanny found 
three strange horses in the paddock: for long now the boys 
have been forbidden to leave their horses here one hour 
because our grass is over-grazed.  S. came up with the news, 
and I saw I must now strike a blow.  'To the pound with the 
lot,' said I.  He proposed taking the three himself, but I 
thought that too dangerous an experiment, said I should go 
too, and hurried into my boots so as to show decision taken, 
in the necessary interviews.  They came of course - the 
interviews - and I explained what I was going to do at huge 
length, and stuck to my guns.  I am glad to say the natives, 
with their usual (purely speculative) sense of justice highly 
approved the step after reflection.  Meanwhile off went S. 
and I with the three CORPORA DELICTI; and a good job I went!  
Once, when our circus began to kick, we thought all was up; 
but we got them down all sound in wind and limb.  I judged I 
was much fallen off from my Elliott forefathers, who managed 
this class of business with neatness and despatch.  Half-way 
down it came on to rain tropic style, and I came back from my 
outing drenched liked a drowned man - I was literally blinded 
as I came back among these sheets of water; and the 
consequence was I was laid down with diarrhoea and 
threatenings of Samoa colic for the inside of another week.

I have a confession to make.  When I was sick I tried to get 
to work to finish that Samoa thing, wouldn't go; and at last, 
in the colic time, I slid off into DAVID BALFOUR, some 50 
pages of which are drafted, and like me well.  Really I think 
it is spirited; and there's a heroine that (up to now) seems 
to have attractions: ABSIT OMEN!  David, on the whole, seems 
excellent.  Alan does not come in till the tenth chapter, and 
I am only at the eighth, so I don't know if I can find him 
again; but David is on his feet, and doing well, and very 
much in love, and mixed up with the Lord Advocate and the 
(untitled) Lord Lovat, and all manner of great folk.  And the 
tale interferes with my eating and sleeping.  The join is 
bad; I have not thought to strain too much for continuity; so 
this part be alive, I shall be content.  But there's no doubt 
David seems to have changed his style, de'il ha'e him!  And 
much I care, if the tale travel!


FRIDAY, FEB. ?? 19TH?


Two incidents to-day which I must narrate.  After lunch, it 
was raining pitilessly; we were sitting in my mother's 
bedroom, and I was reading aloud Kinglake's Charge of the 
Light Brigade, and we had just been all seized by the horses 
aligning with Lord George Paget, when a figure appeared on 
the verandah; a little, slim, small figure of a lad, with 
blond (I.E. limed) hair, a propitiatory smile, and a nose 
that alone of all his features grew pale with anxiety.  'I 
come here stop,' was about the outside of his English; and I 
began at once to guess that he was a runaway labourer, and 
that the bush-knife in his hand was stolen.  It proved he had 
a mate, who had lacked his courage, and was hidden down the 
road; they had both made up their minds to run away, and had 
'come here stop.'  I could not turn out the poor rogues, one 
of whom showed me marks on his back, into the drenching 
forest; I could not reason with them, for they had not enough 
English, and not one of our boys spoke their tongue; so I 
bade them feed and sleep here to-night, and to-morrow I must 
do what the Lord shall bid me.

Near dinner time, I was told that a friend of Lafaele's had 
found human remains in my bush.  After dinner, a figure was 
seen skulking across towards the waterfall, which produced 
from the verandah a shout, in my most stentorian tones: 'O AI 
LE INGOA?' literally 'Who the name?' which serves here for 
'What's your business?' as well.  It proved to be Lafaele's 
friend; I bade a kitchen boy, Lauilo, go with him to see the 
spot, for though it had ceased raining, the whole island ran 
and dripped.  Lauilo was willing enough, but the friend of 
the archangel demurred; he had too much business; he had no 
time.  'All right,' I said, 'you too much frightened, I go 
along,' which of course produced the usual shout of delight 
from all those who did not require to go.  I got into my 
Saranac snow boots.  Lauilo got a cutlass; Mary Carter, our 
Sydney maid, joined the party for a lark, and off we set.  I 
tell you our guide kept us moving; for the dusk fell swift.  
Our woods have an infamous reputation at the best, and our 
errand (to say the least of it) was grisly.  At last 'they 
found the remains; they were old, which was all I cared to be 
sure of; it seemed a strangely small 'pickle-banes' to stand 
for a big, flourishing, buck-islander, and their situation in 
the darkening and dripping bush was melancholy.  All at once, 
I found there was a second skull, with a bullet-hole I could 
have stuck my two thumbs in - say anybody else's one thumb.  
My Samoans said it could not be, there were not enough bones; 
I put the two pieces of skull together, and at last convinced 
them.  Whereupon, in a flash, they found the not unromantic 
explanation.  This poor brave had succeeded in the height of 
a Samoan warriors ambition; he had taken a head, which he was 
never destined to show to his applauding camp.  Wounded 
himself, he had crept here into the bush to die with his 
useless trophy by his side.  His date would be about fifteen 
years ago, in the great battle between Laupepa and Talavou, 
which took place on My Land, Sir.  To-morrow we shall bury 
the bones and fire a salute in honour of unfortunate courage.

Do you think I have an empty life? or that a man jogging to 
his club has so much to interest and amuse him? - touch and 
try him too, but that goes along with the others: no pain, no 
pleasure, is the iron law.  So here I stop again, and leave, 
as I left yesterday, my political business untouched.  And 
lo! here comes my pupil, I believe, so I stop in time.


MARCH 2ND.


Since I last wrote, fifteen chapters of DAVID BALFOUR have 
been drafted, and five TIRES AU CLAIR.  I think it pretty 
good; there's a blooming maiden that costs anxiety - she is 
as virginal as billy; but David seems there and alive, and 
the Lord Advocate is good, and so I think is an episodic 
appearance of the Master of Lovat.  In Chapter XVII. I shall 
get David abroad - Alan went already in Chapter XII.  The 
book should be about the length of KIDNAPPED; this early part 
of it, about D.'s evidence in the Appin case, is more of a 
story than anything in KIDNAPPED, but there is no doubt there 
comes a break in the middle, and the tale is practically in 
two divisions.  In the first James More and the M'Gregors, 
and Catriona, only show; in the second, the Appin case being 
disposed of, and James Stewart hung, they rule the roast and 
usurp the interest - should there be any left.  Why did I 
take up DAVID BALFOUR?  I don't know.  A sudden passion.

Monday, I went down in the rain with a colic to take the 
chair at a public meeting; dined with Haggard; sailed off to 
my meeting, and fought with wild beasts for three anxious 
hours.  All was lost that any sensible man cared for, but the 
meeting did not break up - thanks a good deal to R. L. S. - 
and the man who opposed my election, and with whom I was all 
the time wrangling, proposed the vote of thanks to me with a 
certain handsomeness; I assure you I had earned it . . .  
Haggard and the great Abdul, his high-caste Indian servant, 
imported by my wife, were sitting up for me with supper, and 
I suppose it was twelve before I got to bed.  Tuesday 
raining, my mother rode down, and we went to the Consulate to 
sign a Factory and Commission.  Thence, I to the lawyers, to 
the printing office, and to the Mission.  It was dinner time 
when I returned home.

This morning, our cook-boy having suddenly left - injured 
feelings - the archangel was to cook breakfast.  I found him 
lighting the fire before dawn; his eyes blazed, he had no 
word of any language left to use, and I saw in him (to my 
wonder) the strongest workings of gratified ambition.  
Napoleon was no more pleased to sign his first treaty with 
Austria than was Lafaele to cook that breakfast.  All 
morning, when I had hoped to be at this letter, I slept like 
one drugged and you must take this (which is all I can give 
you) for what it is worth -


D.B.

MEMOIRS OF HIS ADVENTURES AT HOME AND ABROAD.  THE SECOND 
PART; WHEREIN ARE SET FORTH THE MISFORTUNES IN WHICH HE WAS 
INVOLVED UPON THE APPIN MURDER; HIS TROUBLES WITH LORD 
ADVOCATE PRESTONGRANGE; CAPTIVITY ON THE BASS ROCK; JOURNEY 
INTO FRANCE AND HOLLAND; AND SINGULAR RELATIONS WITH JAMES 
MORE DRUMMOND OR MACGREGOR, A SON OF THE NOTORIOUS ROB ROY.



Chapters. - I. A Beggar on Horseback.  II. The Highland 
Writer.  III. I go to Pilrig.  IV. Lord Advocate 
Prestongrange.  V. Butter and Thunder.  VI. I make a fault in 
honour.  VII. The Bravo.  VIII. The Heather on Fire.  IX. I 
begin to be haunted with a red-headed man.  X. The Wood by 
Silvermills.  XI. On the march again with Alan.  XII. Gillane 
Sands.  XIII. The Bass Rock.  XIV. Black Andie's Tale of Tod 
Lapraik.  XV. I go to Inveraray.

That is it, as far as drafted.  Chapters IV. V. VII. IX. and 
XIV. I am specially pleased with; the last being an 
episodical bogie story about the Bass Rock told there by the 
Keeper.



CHAPTER XVII



MARCH 9TH.


MY DEAR S. C., - Take it not amiss if this is a wretched 
letter.  I am eaten up with business.  Every day this week I 
have had some business impediment - I am even now waiting a 
deputation of chiefs about the road - and my precious morning 
was shattered by a polite old scourge of a FAIPULE - 
parliament man - come begging.  All the time DAVID BALFOUR is 
skelping along.  I began it the 13th of last month; I have 
now 12 chapters, 79 pages ready for press, or within an ace, 
and, by the time the month is out, one-half should be 
completed, and I'll be back at drafting the second half.  
What makes me sick is to think of Scott turning out GUY 
MANNERING in three weeks!  What a pull of work: heavens, what 
thews and sinews!  And here am I, my head spinning from 
having only re-written seven not very difficult pages - and 
not very good when done.  Weakling generation.  It makes me 
sick of myself, to make such a fash and bobbery over a rotten 
end of an old nursery yarn, not worth spitting on when done.  
Still, there is no doubt I turn out my work more easily than 
of yore, and I suppose I should be singly glad of that.  And 
if I got my book done in six weeks, seeing it will be about 
half as long as a Scott, and I have to write everything 
twice, it would be about the same rate of industry.  It is my 
fair intention to be done with it in three months, which 
would make me about one-half the man Sir Walter was for 
application and driving the dull pen.  Of the merit we shall 
not talk; but I don't think Davie is WITHOUT merit.


MARCH 12TH.


And I have this day triumphantly finished 15 chapters, 100 
pages - being exactly one-half (as near as anybody can guess) 
of DAVID BALFOUR; the book to be about a fifth as long again 
(altogether) as TREASURE ISLAND: could I but do the second 
half in another month!  But I can't, I fear; I shall have 
some belated material arriving by next mail, and must go 
again at the History.  Is it not characteristic of my broken 
tenacity of mind, that I should have left Davie Balfour some 
five years in the British Linen Company's Office, and then 
follow him at last with such vivacity?  But I leave you 
again; the last (15th) chapter ought to be re-wrote, or part 
of it, and I want the half completed in the month, and the 
month is out by midnight; though, to be sure, last month was 
February, and I might take grace.  These notes are only to 
show I hold you in mind, though I know they can have no 
interest for man or God or animal.

I should have told you about the Club.  We have been asked to 
try and start a sort of weekly ball for the half-castes and 
natives, ourselves to be the only whites; and we consented, 
from a very heavy sense of duty, and with not much hope.  Two 
nights ago we had twenty people up, received them in the 
front verandah, entertained them on cake and lemonade, and I 
made a speech - embodying our proposals, or conditions, if 
you like - for I suppose thirty minutes.  No joke to speak to 
such an audience, but it is believed I was thoroughly 
intelligible.  I took the plan of saying everything at least 
twice in a different form of words, so that if the one 
escaped my hearers, the other might be seized.  One white man 
came with his wife, and was kept rigorously on the front 
verandah below!  You see what a sea of troubles this is like 
to prove; but it is the only chance - and when it blows up, 
it must blow up!  I have no more hope in anything than a dead 
frog; I go into everything with a composed despair, and don't 
mind - just as I always go to sea with the conviction I am to 
be drowned, and like it before all other pleasures.  But you 
should have seen the return voyage, when nineteen horses had 
to be found in the dark, and nineteen bridles, all in a 
drench of rain, and the club, just constituted as such, 
sailed away in the wet, under a cloudy moon like a bad 
shilling, and to descend a road through the forest that was 
at that moment the image of a respectable mountain brook.  My 
wife, who is president WITH POWER TO EXPEL, had to begin her 
functions. . . .


25TH MARCH.


Heaven knows what day it is, but I am ashamed, all the more 
as your letter from Bournemouth of all places - poor old 
Bournemouth! - is to hand, and contains a statement of 
pleasure in my letters which I wish I could have rewarded 
with a long one.  What has gone on?  A vast of affairs, of a 
mingled, strenuous, inconclusive, desultory character; much 
waste of time, much riding to and fro, and little transacted 
or at least peracted.

Let me give you a review of the present state of our live 
stock. - Six boys in the bush; six souls about the house.  
Talolo, the cook, returns again to-day, after an absence 
which has cost me about twelve hours of riding, and I suppose 
eight hours' solemn sitting in council.  'I am sorry indeed 
for the Chief Justice of Samoa,' I said; 'it is more than I 
am fit for to be Chief Justice of Vailima.' - Lauilo is 
steward.  Both these are excellent servants; we gave a 
luncheon party when we buried the Samoan bones, and I assure 
you all was in good style, yet we never interfered.  The food 
was good, the wine and dishes went round as by mechanism. - 
Steward's assistant and washman Arrick, a New Hebridee black 
boy, hired from the German firm; not so ugly as most, but not 
pretty neither; not so dull as his sort are, but not quite a 
Crichton.  When he came first, he ate so much of our good 
food that he got a prominent belly.  Kitchen assistant, Tomas 
(Thomas in English), a Fiji man, very tall and handsome, 
moving like a marionette with sudden bounds, and rolling his 
eyes with sudden effort. - Washerwoman and precentor, Helen, 
Tomas's wife.  This is our weak point; we are ashamed of 
Helen; the cook-house blushes for her; they murmur there at 
her presence.  She seems all right; she is not a bad-looking, 
strapping wench, seems chaste, is industrious, has an 
excellent taste in hymns - you should have heard her read one 
aloud the other day, she marked the rhythm with so much 
gloating, dissenter sentiment.  What is wrong, then? says 
you.  Low in your ear - and don't let the papers get hold of 
it - she is of no family.  None, they say; literally a common 
woman.  Of course, we have out-islanders, who MAY be 
villeins; but we give them the benefit of the doubt, which is 
impossible with Helen of Vailima; our blot, our pitted speck.  
The pitted speck I have said is our precentor.  It is always 
a woman who starts Samoan song; the men who sing second do 
not enter for a bar or two.  Poor, dear Faauma, the unchaste, 
the extruded Eve of our Paradise, knew only two hymns; but 
Helen seems to know the whole repertory, and the morning 
prayers go far more lively in consequence. - Lafaele, provost 
of the cattle.  The cattle are Jack, my horse, quite 
converted, my wife rides him now, and he is as steady as a 
doctor's cob; Tifaga Jack, a circus horse, my mother's 
piebald, bought from a passing circus; Belle's mare, now in 
childbed or next door, confound the slut!  Musu - amusingly 
translated the other day 'don't want to,' literally cross, 
but always in the sense of stubbornness and resistance - my 
wife's little dark-brown mare, with a white star on her 
forehead, whom I have been riding of late to steady her - she 
has no vices, but is unused, skittish and uneasy, and wants a 
lot of attention and humouring; lastly (of saddle horses) 
Luna - not the Latin MOON, the Hawaiian OVERSEER, but it's 
pronounced the same - a pretty little mare too, but scarce at 
all broken, a bad bucker, and has to be ridden with a stock-
whip and be brought back with her rump criss-crossed like a 
clan tartan; the two cart horses, now only used with pack-
saddles; two cows, one in the straw (I trust) to-morrow, a 
third cow, the Jersey - whose milk and temper are alike 
subjects of admiration - she gives good exercise to the 
farming saunterer, and refreshes him on his return with 
cream; two calves, a bull, and a cow; God knows how many 
ducks and chickens, and for a wager not even God knows how 
many cats; twelve horses, seven horses, five kine: is not 
this Babylon the Great which I have builded?  Call it 
SUBPRIORSFORD.

Two nights ago the club had its first meeting; only twelve 
were present, but it went very well.  I was not there, I had 
ridden down the night before after dinner on my endless 
business, took a cup of tea in the Mission like an ass, then 
took a cup of coffee like a fool at Haggard's, then fell into 
a discussion with the American Consul . . . I went to bed at 
Haggard's, came suddenly broad awake, and lay sleepless the 
live night.  It fell chill, I had only a sheet, and had to 
make a light and range the house for a cover - I found one in 
the hall, a macintosh.  So back to my sleepless bed, and to 
lie there till dawn.  In the morning I had a longish ride to 
take in a day of a blinding, staggering sun, and got home by 
eleven, our luncheon hour, with my head rather swimmy; the 
only time I have FEARED the sun since I was in Samoa.  
However, I got no harm, but did not go to the club, lay off, 
lazied, played the pipe, and read - a novel by James Payn - 
sometimes quite interesting, and in one place really very 
funny with the quaint humour of the man.  Much interested the 
other day.  As I rode past a house, I saw where a Samoan had 
written a word on a board, and there was an A, perfectly 
formed, but upside down.  You never saw such a thing in 
Europe; but it is as common as dirt in Polynesia.  Men's 
names are tattooed on the forearm; it is common to find a 
subverted letter tattooed there.  Here is a tempting problem 
for psychologists.

I am now on terms again with the German Consulate, I know not 
for how long; not, of course, with the President, which I 
find a relief; still, with the Chief Justice and the English 
Consul.  For Haggard, I have a genuine affection; he is a 
loveable man.

Wearyful man!  'Here is the yarn of Loudon Dodd, NOT AS HE 
TOLD IT, BUT AS IT WAS AFTERWARDS WRITTEN.'  These words were 
left out by some carelessness, and I think I have been thrice 
tackled about them.  Grave them in your mind and wear them on 
your forehead.

The Lang story will have very little about the treasure; THE 
MASTER will appear; and it is to a great extent a tale of 
Prince Charlie AFTER the '45, and a love story forbye: the 
hero is a melancholy exile, and marries a young woman who 
interests the prince, and there is the devil to pay.  I think 
the Master kills him in a duel, but don't know yet, not 
having yet seen my second heroine.  No - the Master doesn't 
kill him, they fight, he is wounded, and the Master plays 
DEUS EX MACHINA.  I THINK just now of calling it THE TAIL OF 
THE RACE; no - heavens!  I never saw till this moment - but 
of course nobody but myself would ever understand Mill-Race, 
they would think of a quarter-mile.  So - I am nameless 
again.  My melancholy young man is to be quite a Romeo.  Yes, 
I'll name the book from him: DYCE OF YTHAN - pronounce 
Eethan.


Dyce of Ythan
by R. L. S.


O, Shovel - Shovel waits his turn, he and his ancestors.  I 
would have tackled him before, but my STATE TRIALS have never 
come.  So that I have now quite planned:-


Dyce of Ythan. (Historical, 1750.)
Sophia Scarlet. (To-day.)
The Shovels of Newton French. (Historical, 1650 to 1830.)

And quite planned and part written:-

The Pearl Fisher. (To-day.) (With Lloyd a machine.)
David Balfour. (Historical, 1751.)

And, by a strange exception for R. L. S., all in the third 
person except D. B.

I don't know what day this is now (the 29th), but I have 
finished my two chapters, ninth and tenth, of SAMOA in time 
for the mail, and feel almost at peace.  The tenth was the 
hurricane, a difficult problem; it so tempted one to be 
literary; and I feel sure the less of that there is in my 
little handbook, the more chance it has of some utility.  
Then the events are complicated, seven ships to tell of, and 
sometimes three of them together; O, it was quite a job.  But 
I think I have my facts pretty correct, and for once, in my 
sickening yarn, they are handsome facts: creditable to all 
concerned; not to be written of - and I should think, scarce 
to be read - without a thrill.  I doubt I have got no 
hurricane into it, the intricacies of the yarn absorbing me 
too much.  But there - it's done somehow, and time presses 
hard on my heels.  The book, with my best expedition, may 
come just too late to be of use.  In which case I shall have 
made a handsome present of some months of my life for nothing 
and to nobody.  Well, through Her the most ancient heavens 
are fresh and strong.


30TH.


After I had written you, I re-read my hurricane, which is 
very poor; the life of the journalist is hard, another couple 
of writings and I could make a good thing, I believe, and it 
must go as it is!  But, of course, this book is not written 
for honour and glory, and the few who will read it may not 
know the difference.  Very little time.  I go down with the 
mail shortly, dine at the Chinese restaurant, and go to the 
club to dance with islandresses.  Think of my going out once 
a week to dance.

Politics are on the full job again, and we don't know what is 
to come next.  I think the whole treaty RAJ seems quite 
played out!  They have taken to bribing the FAIPULE men 
(parliament men) to stay in Mulinuu, we hear; but I have not 
yet sifted the rumour.  I must say I shall be scarce 
surprised if it prove true; these rumours have the knack of 
being right. - Our weather this last month has been 
tremendously hot, not by the thermometer, which sticks at 86 
degrees, but to the sensation: no rain, no wind, and this the 
storm month.  It looks ominous, and is certainly 
disagreeable.

No time to finish,
Yours ever,
R. L. S.



CHAPTER XVIII



MAY 1ST. 1892.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - As I rode down last night about six, I saw 
a sight I must try to tell you of.  In front of me, right 
over the top of the forest into which I was descending was a 
vast cloud.  The front of it accurately represented the 
somewhat rugged, long-nosed, and beetle-browed profile of a 
man, crowned by a huge Kalmuck cap; the flesh part was of a 
heavenly pink, the cap, the moustache, the eyebrows were of a 
bluish gray; to see this with its childish exactitude of 
design and colour, and hugeness of scale - it covered at 
least 25 degrees - held me spellbound.  As I continued to 
gaze, the expression began to change; he had the exact air of 
closing one eye, dropping his jaw, and drawing down his nose; 
had the thing not been so imposing, I could have smiled; and 
then almost in a moment, a shoulder of leaden-coloured bank 
drove in front and blotted it.  My attention spread to the 
rest of the cloud, and it was a thing to worship.  It rose 
from the horizon, and its top was within thirty degrees of 
the zenith; the lower parts were like a glacier in shadow, 
varying from dark indigo to a clouded white in exquisite 
gradations.  The sky behind, so far as I could see, was all 
of a blue already enriched and darkened by the night, for the 
hill had what lingered of the sunset.  But the top of my 
Titanic cloud flamed in broad sunlight, with the most 
excellent softness and brightness of fire and jewels, 
enlightening all the world.  It must have been far higher 
than Mount Everest, and its glory, as I gazed up at it out of 
the night, was beyond wonder.  Close by rode the little 
crescent moon; and right over its western horn, a great 
planet of about equal lustre with itself.  The dark woods 
below were shrill with that noisy business of the birds' 
evening worship.  When I returned, after eight, the moon was 
near down; she seemed little brighter than before, but now 
that the cloud no longer played its part of a nocturnal sun, 
we could see that sight, so rare with us at home that it was 
counted a portent, so customary in the tropics, of the dark 
sphere with its little gilt band upon the belly.  The planet 
had been setting faster, and was now below the crescent.  
They were still of an equal brightness.

I could not resist trying to reproduce this in words, as a 
specimen of these incredibly beautiful and imposing meteors 
of the tropic sky that make so much of my pleasure here; 
though a ship's deck is the place to enjoy them.  O what 
AWFUL scenery, from a ship's deck, in the tropics!  People 
talk about the Alps, but the clouds of the trade wind are 
alone for sublimity.

Now to try and tell you what has been happening.  The state 
of these islands, and of Mataafa and Laupepa (Malietoa's 
AMBO) had been much on my mind.  I went to the priests and 
sent a message to Mataafa, at a time when it was supposed he 
was about to act.  He did not act, delaying in true native 
style, and I determined I should go to visit him.  I have 
been very good not to go sooner; to live within a few miles 
of a rebel camp, to be a novelist, to have all my family 
forcing me to go, and to refrain all these months, counts for 
virtue.  But hearing that several people had gone and the 
government done nothing to punish them, and having an errand 
there which was enough to justify myself in my own eyes, I 
half determined to go, and spoke of it with the half-caste 
priest.  And here (confound it) up came Laupepa and his 
guards to call on me; we kept him to lunch, and the old 
gentleman was very good and amiable.  He asked me why I had 
not been to see him?  I reminded him a law had been made, and 
told him I was not a small boy to go and ask leave of the 
consuls, and perhaps be refused.  He told me to pay no 
attention to the law but come when I would, and begged me to 
name a day to lunch.  The next day (I think it was) early in 
the morning, a man appeared; he had metal buttons like a 
policeman - but he was none of our Apia force; he was a rebel 
policeman, and had been all night coming round inland through 
the forest from Malie.  He brought a letter addressed

I LAUA SUSUGA         To his Excellency
MISI MEA.             Mr. Thingumbob.

(So as not to compromise me).  I can read Samoan now, though 
not speak it.  It was to ask me for last Wednesday.  My 
difficulty was great; I had no man here who was fit, or who 
would have cared to write for me; and I had to postpone the 
visit.  So I gave up half-a-day with a groan, went down to 
the priests, arranged for Monday week to go to Malie, and 
named Thursday as my day to lunch with Laupepa.  I was 
sharply ill on Wednesday, mail day.  But on Thursday I had to 
trail down and go through the dreary business of a feast, in 
the King's wretched shanty, full in view of the President's 
fine new house; it made my heart burn.

This gave me my chance to arrange a private interview with 
the King, and I decided to ask Mr. Whitmee, one of our 
missionaries, to be my interpreter.  On Friday, being too 
much exhausted to go down, I begged him to come up.  He did, 
I told him the heads of what I meant to say; and he not only 
consented, but said, if we got on well with the King, he 
would even proceed with me to Malie.  Yesterday, in 
consequence, I rode down to W.'s house by eight in the 
morning; waited till ten; received a message that the King 
was stopped by a meeting with the President and FAIPULE; made 
another engagement for seven at night; came up; went down; 
waited till eight, and came away again, BREDOUILLE, and a 
dead body.  The poor, weak, enslaved King had not dared to 
come to me even in secret.  Now I have to-day for a rest, and 
to-morrow to Malie.  Shall I be suffered to embark?  It is 
very doubtful; they are on the trail.  On Thursday, a 
policeman came up to me and began that a boy had been to see 
him, and said I was going to see Mataafa.  - 'And what did 
you say?' said I. - 'I told him I did not know about where 
you were going,' said he. - 'A very good answer,' said I, and 
turned away.  It is lashing rain to-day, but to-morrow, rain 
or shine, I must at least make the attempt; and I am so 
weary, and the weather looks so bad.  I could half wish they 
would arrest me on the beach.  All this bother and pother to 
try and bring a little chance of peace; all this opposition 
and obstinacy in people who remain here by the mere 
forbearance of Mataafa, who has a great force within six 
miles of their government buildings, which are indeed only 
the residences of white officials.  To understand how I have 
been occupied, you must know that 'Misi Mea' has had another 
letter, and this time had to answer himself; think of doing 
so in a language so obscure to me, with the aid of a Bible, 
concordance and dictionary!  What a wonderful Baboo 
compilation it must have been!  I positively expected to hear 
news of its arrival in Malie by the sound of laughter.  I 
doubt if you will be able to read this scrawl, but I have 
managed to scramble somehow up to date; and to-morrow, one 
way or another, should be interesting.  But as for me, I am a 
wreck, as I have no doubt style and handwriting both testify.


8 P.M.


Wonderfully rested; feel almost fit for to-morrow's dreary 
excursion - not that it will be dreary if the weather favour, 
but otherwise it will be death; and a native feast, and I 
fear I am in for a big one, is a thing I loathe.  I wonder if 
you can really conceive me as a politician in this extra-
mundane sphere - presiding at public meetings, drafting 
proclamations, receiving mis-addressed letters that have been 
carried all night through tropical forests?  It seems strange 
indeed, and to you, who know me really, must seem stranger.  
I do not say I am free from the itch of meddling, but God 
knows this is no tempting job to meddle in; I smile at 
picturesque circumstances like the Misi Mea (MONSIEUR CHOSE 
is the exact equivalent) correspondence, but the business as 
a whole bores and revolts me.  I do nothing and say nothing; 
and then a day comes, and I say 'this can go on no longer.'


9.30 P. M.


The wretched native dilatoriness finds me out.  News has just 
come that we must embark at six to-morrow; I have divided the 
night in watches, and hope to be called to-morrow at four and 
get under way by five.  It is a great chance if it be 
managed; but I have given directions and lent my own clock to 
the boys, and hope the best.  If I get called at four we 
shall do it nicely.  Good-night; I must turn in.


MAY 3RD.


Well, we did get off by about 5.30, or, by'r lady! quarter of 
six: myself on Donald, the huge grey cart-horse, with a ship-
bag across my saddle bow, Fanny on Musu and Belle on Jack.  
We were all feeling pretty tired and sick, and I looked like 
heaven knows what on the cart horse: 'death on the pale 
horse,' I suggested - and young Hunt the missionary, who met 
me to-day on the same charger, squinted up at my perch and 
remarked, 'There's a sweet little cherub that sits up aloft.'  
The boat was ready and we set off down the lagoon about 
seven, four oars, and Talolo, my cook, steering.


MAY 9TH (MONDAY ANYWAY).


And see what good resolutions came to!  Here is all this time 
past, and no speed made.  Well, we got to Malie and were 
received with the most friendly consideration by the rebel 
chief.  Belle and Fanny were obviously thought to be my two 
wives; they were served their kava together, as were Mataafa 
and myself.  Talolo utterly broke down as interpreter; long 
speeches were made to me by Mataafa and his orators, of which 
he could make nothing but they were 'very much surprised' - 
his way of pronouncing obliged - and as he could understand 
nothing that fell from me except the same form of words, the 
dialogue languished and all business had to be laid aside.  
We had kava, and then a dish of arrowroot; one end of the 
house was screened off for us with a fine tapa, and we lay 
and slept, the three of us heads and tails, upon the mats 
till dinner.  After dinner his illegitimate majesty and 
myself had a walk, and talked as well as my twopenny Samoan 
would admit.  Then there was a dance to amuse the ladies 
before the house, and we came back by moonlight, the sky 
piled full of high faint clouds that long preserved some of 
the radiance of the sunset.  The lagoon was very shallow; we 
continually struck, for the moon was young and the light 
baffling; and for a long time we were accompanied by, and 
passed and re-passed, a huge whale-boat from Savaii, pulling 
perhaps twelve oars, and containing perhaps forty people who 
sang in time as they went So to the hotel, where we slept, 
and returned the next Tuesday morning on the three same 
steeds.

Meanwhile my business was still untransacted.  And on 
Saturday morning, I sent down and arranged with Charlie 
Taylor to go down that afternoon.  I had scarce got the 
saddle bags fixed and had not yet mounted, when the rain 
began.  But it was no use delaying now; off I went in a wild 
waterspout to Apia; found Charlie (Sale) Taylor - a 
sesquipedalian young half-caste - not yet ready, had a snack 
of bread and cheese at the hotel while waiting him, and then 
off to Malie.  It rained all the way, seven miles; the road, 
which begins in triumph, dwindles down to a nasty, boggy, 
rocky footpath with weeds up to a horseman's knees; and there 
are eight pig fences to jump, nasty beastly jumps - the next 
morning we found one all messed with blood where a horse had 
come to grief - but my Jack is a clever fencer; and 
altogether we made good time, and got to Malie about dark.  
It is a village of very fine native houses, high, domed, oval 
buildings, open at the sides, or only closed with slatted 
Venetians.  To be sure, Mataafa's is not the worst.  It was 
already quite dark within, only a little fire of cocoa-shell 
blazed in the midst and showed us four servants; the chief 
was in his chapel, whence we heard the sound of chaunting.  
Presently he returned; Taylor and I had our soaking clothes 
changed, family worship was held, kava brewed, I was 
exhibited to the chiefs as a man who had ridden through all 
that rain and risked deportation to serve their master; they 
were bidden learn my face, and remember upon all occasions to 
help and serve me.  Then dinner, and politics, and fine 
speeches until twelve at night - O, and some more kava - when 
I could sit up no longer; my usual bed-time is eight, you 
must remember.  Then one end of the house was screened off 
for me alone, and a bed made - you never saw such a couch - I 
believe of nearly fifty (half at least) fine mats, by 
Mataafa's daughter, Kalala.  Here I reposed alone; and on the 
other side of the tafa, Majesty and his household.  Armed 
guards and a drummer patrolled about the house all night; 
they had no shift, poor devils; but stood to arms from sun-
down to sun-up.

About four in the morning, I was awakened by the sound of a 
whistle pipe blown outside on the dark, very softly and to a 
pleasing simple air; I really think I have hit the first 
phrase:

[Fragment of music score which cannot be reproduced]

It sounded very peaceful, sweet and strange in the dark; and 
I found this was a part of the routine of my rebel's night, 
and it was done (he said) to give good dreams.  By a little 
before six, Taylor and I were in the saddle again fasting.  
My riding boots were so wet I could not get them on, so I 
must ride barefoot.  The morning was fair but the roads very 
muddy, the weeds soaked us nearly to the waist, Sale was 
twice spilt at the fences, and we got to Apia a bedraggled 
enough pair.  All the way along the coast, the pate (small 
wooden drum) was beating in the villages and the people 
crowding to the churches in their fine clothes.  Thence 
through the mangrove swamp, among the black mud and the green 
mangroves, and the black and scarlet crabs, to Mulinuu, to 
the doctor's, where I had an errand, and so to the inn to 
breakfast about nine.  After breakfast I rode home.  Conceive 
such an outing, remember the pallid brute that lived in 
Skerryvore like a weevil in a biscuit, and receive the 
intelligence that I was rather the better for my journey.  
Twenty miles ride, sixteen fences taken, ten of the miles in 
a drenching rain, seven of them fasting and in the morning 
chill, and six stricken hours' political discussions by an 
interpreter; to say nothing of sleeping in a native house, at 
which many of our excellent literati would look askance of 
itself.

You are to understand: if I take all this bother, it is not 
only from a sense of duty, or a love of meddling - damn the 
phrase, take your choice - but from a great affection for 
Mataafa.  He is a beautiful, sweet old fellow, and he and I 
grew quite fulsome on Saturday night about our sentiments.  I 
had a messenger from him to-day with a flannel undershirt 
which I had left behind like a gibbering idiot; and 
perpetrated in reply another baboo letter.  It rains again 
to-day without mercy; blessed, welcome rains, making up for 
the paucity of the late wet season; and when the showers 
slacken, I can hear my stream roaring in the hollow, and tell 
myself that the cacaos are drinking deep.  I am desperately 
hunted to finish my Samoa book before the mail goes; this 
last chapter is equally delicate and necessary.  The prayers 
of the congregation are requested.  Eheu! and it will be 
ended before this letter leaves and printed in the States ere 
you can read this scribble.  The first dinner gong has 
sounded; JE VOUS SALUE, MONSIEUR ET CHER CONFRERE.  TOFA, 
SOIFUA!  Sleep! long life! as our Samoan salutation of 
farewell runs.


FRIDAY, MAY 13TH.


Well, the last chapter, by far the most difficult and 
ungrateful, is well under way, I have been from six to seven 
hours upon it daily since I last wrote; and that is all I 
have done forbye working at Samoan rather hard, and going 
down on Wednesday evening to the club.  I make some progress 
now at the language; I am teaching Belle, which clears and 
exercises myself.  I am particularly taken with the FINESSE 
of the pronouns.  The pronouns are all dual and plural and 
the first person, both in the dual and plural, has a special 
exclusive and inclusive form.  You can conceive what fine 
effects of precision and distinction can be reached in 
certain cases.  Take Ruth, i. VV. 8 to 13, and imagine how 
those pronouns come in; it is exquisitely elegant, and makes 
the mouth of the LITTERATEUR to water.  I am going to 
exercitate my pupil over those verses to-day for pronoun 
practice.


TUESDAY.


Yesterday came yours.  Well, well, if the dears prefer a 
week, why, I'll give them ten days, but the real document, 
from which I have scarcely varied, ran for one night.  I 
think you seem scarcely fair to Wiltshire, who had surely, 
under his beast-ignorant ways, right noble qualities.  And I 
think perhaps you scarce do justice to the fact that this is 
a place of realism A OUTRANCE; nothing extenuated or 
coloured.  Looked at so, is it not, with all its tragic 
features, wonderfully idyllic, with great beauty of scene and 
circumstance?  And will you please to observe that almost all 
that is ugly is in the whites?  I'll apologise for Papa 
Randal if you like; but if I told you the whole truth - for I 
did extenuate there! - and he seemed to me essential as a 
figure, and essential as a pawn in the game, Wiltshire's 
disgust for him being one of the small, efficient motives in 
the story.  Now it would have taken a fairish dose to disgust 
Wiltshire. - Again, the idea of publishing the Beach 
substantively is dropped - at once, both on account of 
expostulation, and because it measured shorter than I had 
expected.  And it was only taken up, when the proposed 
volume, BEACH DE MAR, petered out.  It petered out thus: the 
chief of the short stories got sucked into SOPHIA SCARLET - 
and Sophia is a book I am much taken with, and mean to get 
to, as soon as - but not before - I have done DAVID BALFOUR 
and THE YOUNG CHEVALIER.  So you see you are like to hear no 
more of the Pacific or the nineteenth century for a while.  
THE YOUNG CHEVALIER is a story of sentiment and passion, 
which I mean to write a little differently from what I have 
been doing - if I can hit the key; rather more of a 
sentimental tremolo to it.  It may thus help to prepare me 
for SOPHIA, which is to contain three ladies, and a kind of a 
love affair between the heroine and a dying planter who is a 
poet! large orders for R. L. S.

O the German taboo is quite over; no soul attempts to support 
the C. J. or the President, they are past hope; the whites 
have just refused their taxes - I mean the council has 
refused to call for them, and if the council consented, 
nobody would pay; 'tis a farce, and the curtain is going to 
fall briefly.  Consequently in my History, I say as little as 
may be of the two dwindling stars.  Poor devils!  I liked the 
one, and the other has a little wife, now lying in!  There 
was no man born with so little animosity as I. When I heard 
the C. J. was in low spirits and never left his house, I 
could scarce refrain from going to him.

It was a fine feeling to have finished the History; there 
ought to be a future state to reward that grind!  It's not 
literature, you know; only journalism, and pedantic 
journalism.  I had but the one desire, to get the thing as 
right as might be, and avoid false concords - even if that!  
And it was more than there was time for.  However, there it 
is: done.  And if Samoa turns up again my book has to be 
counted with, being the only narrative extant.  Milton and I 
- if you kindly excuse the juxtaposition - harnessed 
ourselves to strange waggons, and I at least will be found to 
have plodded very soberly with my load.  There is not even a 
good sentence in it, but perhaps - I don't know - it may be 
found an honest, clear volume.


WEDNESDAY.


Never got a word set down, and continues on Thursday 19th 
May, his own marriage day as ever was.  News; yes.  The C. J. 
came up to call on us!  After five months' cessation on my 
side, and a decidedly painful interchange of letters, I could 
not go down - could not - to see him.  My three ladies 
received him, however; he was very agreeable as usual, but 
refused wine, beer, water, lemonade, chocolate and at last a 
cigarette.  Then my wife asked him, 'So you refuse to break 
bread?' and he waved his hands amiably in answer.  All my 
three ladies received the same impression that he had serious 
matters in his mind: now we hear he is quite cock-a-hoop 
since the mail came, and going about as before his troubles 
darkened.  But what did he want with me?  'Tis thought he had 
received a despatch - and that he misreads it (so we fully 
believe) to the effect that they are to have war ships at 
command and can make their little war after all.  If it be 
so, and they do it, it will be the meanest wanton slaughter 
of poor men for the salaries of two white failures.  But what 
was his errand with me? Perhaps to warn me that unless I 
behave he now hopes to be able to pack me off in the CURACOA 
when she comes.

I have celebrated my holiday from SAMOA by a plunge at the 
beginning of THE YOUNG CHEVALIER.  I am afraid my touch is a 
little broad in a love story; I can't mean one thing and 
write another.  As for women, I am no more in any fear of 
them; I can do a sort all right; age makes me less afraid of 
a petticoat, but I am a little in fear of grossness.  
However, this David Balfour's love affair, that's all right - 
might be read out to a mothers' meeting - or a daughters' 
meeting.  The difficulty in a love yarn, which dwells at all 
on love, is the dwelling on one string; it is manifold, I 
grant, but the root fact is there unchanged, and the 
sentiment being very intense, and already very much handled 
in letters, positively calls for a little pawing and gracing.  
With a writer of my prosaic literalness and pertinency of 
point of view, this all shoves toward grossness - positively 
even towards the far more damnable CLOSENESS.  This has kept 
me off the sentiment hitherto, and now I am to try: Lord!  Of 
course Meredith can do it, and so could Shakespeare; but with 
all my romance, I am a realist and a prosaist, and a most 
fanatical lover of plain physical sensations plainly and 
expressly rendered; hence my perils.  To do love in the same 
spirit as I did (for instance) D. Balfour's fatigue in the 
heather; my dear sir, there were grossness - ready made!  And 
hence, how to sugar?  However, I have nearly done with Marie-
Madeleine, and am in good hopes of Marie-Salome, the real 
heroine; the other is only a prologuial heroine to introduce 
the hero.


FRIDAY.


Anyway, the first prologuial episode is done, and Fanny likes 
it.  There are only four characters; Francis Blair of Balmile 
(Jacobite Lord Gladsmuir) my hero; the Master of Ballantrae; 
Paradon, a wine-seller of Avignon; Marie-Madeleine his wife.  
These two last I am now done with, and I think they are 
successful, and I hope I have Balmile on his feet; and the 
style seems to be found.  It is a little charged and violent; 
sins on the side of violence; but I think will carry the 
tale.  I think it is a good idea so to introduce my hero, 
being made love to by an episodic woman.  This queer tale - I 
mean queer for me - has taken a great hold upon me.  Where 
the devil shall I go next?  This is simply the tale of a COUP 
DE TETE of a young man and a young woman; with a nearly, 
perhaps a wholly, tragic sequel, which I desire to make 
thinkable right through, and sensible; to make the reader, as 
far as I shall be able, eat and drink and breathe it.  Marie-
Salome des Saintes-Maries is, I think, the heroine's name; 
she has got to BE yet: SURSUM CORDA!  So has the young 
Chevalier, whom I have not yet touched, and who comes next in 
order.  Characters: Balmile, or Lord Gladsmuir, COMME VOUS 
VOULEZ; Prince Charlie; Earl Marischal; Master of Ballantrae; 
and a spy, and Dr. Archie Campbell, and a few nondescripts; 
then, of women, Marie-Salome and Flora Blair; seven at the 
outside; really four full lengths, and I suppose a half-dozen 
episodic profiles.  How I must bore you with these 
ineptitudes!  Have patience.  I am going to bed; it is (of 
all hours) eleven.  I have been forced in (since I began to 
write to you) to blatter to Fanny on the subject of my 
heroine, there being two CRUCES as to her life and history: 
how came she alone? and how far did she go with the 
Chevalier?  The second must answer itself when I get near 
enough to see.  The first is a back-breaker.  Yet I know 
there are many reasons why a FILLE DE FAMINE, romantic, 
adventurous, ambitious, innocent of the world, might run from 
her home in these days; might she not have been threatened 
with a convent? might there not be some Huguenot business 
mixed in?  Here am I, far from books; if you can help me with 
a suggestion, I shall say God bless you.  She has to be new 
run away from a strict family, well-justified in her own wild 
but honest eyes, and meeting these three men, Charles Edward, 
Marischal, and Balmile, through the accident of a fire at an 
inn.  She must not run from a marriage, I think; it would 
bring her in the wrong frame of mind.  Once I can get her, 
SOLA, on the highway, all were well with my narrative.  
Perpend.  And help if you can.

Lafaele, long (I hope) familiar to you, has this day received 
the visit of his SON from Tonga; and the SON proves to be a 
very pretty, attractive young daughter!  I gave all the boys 
kava in honour of her arrival; along with a lean, side-
whiskered Tongan, dimly supposed to be Lafaele's step-father; 
and they have been having a good time; in the end of my 
verandah, I hear Simi, my present incapable steward, talking 
Tongan with the nondescript papa.  Simi, our out-door boy, 
burst a succession of blood-vessels over our work, and I had 
to make a position for the wreck of one of the noblest 
figures of a man I ever saw.  I believe I may have mentioned 
the other day how I had to put my horse to the trot, the 
canter and (at last) the gallop to run him down.  In a 
photograph I hope to send you (perhaps with this) you will 
see Simi standing in the verandah in profile.  As a steward, 
one of his chief points is to break crystal; he is great on 
fracture - what do I say? - explosion!  He cleans a glass, 
and the shards scatter like a comet's bowels.

N.B. - If I should by any chance be deported, the first of 
the rules hung up for that occasion is to communicate with 
you by telegraph. - Mind, I do not fear it, but it IS 
possible.


MONDAY 25TH.


We have had a devil of a morning of upset and bustle; the 
bronze candlestick Faauma has returned to the family, in time 
to take her position of stepmamma, and it is pretty to see 
how the child is at once at home, and all her terrors ended.


27TH.  MAIL DAY.


And I don't know that I have much to report.  I may have to 
leave for Malie as soon as these mail packets are made up.  
'Tis a necessity (if it be one) I rather deplore.  I think I 
should have liked to lazy; but I daresay all it means is the 
delay of a day or so in harking back to David Balfour; that 
respectable youth chides at being left (where he is now) in 
Glasgow with the Lord Advocate, and after five years in the 
British Linen, who shall blame him?  I was all forenoon 
yesterday down in Apia,' dictating, and Lloyd type-writing, 
the conclusion of SAMOA; and then at home correcting till the 
dinner bell; and in the evening again till eleven of the 
clock.  This morning I have made up most of my packets, and I 
think my mail is all ready but two more, and the tag of this.  
I would never deny (as D. B might say) that I was rather 
tired of it.  But I have a damned good dose of the devil in 
my pipe-stem atomy; I have had my little holiday outing in my 
kick at THE YOUNG CHEVALIER, and I guess I can settle to 
DAVID BALFOUR to-morrow or Friday like a little man.  I 
wonder if any one had ever more energy upon so little 
strength? - I know there is a frost, the Samoa book can only 
increase that - I can't help it, that book is not written for 
me but for Miss Manners; but I mean to break that frost 
inside two years, and pull off a big success, and Vanity 
whispers in my ear that I have the strength.  If I haven't, 
whistle ower the lave o't!  I can do without glory and 
perhaps the time is not far off when I can do without corn.  
It is a time coming soon enough, anyway; and I have endured 
some two and forty years without public shame, and had a good 
time as I did it.  If only I could secure a violent death, 
what a fine success!  I wish to die in my boots; no more Land 
of Counterpane for me.  To be drowned, to be shot, to be 
thrown from a horse - ay, to be hanged, rather than pass 
again through that slow dissolution.

I fancy this gloomy ramble is caused by a twinge of age; I 
put on an under-shirt yesterday (it was the only one I could 
find) that barely came under my trousers; and just below it, 
a fine healthy rheumatism has now settled like a fire in my 
hip.  From such small causes do these valuable considerations 
flow!

I shall now say adieu, dear Sir, having ten rugged miles 
before me and the horrors of a native feast and parliament 
without an interpreter, for to-day I go alone.

Yours ever,
R. L S.



CHAPTER XIX



SUNDAY, 29TH MAY.


HOW am I to overtake events?  On Wednesday, as soon as my 
mail was finished, I had a wild whirl to look forward to.  
Immediately after dinner, Belle, Lloyd and I, set out on 
horseback, they to the club, I to Haggard's, thence to the 
hotel where I had supper ready for them.  All next day we 
hung round Apia with our whole house-crowd in Sunday array, 
hoping for the mail steamer with a menagerie on board.  No 
such luck; the ship delayed; and at last, about three, I had 
to send them home again, a failure of a day's pleasuring that 
does not bear to be discussed.  Lloyd was so sickened that he 
returned the same night to Vailima, Belle and I held on, sat 
most of the evening on the hotel verandah stricken silly with 
fatigue and disappointment, and genuine sorrow for our poor 
boys and girls, and got to bed with rather dismal 
appreciations of the morrow.

These were more than justified, and yet I never had a jollier 
day than Friday 27th.  By 7.30 Belle and I had breakfast; we 
had scarce done before my mother was at the door on 
horseback, and a boy at her heels to take her not very 
dashing charger home again.  By 8.10 we were all on the 
landing pier, and it was 9.20 before we had got away in a 
boat with two inches of green wood on the keel of her, no 
rudder, no mast, no sail, no boat flag, two defective 
rowlocks, two wretched apologies for oars, and two boys - one 
a Tongan half-caste, one a white lad, son of the Tonga 
schoolmaster, and a sailor lad - to pull us.  All this was 
our first taste of the tender mercies of Taylor (the 
sesquipidalian half-caste introduced two letters back, I 
believe).  We had scarce got round Mulinuu when Sale Taylor's 
heart misgave him; he thought we had missed the tide; called 
a halt, and set off ashore to find canoes.  Two were found; 
in one my mother and I were embarked with the two biscuit 
tins (my present to the feast), and the bag with our dry 
clothes, on which my mother was perched - and her cap was on 
the top of it - feminine hearts please sympathise; all under 
the guidance of Sale.  In the other Belle and our guest; 
Tauilo, a chief-woman, the mother of my cook, were to have 
followed.  And the boys were to have been left with the boat.  
But Tauilo refused.  And the four, Belle, Tauilo, Frank the 
sailor-boy, and Jimmie the Tongan half-caste, set off in the 
boat across that rapidly shoaling bay of the lagoon.

How long the next scene lasted, I could never tell.  Sale was 
always trying to steal away with our canoe and leave the 
other four, probably for six hours, in an empty, leaky boat, 
without so much as an orange or a cocoanut on board, and 
under the direct rays of the sun.  I had at last to stop him 
by taking the spare paddle off the out-rigger and sticking it 
in the ground - depth, perhaps two feet - width of the bay, 
say three miles.  At last I bid him land me and my mother and 
go back for the other ladies.  'The coast is so rugged,' said 
Sale. - 'What?' I said, 'all these villages and no landing 
place?' - 'Such is the nature of Samoans,' said he.  Well, 
I'll find a landing-place, I thought; and presently I said, 
'Now we are going to land there.' - 'We can but try,' said 
the bland Sale, with resignation.  Never saw a better 
landing-place in my life.  Here the boat joined us.  My 
mother and Sale continued in the canoe alone, and Belle and I 
and Tauilo set off on foot for Malie.  Tauilo was about the 
size of both of us put together and a piece over; she used us 
like a mouse with children.  I had started barefoot; Belle 
had soon to pull off her gala shoes and stockings; the mud 
was as deep as to our knees, and so slippery that (moving, as 
we did, in Indian file, between dense scratching tufts of 
sensitive) Belle and I had to take hands to support each 
other, and Tauilo was steadying Belle from the rear.  You can 
conceive we were got up to kill, Belle in an embroidered 
white dress and white hat, I in a suit of Bedford cords hot 
from the Sydney tailors; and conceive us, below, ink-black to 
the knees with adhesive clay, and above, streaming with heat.  
I suppose it was better than three miles, but at last we made 
the end of Malie.  I asked if we could find no water to wash 
our feet; and our nursemaid guided us to a pool.  We sat down 
on the pool side, and our nursemaid washed our feet and legs 
for us - ladies first, I suppose out of a sudden respect to 
the insane European fancies: such a luxury as you can scarce 
imagine.  I felt a new man after it.  But before we got to 
the King's house we were sadly muddied once more.  It was 1 
P.M. when we arrived, the canoe having beaten us by about 
five minutes, so we made fair time over our bog-holes.

But the war dances were over, and we came in time to see only 
the tail end (some two hours) of the food presentation.  In 
Mataafa's house three chairs were set for us covered with 
fine mats.  Of course, a native house without the blinds down 
is like a verandah.  All the green in front was surrounded 
with sheds, some of flapping canvas, some of green palm 
boughs, where (in three sides of a huge oblong) the natives 
sat by villages in a fine glow of many-hued array.  There 
were folks in tapa, and folks in patchwork; there was every 
colour of the rainbow in a spot or a cluster; there were men 
with their heads gilded with powdered sandal-wood, others 
with heads all purple, stuck full of the petals of a flower.  
In the midst there was a growing field of outspread food, 
gradually covering acres; the gifts were brought in, now by 
chanting deputations, now by carriers in a file; they were 
brandished aloft and declaimed over, with polite sacramental 
exaggerations, by the official receiver.  He, a stalwart, 
well-oiled quadragenarian, shone with sweat from his 
exertions, brandishing cooked pigs.  At intervals, from one 
of the squatted villages, an orator would arise.  The field 
was almost beyond the reach of any human speaking voice; the 
proceedings besides continued in the midst; yet it was 
possible to catch snatches of this elaborate and cut-and-dry 
oratory - it was possible for me, for instance, to catch the 
description of my gift and myself as the ALII TUSITALA, O LE 
ALII O MALO TETELE - the chief White Information, the chief 
of the great Governments.  Gay designation?  In the house, in 
our three curule chairs, we sat and looked on.  On our left a 
little group of the family.  In front of us, at our feet, an 
ancient Talking-man, crowned with green leaves, his profile 
almost exactly Dante's; Popo his name.  He had worshipped 
idols in his youth; he had been full grown before the first 
missionary came hither from Tahiti; this makes him over 
eighty.  Near by him sat his son and colleague.  In the group 
on our left, his little grandchild sat with her legs crossed 
and her hands turned, the model already (at some three years 
old) of Samoan etiquette.  Still further off to our right, 
Mataafa sat on the ground through all the business; and still 
I saw his lips moving, and the beads of his rosary slip 
stealthily through his hand.  We had kava, and the King's 
drinking was hailed by the Popos (father and son) with a 
singular ululation, perfectly new to my ears; it means, to 
the expert, 'Long live Tuiatua'; to the inexpert, is a mere 
voice of barbarous wolves.  We had dinner, retired a bit 
behind the central pillar of the house; and, when the King 
was done eating, the ululation was repeated.  I had my eyes 
on Mataafa's face, and I saw pride and gratified ambition 
spring to life there and be instantly sucked in again.  It 
was the first time, since the difference with Laupepa, that 
Popo and his son had openly joined him, and given him the due 
cry as Tuiatua - one of the eight royal names of the islands, 
as I hope you will know before this reaches you.

Not long after we had dined, the food-bringing was over.  The 
gifts (carefully noted and tallied as they came in) were now 
announced by a humorous orator, who convulsed the audience, 
introducing singing notes, now on the name of the article, 
now on the number; six thousand odd heads of taro, three 
hundred and nineteen cooked pigs; and one thing that 
particularly caught me (by good luck), a single turtle 'for 
the King' - LE TASI MO LE TUPU.  Then came one of the 
strangest sights I have yet witnessed.  The two most 
important persons there (bar Mataafa) were Popo and his son.  
They rose, holding their long shod rods of talking men, 
passed forth from the house, broke into a strange dance, the 
father capering with outstretched arms and rod, the son 
crouching and gambolling beside him in a manner 
indescribable, and presently began to extend the circle of 
this dance among the acres of cooked food.  WHATEVER THEY 
LEAPED OVER, WHATEVER THEY CALLED FOR, BECAME THEIRS.  To see 
mediaeval Dante thus demean himself struck a kind of a chill 
of incongruity into our Philistine souls; but even in a great 
part of the Samoan concourse, these antique and (I 
understand) quite local manners awoke laughter.  One of my 
biscuit tins and a live calf were among the spoils he 
claimed, but the large majority of the cooked food (having 
once proved his dignity) he re-presented to the King.

Then came the turn of LE ALII TUSITALA.  He would not dance, 
but he was given - five live hens, four gourds of oil, four 
fine tapas, a hundred heads of taro, two cooked pigs, a 
cooked shark, two or three cocoanut branches strung with 
kava, and the turtle, who soon after breathed his last, I 
believe, from sunstroke.  It was a royal present for 'the 
chief of the great powers.'  I should say the gifts were, on 
the proper signal, dragged out of the field of food by a 
troop of young men, all with their lava-lavas kilted almost 
into a loin-cloth.  The art is to swoop on the food-field, 
pick up with unerring swiftness the right things and 
quantities, swoop forth again on the open, and separate, 
leaving the gifts in a new pile: so you may see a covey of 
birds in a corn-field.  This reminds me of a very inhumane 
but beautiful passage I had forgotten in its place.  The 
gift-giving was still in full swing, when there came a troop 
of some ninety men all in tafa lava-lavas of a purplish 
colour; they paused, and of a sudden there went up from them 
high into the air a flight of live chickens, which, as they 
came down again, were sent again into the air, for perhaps a 
minute, from the midst of a singular turmoil of flying arms 
and shouting voices; I assure you, it was very beautiful to 
see, but how many chickens were killed?

No sooner was my food set out than I was to be going.  I had 
a little serious talk with Mataafa on the floor, and we went 
down to the boat, where we got our food aboard, such a cargo 
- like the Swiss Family Robinson, we said.  However, a squall 
began, Tauilo refused to let us go, and we came back to the 
house for half-an-hour or so, when my ladies distinguished 
themselves by walking through a Fono (council), my mother 
actually taking up a position between Mataafa and Popo!  It 
was about five when we started - turtle, pigs, taro, etc., my 
mother, Belle, myself, Tauilo, a portly friend of hers with 
the voice of an angel, and a pronunciation so delicate and 
true that you could follow Samoan as she sang, and the two 
tired boys Frank and Jimmie, with the two bad oars and the 
two slippery rowlocks to impel the whole.  Sale Taylor took 
the canoe and a strong Samoan to paddle him.  Presently after 
he went inshore, and passed us a little after, with his arms 
folded, and TWO strong Samoans impelling him Apia-ward.  This 
was too much for Belle, who hailed, taunted him, and made him 
return to the boat with one of the Samoans, setting Jimmie 
instead in the canoe.  Then began our torment, Sale and the 
Samoan took the oars, sat on the same thwart (where they 
could get no swing on the boat had they tried), and 
deliberately ladled at the lagoon.  We lay enchanted.  Night 
fell; there was a light visible on shore; it did not move.  
The two women sang, Belle joining them in the hymns she has 
learned at family worship.  Then a squall came up; we sat a 
while in roaring midnight under rivers of rain, and, when it 
blew by, there was the light again, immovable.  A second 
squall followed, one of the worst I was ever out in; we could 
scarce catch our breath in the cold, dashing deluge.  When it 
went, we were so cold that the water in the bottom of the 
boat (which I was then baling) seemed like a warm footbath in 
comparison, and Belle and I, who were still barefoot, were 
quite restored by laving in it.

All this time I had kept my temper, and refrained as far as 
might be from any interference, for I saw (in our friend's 
mulish humour) he always contrived to twist it to our 
disadvantage.  But now came the acute point.  Young Frank now 
took an oar.  He was a little fellow, near as frail as 
myself, and very short; if he weighed nine stone, it was the 
outside; but his blood was up.  He took stroke, moved the big 
Samoan forward to bow, and set to work to pull him round in 
fine style.  Instantly a kind of race competition - almost 
race hatred - sprang up.  We jeered the Samoan.  Sale 
declared it was the trim of the boat: 'if this lady was aft' 
(Tauilo's portly friend) 'he would row round Frank.'  We 
insisted on her coming aft, and Frank still rowed round the 
Samoan.  When the Samoan caught a crab (the thing was 
continual with these wretched oars and rowlocks), we shouted 
and jeered; when Frank caught one, Sale and the Samoan jeered 
and yelled.  But anyway the boat moved, and presently we got 
up with Mulinuu, where I finally lost my temper, when I found 
that Sale proposed to go ashore and make a visit - in fact, 
we all three did.  It is not worth while going into, but I 
must give you one snatch of the subsequent conversation as we 
pulled round Apia bay.  'This Samoan,' said Sale, 'received 
seven German bullets in the field of Fangalii.'  'I am 
delighted to hear it,' said Belle.  'His brother was killed 
there,' pursued Sale; and Belle, prompt as an echo, 'Then 
there are no more of the family? how delightful!'  Sale was 
sufficiently surprised to change the subject; he began to 
praise Frank's rowing with insufferable condescension: 'But 
it is after all not to be wondered at,' said he, 'because he 
has been for some time a sailor.  My good man, is it three or 
five years that you have been to sea?'  And Frank, in a 
defiant shout: 'Two!' Whereupon, so high did the ill-feeling 
run, that we three clapped and applauded and shouted, so that 
the President (whose house we were then passing) doubtless 
started at the sounds.  It was nine when we got to the hotel; 
at first no food was to be found, but we skirmished up some 
bread and cheese and beer and brandy; and (having changed our 
wet clothes for the rather less wet in our bags) supped on 
the verandah.

SATURDAY 28TH.  I was wakened about 6.30, long past my usual 
hour, by a benevolent passer-by.  My turtle lay on the 
verandah at my door, and the man woke me to tell me it was 
dead, as it had been when we put it on board the day before.  
All morning I ran the gauntlet of men and women coming up to 
me: 'Mr. Stevenson, your turtle is dead.'  I gave half of it 
to the hotel keeper, so that his cook should cut it up; and 
we got a damaged shell, and two splendid meals, beefsteak one 
day and soup the next.  The horses came for us about 9.30.  
It was waterspouting; we were drenched before we got out of 
the town; the road was a fine going Highland trout stream; it 
thundered deep and frequent, and my mother's horse would not 
better on a walk.  At last she took pity on us, and very 
nobly proposed that Belle and I should ride ahead.  We were 
mighty glad to do so, for we were cold.  Presently, I said I 
should ride back for my mother, but it thundered again, Belle 
is afraid of thunder, and I decided to see her through the 
forest before I returned for my other hen - I may say, my 
other wet hen.  About the middle of the wood, where it is 
roughest and steepest, we met three pack-horses with barrels 
of lime-juice.  I piloted Belle past these - it is not very 
easy in such a road - and then passed them again myself, to 
pilot my mother.  This effected, it began to thunder again, 
so I rode on hard after Belle.  When I caught up with her, 
she was singing Samoan hymns to support her terrors!  We were 
all back, changed, and at table by lunch time, 11 A.M.  Nor 
have any of us been the worse for it sinsyne.  That is pretty 
good for a woman of my mother's age and an invalid of my 
standing; above all, as Tauilo was laid up with a bad cold, 
probably increased by rage.


FRIDAY, 3RD JUNE.


On Wednesday the club could not be held, and I must ride down 
town and to and fro all afternoon delivering messages, then 
dined and rode up by the young moon.  I had plenty news when 
I got back; there is great talk in town of my deportation: it 
is thought they have written home to Downing Street 
requesting my removal, which leaves me not much alarmed; what 
I do rather expect is that H. J. Moors and I may be haled up 
before the C. J. to stand a trial for LESE-Majesty.  Well, 
we'll try and live it through.

The rest of my history since Monday has been unadulterated 
DAVID BALFOUR.  In season and out of season, night and day, 
David and his innocent harem - let me be just, he never has 
more than the two - are on my mind.  Think of David Balfour 
with a pair of fair ladies - very nice ones too - hanging 
round him.  I really believe David is as a good character as 
anybody has a right to ask for in a novel.  I have finished 
drafting Chapter XX. to-day, and feel it all ready to froth 
when the spigot is turned.

O I forgot - and do forget.  What did I mean?  A waft of 
cloud has fallen on my mind, and I will write no more.


WEDNESDAY, I BELIEVE, 8TH JUNE.


Lots of David, and lots of David, and the devil any other 
news.  Yesterday we were startled by great guns firing a 
salute, and to-day Whitmee (missionary) rode up to lunch, and 
we learned it was the CURACOA come in, the ship (according to 
rumour) in which I was to be deported.  I went down to meet 
my fate, and the captain is to dine with me Saturday, so I 
guess I am not going this voyage.  Even with the 
particularity with which I write to you, how much of my life 
goes unexpressed; my troubles with a madman by the name of -, 
a genuine living lunatic, I believe, and jolly dangerous; my 
troubles about poor -, all these have dropped out; yet for 
moments they were very instant, and one of them is always 
present with me.

I have finished copying Chapter XXI. of David - 'SOLUS CUM 
SOLA; we travel together.'  Chapter XXII., 'SOLUS CUM SOLA; 
we keep house together,' is already drafted.  To the end of 
XXI. makes more than 150 pages of my manuscript - damn this 
hair - and I only designed the book to run to about 200; but 
when you introduce the female sect, a book does run away with 
you.  I am very curious to see what you will think of my two 
girls.  My own opinion is quite clear; I am in love with 
both.  I foresee a few pleasant years of spiritual 
flirtations.  The creator (if I may name myself, for the sake 
of argument, by such a name) is essentially unfaithful.  For 
the duration of the two chapters in which I dealt with Miss 
Grant, I totally forgot my heroine, and even - but this is a 
flat secret - tried to win away David.  I think I must try 
some day to marry Miss Grant.  I'm blest if I don't think 
I've got that hair out! which seems triumph enough; so I 
conclude.


TUESDAY.


Your infinitesimal correspondence has reached me, and I have 
the honour to refer to it with scorn.  It contains only one 
statement of conceivable interest, that your health is 
better; the rest is null, and so far as disquisitory unsound.  
I am all right, but David Balfour is ailing; this came from 
my visit to the man-of-war, where I had a cup of tea, and the 
most of that night walked the verandah with extraordinary 
convictions of guilt and ruin, many of which (but not all) 
proved to have fled with the day, taking David along with 
them; he R.I.P. in Chapter XXII.

On Saturday I went down to the town, and fetched up Captain 
Gibson to dinner; Sunday I was all day at Samoa, and had a 
pile of visitors.  Yesterday got my mail, including your 
despicable sheet; was fooled with a visit from the high chief 
Asi, went down at 4 P.M. to my Samoan lesson from Whitmee - I 
think I shall learn from him, he does not fool me with 
cockshot rules that are demolished next day, but professes 
ignorance like a man; the truth is, the grammar has still to 
be expiscated - dined with Haggard, and got home about nine.


WEDNESDAY.


The excellent Clarke up here almost all day yesterday, a man 
I esteem and like to the soles of his boots; I prefer him to 
anyone in Samoa, and to most people in the world; a real good 
missionary, with the inestimable advantage of having grown up 
a layman.  Pity they all can't get that!  It recalls my old 
proposal, which delighted Lady Taylor so much, that every 
divinity student should be thirty years old at least before 
he was admitted.  Boys switched out of college into a pulpit, 
what chance have they?  That any should do well amazes me, 
and the most are just what was to be expected.


SATURDAY.


I must tell you of our feast.  It was long promised to the 
boys, and came off yesterday in one of their new houses.  My 
good Simele arrived from Savaii that morning asking for 
political advice; then we had Tauilo; Elena's father, a 
talking man of Tauilo's family; Talolo's cousin; and a boy of 
Simele's family, who attended on his dignity; then Metu, the 
meat-man - you have never heard of him, but he is a great 
person in our household - brought a lady and a boy - and 
there was another infant - eight guests in all.  And we sat 
down thirty strong.  You should have seen our procession, 
going (about two o'clock), all in our best clothes, to the 
hall of feasting!  All in our Sunday's best.  The new house 
had been hurriedly finished; the rafters decorated with 
flowers; the floor spread, native style, with green leaves; 
we had given a big porker, twenty-five pounds of fresh beef, 
a tin of biscuit, cocoanuts, etc.  Our places were all 
arranged with much care; the native ladies of the house 
facing our party; the sides filled up by the men; the guests, 
please observe: the two chief people, male and female, were 
placed with our family, the rest between S. and the native 
ladies.  After the feast was over, we had kava, and the 
calling of the kava was a very elaborate affair, and I 
thought had like to have made Simele very angry; he is really 
a considerable chief, but he and Tauilo were not called till 
after all our family, AND THE GUESTS, I suppose the principle 
being that he was still regarded as one of the household.  I 
forgot to say that our black boy did not turn up when the 
feast was ready.  Off went the two cooks, found him, 
decorated him with huge red hibiscus flowers - he was in a 
very dirty under shirt - brought him back between them like a 
reluctant maid, and, thrust him into a place between Faauma 
and Elena, where he was petted and ministered to.  When his 
turn came in the kava drinking - and you may be sure, in 
their contemptuous, affectionate kindness for him, as for a 
good dog, it came rather earlier than it ought - he was cried 
under a new name.  ALEKI is what they make of his own name 
Arrick; but instead of 

{ the cup of }
{'le ipu o     }

Aleki!' it was called 'le ipu o VAILIMA' and it was explained 
that he had 'taken his chief-name'! a jest at which the 
plantation still laughs.  Kava done, I made a little speech, 
Henry translating.  If I had been well, I should have alluded 
to all, but I was scarce able to sit up; so only alluded to 
my guest of all this month, the Tongan, Tomas, and to Simele, 
partly for the jest of making him translate compliments to 
himself.  The talking man replied with many handsome 
compliments to me, in the usual flood of Samoan fluent 
neatness; and we left them to an afternoon of singing and 
dancing.  Must stop now, as my right hand is very bad again.  
I am trying to write with my left.


SUNDAY.


About half-past eight last night, I had gone to my own room, 
Fanny and Lloyd were in Fanny's, every one else in bed, only 
two boys on the premises - the two little brown boys Mitaiele 
(Michael), age I suppose 11 or 12, and the new steward, a 
Wallis islander, speaking no English and about fifty words of 
Samoan, recently promoted from the bush work, and a most 
good, anxious, timid lad of 15 or 16 - looks like 17 or 18, 
of course - they grow fast here.  In comes Mitaiele to Lloyd, 
and told some rigmarole about Paatalise (the steward's name) 
wanting to go and see his family in the bush. - 'But he has 
no family in the bush,' said Lloyd.  'No,' said Mitaiele.  
They went to the boy's bed (they sleep in the walled-in 
compartment of the verandah, once my dressing-room) and 
called at once for me.  He lay like one asleep, talking in 
drowsy tones but without excitement, and at times 'cheeping' 
like a frightened mouse; he was quite cool to the touch, and 
his pulse not fast; his breathing seemed wholly ventral; the 
bust still, the belly moving strongly.  Presently he got from 
his bed, and ran for the door, with his head down not three 
feet from the floor and his body all on a stretch forward, 
like a striking snake: I say 'ran,' but this strange movement 
was not swift.  Lloyd and I mastered him and got him back in 
bed.  Soon there was another and more desperate attempt to 
escape, in which Lloyd had his ring broken.  Then we bound 
him to the bed humanely with sheets, ropes, boards and 
pillows.  He lay there and sometimes talked, sometimes 
whispered, sometimes wept like an angry child; his principal 
word was 'Faamolemole' - 'Please' - and he kept telling us at 
intervals that his family were calling him.  During this 
interval, by the special grace of God, my boys came home; we 
had already called in Arrick, the black boy; now we had that 
Hercules, Lafaele, and a man Savea, who comes from 
Paatalise's own island and can alone communicate with him 
freely.  Lloyd went to bed, I took the first watch, and sat 
in my room reading, while Lafaele and Arrick watched the 
madman.  Suddenly Arrick called me; I ran into the verandah; 
there was Paatalise free of all his bonds and Lafaele holding 
him.  To tell what followed is impossible.  We were five 
people at him - Lafaele and Savea, very strong men, Lloyd, I 
and Arrick, and the struggle lasted until 1 A.M. before we 
had him bound.  One detail for a specimen: Lloyd and I had 
charge of one leg, we were both sitting on it, and lo! we 
were both tossed into the air - I, I daresay, a couple of 
feet.  At last we had him spread-eagled to the iron bedstead, 
by his wrists and ankles, with matted rope; a most inhumane 
business, but what could we do? it was all we could do to 
manage it even so.  The strength of the paroxysms had been 
steadily increasing, and we trembled for the next.  And now I 
come to pure Rider Haggard.  Lafaele announced that the boy 
was very bad, and he would get 'some medicine' which was a 
family secret of his own.  Some leaves were brought 
mysteriously in; chewed, placed on the boy's eyes, dropped in 
his ears (see Hamlet) and stuck up his nostrils; as he did 
this, the weird doctor partly smothered the patient with his 
hand; and by about 2 A.M. he was in a deep sleep, and from 
that time he showed no symptom of dementia whatever.  The 
medicine (says Lafaele) is principally used for the wholesale 
slaughter of families; he himself feared last night that his 
dose was fatal; only one other person, on this island, knows 
the secret; and she, Lafaele darkly whispers, has abused it.  
This remarkable tree we must try to identify.

The man-of-war doctor came up to-day, gave us a strait-
waistcoat, taught us to bandage, examined the boy and saw he 
was apparently well - he insisted on doing his work all 
morning, poor lad, and when he first came down kissed all the 
family at breakfast!  The Doctor was greatly excited, as may 
be supposed, about Lafaele's medicine.


TUESDAY.


All yesterday writing my mail by the hand of Belle, to save 
my wrist.  This is a great invention, to which I shall stick, 
if it can be managed.  We had some alarm about Paatalise, but 
he slept well all night for a benediction.  This lunatic 
asylum exercise has no attractions for any of us.

I don't know if I remembered to say how much pleased I was 
with ACROSS THE PLAINS in every way, inside and out, and you 
and me.  The critics seem to taste it, too, as well as could 
be hoped, and I believe it will continue to bring me in a few 
shillings a year for a while.  But such books pay only 
indirectly.

To understand the full horror of the mad scene, and how well 
my boys behaved, remember that THEY BELIEVED P.'S RAVINGS, 
they KNEW that his dead family, thirty strong, crowded the 
front verandah and called on him to come to the other world.  
They KNEW that his dead brother had met him that afternoon in 
the bush and struck him on both temples.  And remember! we 
are fighting the dead, and they had to go out again in the 
black night, which is the dead man's empire.  Yet last 
evening, when I thought P. was going to repeat the 
performance, I sent down for Lafaele, who had leave of 
absence, and he and his wife came up about eight o'clock with 
a lighted brand.  These are the things for which I have to 
forgive my old cattle-man his manifold shortcomings; they are 
heroic - so are the shortcomings, to be sure.

It came over me the other day suddenly that this diary of 
mine to you would make good pickings after I am dead, and a 
man could make some kind of a book out of it without much 
trouble.  So, for God's sake, don't lose them, and they will 
prove a piece of provision for my 'poor old family,' as 
Simele calls it.

About my coming to Europe, I get more and more doubtful, and 
rather incline to Ceylon again as place of meeting.  I am so 
absurdly well here in the tropics, that it seems like 
affectation.  Yet remember I have never once stood Sydney.  
Anyway, I shall have the money for it all ahead, before I 
think of such a thing.

We had a bowl of Punch on your birthday, which my incredible 
mother somehow knew and remembered.

I sometimes sit and yearn for anything in the nature of an 
income that would come in - mine has all got to be gone and 
fished for with the immortal mind of man.  What I want is the 
income that really comes in of itself while all you have to 
do is just to blossom and exist and sit on chairs.  Think how 
beautiful it would be not to have to mind the critics, and 
not even the darkest of the crowd - Sidney Colvin.  I should 
probably amuse myself with works that would make your hair 
curl, if you had any left.


R. L S.



CHAPTER XX



SATURDAY, 2ND JULY 1892.


THE character of my handwriting is explained, alas! by 
scrivener's cramp.  This also explains how long I have let 
the paper lie plain.


1 P. M.


I was busy copying David Balfour with my left hand - a most 
laborious task - Fanny was down at the native house 
superintending the floor, Lloyd down in Apia, and Belle in 
her own house cleaning, when I heard the latter calling on my 
name.  I ran out on the verandah; and there on the lawn 
beheld my crazy boy with an axe in his hand and dressed out 
in green ferns, dancing.  I ran downstairs and found all my 
house boys on the back verandah, watching him through the 
dining-room.  I asked what it meant? - 'Dance belong his 
place,' they said. - 'I think this no time to dance,' said I.  
'Has he done his work?' - 'No,' they told me, 'away bush all 
morning.'  But there they all stayed on the back verandah.  I 
went on alone through the dining-room, and bade him stop.  He 
did so, shouldered the axe, and began to walk away; but I 
called him back, walked up to him, and took the axe out of 
his unresisting hands.  The boy is in all things so good, 
that I can scarce say I was afraid; only I felt it had to be 
stopped ere he could work himself up by dancing to some 
craziness.  Our house boys protested they were not afraid; 
all I know is they were all watching him round the back door 
and did not follow me till I had the axe.  As for the out 
boys, who were working with Fanny in the native house, they 
thought it a very bad business, and made no secret of their 
fears.


WEDNESDAY, 6TH.


I have no account to give of my stewardship these days, and 
there's a day more to account for than mere arithmetic would 
tell you.  For we have had two Monday Fourths, to bring us at 
last on the right side of the meridian, having hitherto been 
an exception in the world and kept our private date.  
Business has filled my hours sans intermission.


TUESDAY, 12TH


I am doing no work and my mind is in abeyance.  Fanny and 
Belle are sewing-machining in the next room; I have been 
pulling down their hair, and Fanny has been kicking me, and 
now I am driven out.  Austin I have been chasing about the 
verandah; now he has gone to his lessons, and I make believe 
to write to you in despair.  But there is nothing in my mind; 
I swim in mere vacancy, my head is like a rotten nut; I shall 
soon have to begin to work again or I shall carry away some 
part of the machinery.  I have got your insufficient letter, 
for which I scorn to thank you.  I have had no review by 
Gosse, none by Birrell; another time if I have a letter in 
the TIMES, you might send me the text as well; also please 
send me a cricket bat and a cake, and when I come home for 
the holidays, I should like to have a pony.

I am, sir, your obedient servant,

JACOB TONSON.


P.S.  I am quite well; I hope you are quite well.  The world 
is too much with us, and my mother bids me bind my hair and 
lace my bodice blue.



CHAPTER XXI



MY DEAR COLVIN, - This is Friday night, the (I believe) 18th 
or 20th August or September.  I shall probably regret to-
morrow having written you with my own hand like the Apostle 
Paul.  But I am alone over here in the workman's house, where 
I and Belle and Lloyd and Austin are pigging; the rest are at 
cards in the main residence.  I have not joined them because 
'belly belong me' has been kicking up, and I have just taken 
15 drops of laudanum.

On Tuesday, the party set out - self in white cap, velvet 
coat, cords and yellow half boots, Belle in a white kind of 
suit and white cap to match mine, Lloyd in white clothes and 
long yellow boots and a straw hat, Graham in khakis and 
gaiters, Henry (my old overseer) in blue coat and black kilt, 
and the great Lafaele with a big ship-bag on his saddle-bow.  
We left the mail at the  P. O., had lunch at the hotel, and 
about 1.50 set out westward to the place of tryst.  This was 
by a little shrunken brook in a deep channel of mud on the 
far side of which, in a thicket of low trees, all full of 
moths of shadow and butterflies of sun, we lay down to await 
her ladyship.  Whiskey and water, then a sketch of the 
encampment for which we all posed to Belle, passed off the 
time until 3.30.  Then I could hold on no longer.  30 minutes 
late.  Had the secret oozed out?  Were they arrested?  I got 
my horse, crossed the brook again, and rode hard back to the 
Vaea cross roads, whence I was aware of white clothes 
glancing in the other long straight radius of the quadrant.  
I turned at once to return to the place of tryst; but D. 
overtook me, and almost bore me down, shouting 'Ride, ride!' 
like a hero in a ballad.  Lady Margaret and he were only come 
to shew the place; they returned, and the rest of our party, 
reinforced by Captain Leigh and Lady Jersey, set on for 
Malie.  The delay was due to D.'s infinite precautions, 
leading them up lanes, by back ways, and then down again to 
the beach road a hundred yards further on.

It was agreed that Lady Jersey existed no more; she was now 
my cousin Amelia Balfour.  That relative and I headed the 
march; she is a charming woman, all of us like her extremely 
after trial on this somewhat rude and absurd excursion.  And 
we Amelia'd or Miss Balfour'd her with great but intermittent 
fidelity.  When we came to the last village, I sent Henry on 
ahead to warn the King of our approach and amend his 
discretion, if that might be.  As he left I heard the 
villagers asking WHICH WAS THE GREAT LADY?  And a little 
further, at the borders of Malie itself, we found the guard 
making a music of bugles and conches.  Then I knew the game 
was up and the secret out.  A considerable guard of honour, 
mostly children, accompanied us; but, for our good fortune, 
we had been looked for earlier, and the crowd was gone.

Dinner at the King's; he asked me to say grace, I could think 
of none - never could; Graham suggested BENEDICTUS BENEDICAT, 
at which I leaped.  We were nearly done, when old Popo 
inflicted the Atua howl (of which you have heard already) 
right at Lady Jersey's shoulder.  She started in fine style. 
- 'There,' I said, 'we have been giving you a chapter of 
Scott, but this goes beyond the Waverley Novels.'  After 
dinner, kava.  Lady J. was served before me, and the King 
DRANK LAST; it was the least formal kava I ever saw in that 
house, - no names called, no show of ceremony.  All my ladies 
are well trained, and when Belle drained her bowl, the King 
was pleased to clap his hands.  Then he and I must retire for 
our private interview, to another house.  He gave me his own 
staff and made me pass before him; and in the interview, 
which was long and delicate, he twice called me AFIOGA.  Ah, 
that leaves you cold, but I am Samoan enough to have been 
moved.  SUSUGA is my accepted rank; to be called AFIOGA - 
Heavens! what an advance - and it leaves Europe cold.  But it 
staggered my Henry.  The first time it was complicated 'lana 
susuga MA lana afioga - his excellency AND his majesty' - the 
next time plain Majesty.  Henry then begged to interrupt the 
interview and tell who he was - he is a small family chief in 
Sawaii, not very small - 'I do not wish the King,' says he, 
'to think me a boy from Apia.'  On our return to the palace, 
we separated.  I had asked for the ladies to sleep alone - 
that was understood; but that Tusitala - his afioga Tusitala 
- should go out with the other young men, and not sleep with 
the highborn females of his family - was a doctrine received 
with difficulty.  Lloyd and I had one screen, Graham and 
Leigh another, and we slept well.

In the morning I was first abroad before dawn; not very long, 
already there was a stir of birds.  A little after, I heard 
singing from the King's chapel - exceeding good - and went 
across in the hour when the east is yellow and the morning 
bank is breaking up, to hear it nearer.  All about the 
chapel, the guards were posted, and all saluted Tusitala.  I 
could not refrain from smiling: 'So there is a place too,' I 
thought, 'where sentinels salute me.'  Mine has been a queer 
life.

[Drawing in book reproduced here in characters...]

            y2
            X   X  X 
        H              X
    G                    X
  F                       X
 E                The      X
D       i         Kava     X
A                          X
 B                       X
  C                    X
     T               X
          X     X
             W

Breakfast was rather a protracted business.  And that was 
scarce over when we were called to the great house (now 
finished - recall your earlier letters) to see a royal kava.  
This function is of rare use; I know grown Samoans who have 
never witnessed it.  It is, besides, as you are to hear, a 
piece of prehistoric history, crystallised in figures, and 
the facts largely forgotten; an acted hieroglyph.  The house 
is really splendid; in the rafters in the midst, two carved 
and coloured model birds are posted; the only thing of the 
sort I have ever remarked in Samoa, the Samoans being literal 
observers of the second commandment.  At one side of the egg 
our party sat. a=Mataafa, b=Lady J., c=Belle, d=Tusitala, 
e=Graham, f=Lloyd, g=Captain Leigh, h=Henry, i=Popo.  The x's 
round are the high chiefs, each man in his historical 
position.  One side of the house is set apart for the King 
alone; we were allowed there as his guests and Henry as our 
interpreter.  It was a huge trial to the lad, when a speech 
was made to me which he must translate, and I made a speech 
in answer which he had to orate, full-breathed, to that big 
circle; he blushed through his dark skin, but looked and 
acted like a gentleman and a young fellow of sense; then the 
kava came to the King; he poured one drop in libation, drank 
another, and flung the remainder outside the house behind 
him.  Next came the turn of the old shapeless stone marked T.  
It stands for one of the King's titles, Tamasoalii; Mataafa 
is Tamasoalii this day, but cannot drink for it; and the 
stone must first be washed with water, and then have the bowl 
emptied on it.  Then - the order I cannot recall - came the 
turn of y and z, two orators of the name of Malietoa; the 
first took his kava down plain, like an ordinary man; the 
second must be packed to bed under a big sheet of tapa, and 
be massaged by anxious assistants and rise on his elbow 
groaning to drink his cup.  W., a great hereditary war man, 
came next; five times the cup-bearers marched up and down the 
house and passed the cup on, five times it was filled and the 
General's name and titles heralded at the bowl, and five 
times he refused it (after examination) as too small.  It is 
said this commemorates a time when Malietoa at the head of 
his army suffered much for want of supplies.  Then this same 
military gentleman must DRINK five cups, one from each of the 
great names: all which took a precious long time.  He acted 
very well, haughtily and in a society tone OUTLINING THE 
part.  The difference was marked when he subsequently made a 
speech in his own character as a plain God-fearing chief.  A 
few more high chiefs, then Tusitala; one more, and then Lady 
Jersey; one more, and then Captain Leigh, and so on with the 
rest of our party - Henry of course excepted.  You see in 
public, Lady Jersey followed me - just so far was the secret 
kept.

Then we came home; Belle, Graham and Lloyd to the Chinaman's, 
I with Lady Jersey, to lunch; so severally home.  Thursday I 
have forgotten: Saturday, I began again on Davie; on Sunday, 
the Jersey party came up to call and carried me to dinner.  
As I came out, to ride home, the search-lights of the CURACOA 
were lightening on the horizon from many miles away, and next 
morning she came in.  Tuesday was huge fun: a reception at 
Haggard's.  All our party dined there; Lloyd and I, in the 
absence of Haggard and Leigh, had to play aide-de-camp and 
host for about twenty minutes, and I presented the population 
of Apia at random but (luck helping) without one mistake.  
Wednesday we had two middies to lunch.  Thursday we had Eeles 
and Hoskyn (lieutenant and doctor - very, very nice fellows - 
simple, good and not the least dull) to dinner.  Saturday, 
Graham and I lunched on board; Graham, Belle, Lloyd dined at 
the G.'s; and Austin and the WHOLE of our servants went with 
them to an evening entertainment; the more bold returning by 
lantern-light.  Yesterday, Sunday, Belle and I were off by 
about half past eight, left our horses at a public house, and 
went on board the CURACOA in the wardroom skiff; were 
entertained in the wardroom; thence on deck to the service, 
which was a great treat; three fiddles and a harmonium and 
excellent choir, and the great ship's company joining: on 
shore in Haggard's big boat to lunch with the party.  Thence 
all together to Vailima, where we read aloud a Ouida Romance 
we have been secretly writing; in which Haggard was the hero, 
and each one of the authors had to draw a portrait of him or 
herself in a Ouida light.  Leigh, Lady J., Fanny, R.L.S., 
Belle and Graham were the authors.

In the midst of this gay life, I have finally recopied two 
chapters, and drafted for the first time three of Davie 
Balfour.  But it is not a life that would continue to suit 
me, and if I have not continued to write to you, you will 
scarce wonder.  And to-day we all go down again to dinner, 
and to-morrow they all come up to lunch!  The world is too 
much with us.  But it now nears an end, to-day already the 
CURACOA has sailed; and on Saturday or Sunday Lady Jersey 
will follow them in the mail steamer.  I am sending you a 
wire by her hands as far as Sydney, that is to say either you 
or Cassell, about FALESA: I will not allow it to be called 
UMA in book form, that is not the logical name of the story.  
Nor can I have the marriage contract omitted; and the thing 
is full of misprints abominable.  In the picture, Uma is rot; 
so is the old man and the negro; but Wiltshire is splendid, 
and Case will do.  It seems badly illuminated, but this may 
be printing.  How have I seen this first number?  Not through 
your attention, guilty one!  Lady Jersey had it, and only 
mentioned it yesterday.

I ought to say how much we all like the Jersey party.  My boy 
Henry was enraptured with the manners of the TAWAITAI SILI 
(chief lady).  Among our other occupations, I did a bit of a 
supposed epic describing our tryst at the ford of the 
Gasegase; and Belle and I made a little book of caricatures 
and verses about incidents on the visit.


TUESDAY.


The wild round of gaiety continues.  After I had written to 
you yesterday, the brain being wholly extinct, I played 
piquet all morning with Graham.  After lunch down to call on 
the U.S. Consul, hurt in a steeple-chase; thence back to the 
new girls' school which Lady J. was to open, and where my 
ladies met me.  Lady J. is really an orator, with a voice of 
gold; the rest of us played our unremarked parts; 
missionaries, Haggard, myself, a Samoan chief, holding forth 
in turn; myself with (at least) a golden brevity.  Thence, 
Fanny, Belle, and I to town, to our billiard room in 
Haggard's back garden, where we found Lloyd and where Graham 
joined us.  The three men first dressed, with the ladies in a 
corner; and then, to leave them a free field, we went off to 
Haggard and Leigh's quarters, where - after all to dinner, 
where our two parties, a brother of Colonel Kitchener's, a 
passing globe-trotter, and Clarke the missionary.  A very gay 
evening, with all sorts of chaff and mirth, and a moonlit 
ride home, and to bed before 12.30.  And now to-day, we have 
the Jersey-Haggard troupe to lunch, and I must pass the 
morning dressing ship.


THURSDAY, SEPT. 1ST.


I sit to write to you now, 7.15, all the world in bed except 
myself, accounted for, and Belle and Graham, down at 
Haggard's at dinner.  Not a leaf is stirring here; but the 
moon overhead (now of a good bigness) is obscured and partly 
revealed in a whirling covey of thin storm-clouds.  By Jove, 
it blows above.

From 8 till 11.15 on Tuesday, I dressed ship, and in 
particular cleaned crystal, my specially.  About 11.30 the 
guests began to arrive before I was dressed, and between 
while I had written a parody for Lloyd to sing.  Yesterday, 
Wednesday, I had to start out about 3 for town, had a long 
interview with the head of the German Firm about some work in 
my new house, got over to Lloyd's billiard-room about six, on 
the way whither I met Fanny and Belle coming down with one 
Kitchener, a brother of the Colonel's.  Dined in the 
billiard-room, discovered we had forgot to order oatmeal; 
whereupon, in the moonlit evening, I set forth in my tropical 
array, mess jacket and such, to get the oatmeal, and meet a 
young fellow C. - and not a bad young fellow either, only an 
idiot - as drunk as Croesus.  He wept with me, he wept for 
me; he talked like a bad character in an impudently bad 
farce; I could have laughed aloud to hear, and could make you 
laugh by repeating, but laughter was not uppermost.

This morning at about seven, I set off after the lost sheep.  
I could have no horse; all that could be mounted - we have 
one girth-sore and one dead-lame in the establishment - were 
due at a picnic about 10.30.  The morning was very wet, and I 
set off barefoot, with my trousers over my knees, and a 
macintosh.  Presently I had to take a side path in the bush; 
missed it; came forth in a great oblong patch of taro 
solemnly surrounded by forest - no soul, no sign, no sound - 
and as I stood there at a loss, suddenly between the showers 
out broke the note of a harmonium and a woman's voice singing 
an air that I know very well, but have (as usual) forgot the 
name of.  'Twas from a great way off, but seemed to fill the 
world.  It was strongly romantic, and gave me a point which 
brought me, by all sorts of forest wading, to an open space 
of palms.  These were of all ages, but mostly at that age 
when the branches arch from the ground level, range 
themselves, with leaves exquisitely green.  The whole 
interspace was overgrown with convolvulus, purple, yellow and 
white, often as deep as to my waist, in which I floundered 
aimlessly.  The very mountain was invisible from here.  The 
rain came and went; now in sunlit April showers, now with the 
proper tramp and rattle of the tropics.  All this while I met 
no sight or sound of man, except the voice which was now 
silent, and a damned pig-fence that headed me off at every 
corner.  Do you know barbed wire?  Think of a fence of it on 
rotten posts, and you barefoot.  But I crossed it at last 
with my heart in my mouth and no harm done.  Thence at last 
to C's.: no C.  Next place I came to was in the zone of 
woods.  They offered me a buggy and set a black boy to wash 
my legs and feet.  'Washum legs belong that fellow white-man' 
was the command.  So at last I ran down my son of a gun in 
the hotel, sober, and with no story to tell; penitent, I 
think.  Home, by buggy and my poor feet, up three miles of 
root, boulder, gravel and liquid mud, slipping back at every 
step.


SUNDAY, SEPT. 4TH.


Hope you will be able to read a word of the last, no joke 
writing by a bad lantern with a groggy hand and your glasses 
mislaid.  Not that the hand is not better, as you see by the 
absence of the amanuensis hitherto.  Mail came Friday, and a 
communication from yourself much more decent than usual, for 
which I thank you.  Glad the WRECKER should so hum; but Lord, 
what fools these mortals be!

So far yesterday, the citation being wrung from me by 
remembrance of many reviews.  I have now received all FALESA, 
and my admiration for that tale rises; I believe it is in 
some ways my best work; I am pretty sure, at least, I have 
never done anything better than Wiltshire.


MONDAY, 13TH SEPTEMBER 1892.


On Wednesday the Spinsters of Apia gave a ball to a select 
crowd.  Fanny, Belle, Lloyd and I rode down, met Haggard by 
the way and joined company with him.  Dinner with Haggard, 
and thence to the ball.  The Chief Justice appeared; it was 
immediately remarked, and whispered from one to another, that 
he and I had the only red sashes in the room, - and they were 
both of the hue of blood, sir, blood.  He shook hands with 
myself and all the members of my family.  Then the cream 
came, and I found myself in the same set of a quadrille with 
his honour.  We dance here in Apia a most fearful and 
wonderful quadrille, I don't know where the devil they fished 
it from; but it is rackety and prancing and embraceatory 
beyond words; perhaps it is best defined in Haggard's 
expression of a gambado.  When I and my great enemy found 
ourselves involved in this gambol, and crossing hands, and 
kicking up, and being embraced almost in common by large and 
quite respectable females, we - or I - tried to preserve some 
rags of dignity, but not for long.  The deuce of it is that, 
personally, I love this man; his eye speaks to me, I am 
pleased in his society.  We exchanged a glance, and then a 
grin; the man took me in his confidence; and through the 
remainder of that prance we pranced for each other.  Hard to 
imagine any position more ridiculous; a week before he had 
been trying to rake up evidence against me by brow-beating 
and threatening a half-white interpreter; that very morning I 
had been writing most villainous attacks upon him for the 
TIMES; and we meet and smile, and - damn it! - like each 
other.  I do my best to damn the man and drive him from these 
islands; but the weakness endures - I love him.  This is a 
thing I would despise in anybody else; but he is so jolly 
insidious and ingratiating!  No, sir, I can't dislike him; 
but if I don't make hay of him, it shall not be for want of 
trying.

Yesterday, we had two Germans and a young American boy to 
lunch; and in the afternoon, Vailima was in a state of siege; 
ten white people on the front verandah, at least as many 
brown in the cook house, and countless blacks to see the 
black boy Arrick.

Which reminds me, Arrick was sent Friday was a week to the 
German Firm with a note, and was not home on time.  Lloyd and 
I were going bedward, it was late with a bright moon - ah, 
poor dog, you know no such moons as these! - when home came 
Arrick with his head in a white bandage and his eyes shining.  
He had had a fight with other blacks, Malaita boys; many 
against one, and one with a knife: 'I KNICKED 'EM DOWN, three 
four!' he cried; and had himself to be taken to the doctor's 
and bandaged.  Next day, he could not work, glory of battle 
swelled too high in his threadpaper breast; he had made a 
one-stringed harp for Austin, borrowed it, came to Fanny's 
room, and sang war-songs and danced a war dance in honour of 
his victory.  And it appears, by subsequent advices, that it 
was a serious victory enough; four of his assailants went to 
hospital, and one is thought in danger.  All Vailima rejoiced 
at this news.

Five more chapters of David, 22 to 27, go to Baxter.  All 
love affair; seems pretty good to me.  Will it do for the 
young person?  I don't know: since the Beach, I know nothing, 
except that men are fools and hypocrites, and I know less of 
them than I was fond enough to fancy.



CHAPTER XXII



THURSDAY, 15TH SEPTEMBER.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - On Tuesday, we had our young adventurer 
ready, and Fanny, Belle, he and I set out about three of a 
dark, deadly hot, and deeply unwholesome afternoon.  Belle 
had the lad behind her; I had a pint of champagne in either 
pocket, a parcel in my hands, and as Jack had a girth sore 
and I rode without a girth, I might be said to occupy a very 
unstrategic position.  On the way down, a little dreary, 
beastly drizzle beginning to come out of the darkness, Fanny 
put up an umbrella, her horse bounded, reared, cannoned into 
me, cannoned into Belle and the lad, and bolted for home.  It 
really might and ought to have been an A1 catastrophe; but 
nothing happened beyond Fanny's nerves being a good deal 
shattered; of course, she could not tell what had happened to 
us until she got her horse mastered.

Next day, Haggard went off to the Commission and left us in 
charge of his house; all our people came down in wreaths of 
flowers; we had a boat for them; Haggard had a flag in the 
Commission boat for us; and when at last the steamer turned 
up, the young adventurer was carried on board in great style, 
with a new watch and chain, and about three pound ten of 
tips, and five big baskets of fruit as free-will offerings to 
the captain.  Captain Morse had us all to lunch; champagne 
flowed, so did compliments; and I did the affable celebrity 
life-sized.  It made a great send-off for the young 
adventurer.  As the boat drew off, he was standing at the 
head of the gangway, supported by three handsome ladies - one 
of them a real full-blown beauty, Madame Green, the singer - 
and looking very engaging himself, between smiles and tears.  
Not that he cried in public.

My, but we were a tired crowd!  However, it is always a 
blessing to get home, and this time it was a sort of wonder 
to ourselves that we got back alive.  Casualties: Fanny's 
back jarred, horse incident; Belle, bad headache, tears and 
champagne; self, idiocy, champagne, fatigue; Lloyd, ditto, 
ditto.  As for the adventurer, I believe he will have a 
delightful voyage for his little start in life.  But there is 
always something touching in a mite's first launch.


DATE UNKNOWN.


I am now well on with the third part of the DEBACLE.  The two 
first I liked much; the second completely knocking me; so far 
as it has gone, this third part appears the ramblings of a 
dull man who has forgotten what he has to say - he reminds me 
of an M.P.  But Sedan was really great, and I will pick no 
holes.  The batteries under fire, the red-cross folk, the 
county charge - perhaps, above all, Major Bouroche and the 
operations, all beyond discussion; and every word about the 
Emperor splendid.


SEPTEMBER 30TH.


David Balfour done, and its author along with it, or nearly 
so.  Strange to think of even our doctor here repeating his 
nonsense about debilitating climate.  Why, the work I have 
been doing the last twelve months, in one continuous spate, 
mostly with annoying interruptions and without any collapse 
to mention, would be incredible in Norway.  But I HAVE broken 
down now, and will do nothing as long as I possibly can.  
With David Balfour I am very well pleased; in fact these 
labours of the last year - I mean FALESA AND D. B., not 
Samoa, of course - seem to me to be nearer what I mean than 
anything I have ever done; nearer what I mean by fiction; the 
nearest thing before was KIDNAPPED.  I am not forgetting the 
MASTER OF BALLANTRAE, but that lacked all pleasurableness, 
and hence was imperfect in essence.  So you see, if I am a 
little tired, I do not repent.

The third part of the DEBACLE may be all very fine; but I 
cannot read it.  It suffers from IMPAIRED VITALITY, and 
UNCERTAIN AIM; two deadly sicknesses.  Vital - that's what I 
am at, first: wholly vital, with a buoyancy of life.  Then 
lyrical, if it may be, and picturesque, always with an epic 
value of scenes, so that the figures remain in the mind's eye 
for ever.


OCTOBER 8TH.


Suppose you sent us some of the catalogues of the parties 
what vends statutes?  I don't want colossal Herculeses, but 
about quarter size and less.  If the catalogues were 
illustrated it would probably be found a help to weak 
memories.  These may be found to alleviate spare moments, 
when we sometimes amuse ourselves by thinking how fine we 
shall make the palace if we do not go pop.  Perhaps in the 
same way it might amuse you to send us any pattern of wall 
paper that might strike you as cheap, pretty and suitable for 
a room in a hot and extremely bright climate.  It should be 
borne in mind that our climate can be extremely dark too.  
Our sitting-room is to be in varnished wood.  The room I have 
particularly in mind is a sort of bed and sitting-room, 
pretty large, lit on three sides, and the colour in favour of 
its proprietor at present is a topazy yellow.  But then with 
what colour to relieve it?  For a little work-room of my own 
at the back.  I should rather like to see some patterns of 
unglossy - well, I'll be hanged if I can describe this red - 
it's not Turkish and it's not Roman and it's not Indian, but 
it seems to partake of the two last, and yet it can't be 
either of them, because it ought to be able to go with 
vermilion.  Ah, what a tangled web we weave - anyway, with 
what brains you have left choose me and send me some - many - 
patterns of this exact shade.

A few days ago it was Haggard's birthday and we had him and 
his cousin to dinner - bless me if I ever told you of his 
cousin! - he is here anyway, and a fine, pleasing specimen, 
so that we have concluded (after our own happy experience) 
that the climate of Samoa must be favourable to cousins.  
Then we went out on the verandah in a lovely moonlight, 
drinking port, hearing the cousin play and sing, till 
presently we were informed that our boys had got up a siva in 
Lafaele's house to which we were invited.  It was entirely 
their own idea.  The house, you must understand, is one-half 
floored, and one-half bare earth, and the dais stands a 
little over knee high above the level of the soil.  The dais 
was the stage, with three footlights.  We audience sat on 
mats on the floor, and the cook and three of our work-boys, 
sometimes assisted by our two ladies, took their places 
behind the footlights and began a topical Vailima song.  The 
burden was of course that of a Samoan popular song about a 
white man who objects to all that he sees in Samoa.  And 
there was of course a special verse for each one of the party 
- Lloyd was called the dancing man (practically the Chief's 
handsome son) of Vailima; he was also, in his character I 
suppose of overseer, compared to a policeman - Belle had that 
day been the almoner in a semi-comic distribution of wedding 
rings and thimbles (bought cheap at an auction) to the whole 
plantation company, fitting a ring on every man's finger, and 
a ring and a thimble on both the women's.  This was very much 
in character with her native name TEUILA, the adorner of the 
ugly - so of course this was the point of her verse and at a 
given moment all the performers displayed the rings upon 
their fingers.  Pelema (the cousin - OUR cousin) was 
described as watching from the house and whenever he saw any 
boy not doing anything, running and doing it himself.  
Fanny's verse was less intelligible, but it was accompanied 
in the dance with a pantomime of terror well-fitted to call 
up her haunting, indefatigable and diminutive presence in a 
blue gown.



CHAPTER XXIII



VAILIMA, OCTOBER 28TH, 1892.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - This is very late to begin the monthly 
budget, but I have a good excuse this time, for I have had a 
very annoying fever with symptoms of sore arm, and in the 
midst of it a very annoying piece of business which suffered 
no delay or idleness. . . . The consequence of all this was 
that my fever got very much worse and your letter has not 
been hitherto written.  But, my dear fellow, do compare these 
little larky fevers with the fine, healthy, prostrating colds 
of the dear old dead days at home.  Here was I, in the middle 
of a pretty bad one, and I was able to put it in my pocket, 
and go down day after day, and attend to and put my strength 
into this beastly business.  Do you see me doing that with a 
catarrh?  And if I had done so, what would have been the 
result?

Last night, about four o'clock, Belle and I set off to Apia, 
whither my mother had preceded us.  She was at the Mission; 
we went to Haggard's.  There we had to wait the most 
unconscionable time for dinner.  I do not wish to speak 
lightly of the Amanuensis, who is unavoidably present, but I 
may at least say for myself that I was as cross as two 
sticks.  Dinner came at last, we had the tinned soup which is 
usually the PIECE DE RESISTANCE in the halls of Haggard, and 
we pitched into it.  Followed an excellent salad of tomatoes 
and cray-fish, a good Indian curry, a tender joint of beef, a 
dish of pigeons, a pudding, cheese and coffee.  I was so 
over-eaten after this 'hunger and burst' that I could 
scarcely move; and it was my sad fate that night in the 
character of the local author to eloquute before the public - 
'Mr. Stevenson will read a selection from his own works' - a 
degrading picture.  I had determined to read them the account 
of the hurricane; I do not know if I told you that my book 
has never turned up here, or rather only one copy has, and 
that in the unfriendly hands of -.  It has therefore only 
been seen by enemies; and this combination of mystery and 
evil report has been greatly envenomed by some ill-judged 
newspaper articles from the States.  Altogether this specimen 
was listened to with a good deal of uncomfortable expectation 
on the part of the Germans, and when it was over was 
applauded with unmistakable relief.  The public hall where 
these revels came off seems to be unlucky for me; I never go 
there but to some stone-breaking job.  Last time it was the 
public meeting of which I must have written you; this time it 
was this uneasy but not on the whole unsuccessful experiment.  
Belle, my mother, and I rode home about midnight in a fine 
display of lightning and witch-fires.  My mother is absent, 
so that I may dare to say that she struck me as voluble.  The 
Amanuensis did not strike me the same way; she was probably 
thinking, but it was really rather a weird business, and I 
saw what I have never seen before, the witch-fires gathered 
into little bright blue points almost as bright as a night-
light.


SATURDAY


This is the day that should bring your letter; it is gray and 
cloudy and windless; thunder rolls in the mountain; it is a 
quarter past six, and I am alone, sir, alone in this 
workman's house, Belle and Lloyd having been down all 
yesterday to meet the steamer; they were scarce gone with 
most of the horses and all the saddles, than there began a 
perfect picnic of the sick and maim; Iopu with a bad foot, 
Faauma with a bad shoulder, Fanny with yellow spots.  It was 
at first proposed to carry all these to the doctor, 
particularly Faauma, whose shoulder bore an appearance of 
erysipelas, that sent the amateur below.  No horses, no 
saddle.  Now I had my horse and I could borrow Lafaele's 
saddle; and if I went alone I could do a job that had long 
been waiting; and that was to interview the doctor on another 
matter.  Off I set in a hazy moonlight night; windless, like 
to-day; the thunder rolling in the mountain, as to-day; in 
the still groves, these little mushroom lamps glowing blue 
and steady, singly or in pairs.  Well, I had my interview, 
said everything as I had meant, and with just the result I 
hoped for.  The doctor and I drank beer together and 
discussed German literature until nine, and we parted the 
best of friends.  I got home to a silent house of sleepers, 
only Fanny awaiting me; we talked awhile, in whispers, on the 
interview; then, I got a lantern and went across to the 
workman's house, now empty and silent, myself sole occupant.  
So to bed, prodigious tired but mighty content with my 
night's work, and to-day, with a headache and a chill, have 
written you this page, while my new novel waits.  Of this I 
will tell you nothing, except the various names under 
consideration.  First, it ought to be called - but of course 
that is impossible -


BRAXFIELD.
Then it IS to be called either
WEIR OF HERMISTON,
THE LORD-JUSTICE CLERK,
THE TWO KIRSTIES OF THE CAULDSTANESLAP,
or
FOUR BLACK BROTHERS.

Characters:

Adam Weir, Lord-Justice Clerk, called Lord Hermiston.
Archie, his son.
Aunt Kirstie Elliott, his housekeeper at Hermiston.
Elliott of the Cauldstaneslap, her brother.
Kirstie Elliott, his daughter.
Jim,    }
Gib,    }
Hob     } his sons.
&       }
Dandie, }
Patrick Innes, a young advocate.
The Lord-Justice General.

Scene, about Hermiston in the Lammermuirs and in Edinburgh.  
Temp. 1812. So you see you are to have another holiday from 
copra!  The rain begins softly on the iron roof, and I will 
do the reverse and - dry up.


SUNDAY.


Yours with the diplomatic private opinion received.  It is 
just what I should have supposed.  CA M'EST BIEN EGAL. - The 
name is to be

THE LORD-JUSTICE CLERK.

None others are genuine.  Unless it be

LORD-JUSTICE CLERK HERMISTON.


NOV. 2ND.


On Saturday we expected Captain Morse of the Alameda to come 
up to lunch, and on Friday with genuine South Sea hospitality 
had a pig killed.  On the Saturday morning no pig.  Some of 
the boys seemed to give a doubtful account of themselves; our 
next neighbour below in the wood is a bad fellow and very 
intimate with some of our boys, for whom his confounded house 
is like a fly-paper for flies.  To add to all this, there was 
on the Saturday a great public presentation of food to the 
King and Parliament men, an occasion on which it is almost 
dignified for a Samoan to steal anything, and entirely 
dignified for him to steal a pig.

(The Amanuensis went to the TALOLO, as it is called, and saw 
something so very pleasing she begs to interrupt the letter 
to tell it.  The different villagers came in in bands - led 
by the maid of the village, followed by the young warriors.  
It was a very fine sight, for some three thousand people are 
said to have assembled.  The men wore nothing but magnificent 
head-dresses and a bunch of leaves, and were oiled and 
glistening in the sunlight.  One band had no maid but was led 
by a tiny child of about five - a serious little creature 
clad in a ribbon of grass and a fine head-dress, who skipped 
with elaborate leaps in front of the warriors, like a little 
kid leading a band of lions.  A.M.)

The A.M. being done, I go on again.  All this made it very 
possible that even if none of our boys had stolen the pig, 
some of them might know the thief.  Besides, the theft, as it 
was a theft of meat prepared for a guest, had something of 
the nature of an insult, and 'my face,' in native phrase, 
'was ashamed.'  Accordingly, we determined to hold a bed of 
justice.  It was done last night after dinner.  I sat at the 
head of the table, Graham on my right hand, Henry Simele at 
my left, Lloyd behind him.  The house company sat on the 
floor around the walls - twelve all told.  I am described as 
looking as like Braxfield as I could manage with my 
appearance; Graham, who is of a severe countenance, looked 
like Rhadamanthus; Lloyd was hideous to the view; and Simele 
had all the fine solemnity of a Samoan chief.  The 
proceedings opened by my delivering a Samoan prayer, which 
may be translated thus - 'Our God, look down upon us and 
shine into our hearts.  Help us to be far from falsehood so 
that each one of us may stand before Thy Face in his 
integrity.' - Then, beginning with Simele, every one came up 
to the table, laid his hand on the Bible, and repeated clause 
by clause after me the following oath - I fear it may sound 
even comic in English, but it is a very pretty piece of 
Samoan, and struck direct at the most lively superstitions of 
the race.  'This is the Holy Bible here that I am touching.  
Behold me, O God!  If I know who it was that took away the 
pig, or the place to which it was taken, or have heard 
anything relating to it, and shall not declare the same - be 
made an end of by God this life of mine!'  They all took it 
with so much seriousness and firmness that (as Graham said) 
if they were not innocent they would make invaluable 
witnesses.  I was so far impressed by their bearing that I 
went no further, and the funny and yet strangely solemn scene 
came to an end.


SUNDAY, NO. 6th.


Here is a long story to go back upon, and I wonder if I have 
either time or patience for the task?

Wednesday I had a great idea of match-making, and proposed to 
Henry that Faale would make a good wife for him.  I wish I 
had put this down when it was fresher in my mind, it was so 
interesting an interview.  My gentleman would not tell if I 
were on or not.  'I do not know yet; I will tell you next 
week.  May I tell the sister of my father?  No, better not, 
tell her when it is done.' - 'But will not your family be 
angry if you marry without asking them?' - 'My village?  What 
does my village want?  Mats!'  I said I thought the girl 
would grow up to have a great deal of sense, and my gentleman 
flew out upon me; she had sense now, he said.

Thursday, we were startled by the note of guns, and presently 
after heard it was an English war ship.  Graham and I set off 
at once, and as soon as we met any townsfolk they began 
crying to me that I was to be arrested.  It was the VOSSISCHE 
ZEITUNG article which had been quoted in a paper.  Went on 
board and saw Captain Bourke; he did not even know - not even 
guess - why he was here; having been sent off by cablegram 
from Auckland.  It is hoped the same ship that takes this off 
Europewards may bring his orders and our news.  But which is 
it to be?  Heads or tails?  If it is to be German, I hope 
they will deport me; I should prefer it so; I do not think 
that I could bear a German officialdom, and should probably 
have to leave SPONTE MEA, which is only less picturesque and 
more expensive.


8TH.


Mail day.  All well, not yet put in prison, whatever may be 
in store for me.  No time even to sign this lame letter.



CHAPTER XXIV



DEC. 1ST.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - Another grimy little odd and end of paper, 
for which you shall be this month repaid in kind, and serve 
you jolly well right. . .  The new house is roofed; it will 
be a braw house, and what is better, I have my yearly bill 
in, and I find I can pay for it.  For all which mercies, etc.  
I must have made close on 4,000 pounds this year all told; 
but, what is not so pleasant, I seem to have come near to 
spending them.  I have been in great alarm, with this new 
house on the cards, all summer, and came very near to taking 
in sail, but I live here so entirely on credit, that I 
determined to hang on.


DEC. 1ST.


I was saying yesterday that my life was strange and did not 
think how well I spoke.  Yesterday evening I was briefed to 
defend a political prisoner before the Deputy Commissioner.  
What do you think of that for a vicissitude?


DEC. 3RD.


Now for a confession.  When I heard you and Cassells had 
decided to print THE BOTTLE IMP along with FALESA, I was too 
much disappointed to answer.  THE BOTTLE IMP was the PIECE DE 
RESISTANCE for my volume, ISLAND NIGHTS' ENTERTAINMENTS.  
However, that volume might have never got done; and I send 
you two others in case they should be in time.

First have the BEACH OF FALESA.

Then a fresh false title: ISLAND NIGHTS' ENTERTAINMENTS; and 
then

THE BOTTLE IMP: a cue from an old melodrama.

THE ISLE OF VOICES.

THE WAIF WOMAN; a cue from a SAGA.

Of course these two others are not up to the mark of THE 
BOTTLE IMP; but they each have a certain merit, and they fit 
in style.  By saying 'a cue from an old melodrama' after the 
B. I., you can get rid of my note.  If this is in time, it 
will be splendid, and will make quite a volume.

Should you and Cassells prefer, you can call the whole volume 
I. N. E. - though the BEACH OF FALESA is the child of a quite 
different inspiration.  They all have a queer realism, even 
the most extravagant, even the ISLE OF VOICES; the manners 
are exact.

Should they come too late, have them type-written, and return 
to me here the type-written copies.


SUNDAY, DEC. 4TH.


3rd start, - But now more humbly and with the aid of an 
Amanuensis.  First one word about page 2.  My wife protests 
against the Waif-woman and I am instructed to report the same 
to you. . . .


DEC. 5TH.


A horrid alarm rises that our October mail was burned 
crossing the Plains.  If so, you lost a beautiful long letter 
- I am sure it was beautiful though I remember nothing about 
it - and I must say I think it serves you properly well.  
That I should continue writing to you at such length is 
simply a vicious habit for which I blush.  At the same time, 
please communicate at once with Charles Baxter whether you 
have or have not received a letter posted here Oct 12th, as 
he is going to cable me the fate of my mail.

Now to conclude my news.  The German Firm have taken my book 
like angels, and the result is that Lloyd and I were down 
there at dinner on Saturday, where we partook of fifteen 
several dishes and eight distinct forms of intoxicating 
drink.  To the credit of Germany, I must say there was not a 
shadow of a headache the next morning.  I seem to have done 
as well as my neighbours, for I hear one of the clerks 
expressed the next morning a gratified surprise that Mr. 
Stevenson stood his drink so well.  It is a strange thing 
that any race can still find joy in such athletic exercises.  
I may remark in passing that the mail is due and you have had 
far more than you deserve.
R. L. S.



CHAPTER XXV



JANUARY 1893.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - You are properly paid at last, and it is 
like you will have but a shadow of a letter.  I have been 
pretty thoroughly out of kilter; first a fever that would 
neither come on nor go off, then acute dyspepsia, in the 
weakening grasp of which I get wandering between the waking 
state and one of nightmare.  Why the devil does no one send 
me ATALANTA?  And why are there no proofs of D. Balfour?  
Sure I should have had the whole, at least the half, of them 
by now; and it would be all for the advantage of the 
Atalantans.  I have written to Cassell & Co. (matter of 
FALESA) 'you will please arrange with him' (meaning you).  
'What he may decide I shall abide.'  So consider your hand 
free, and act for me without fear or favour.  I am greatly 
pleased with the illustrations.  It is very strange to a 
South-Seayer to see Hawaiian women dressed like Samoans, but 
I guess that's all one to you in Middlesex.  It's about the 
same as if London city men were shown going to the Stock 
Exchange as PIFFERARI; but no matter, none will sleep worse 
for it.  I have accepted Cassell's proposal as an amendment 
to one of mine; that D. B. is to be brought out first under 
the title CATRIONA without pictures; and, when the hour 
strikes, KIDNAPPED and CATRIONA are to form vols. I. and II. 
of the heavily illustrated 'Adventures of David Balfour' at 
7s. 6d. each, sold separately.

-'s letter was vastly sly and dry and shy.  I am not afraid 
now.  Two attempts have been made, both have failed, and I 
imagine these failures strengthen me.  Above all this is true 
of the last, where my weak point was attempted.  On every 
other, I am strong.  Only force can dislodge me, for public 
opinion is wholly on my side.  All races and degrees are 
united in heartfelt opposition to the Men of Mulinuu.  The 
news of the fighting was of no concern to mortal man; it was 
made much of because men love talk of battles, and because 
the Government pray God daily for some scandal not their own; 
but it was only a brisk episode in a clan fight which has 
grown apparently endemic in the west of Tutuila.  At the best 
it was a twopenny affair, and never occupied my mind five 
minutes.

I am so weary of reports that are without foundation and 
threats that go without fulfilment, and so much occupied 
besides by the raging troubles of my own wame, that I have 
been very slack on politics, as I have been in literature.  
With incredible labour, I have rewritten the First Chapter of 
the Justice Clerk; it took me about ten days, and requires 
another athletic dressing after all.  And that is my story 
for the month.  The rest is grunting and grutching.

Consideranda for THE BEACH:-

I. Whether to add one or both the tales I sent you?
II. Whether to call the whole volume 'Island Nights 
Entertainments'?
III Whether, having waited so long, it would not be better to 
give me another mail, in case I could add another member to 
the volume and a little better justify the name?

If I possibly can draw up another story, I will.  What 
annoyed me about the use of THE BOTTLE IMP was that I had 
always meant it for the centre-piece of a volume of MARCHEN 
which I was slowly to elaborate.  You always had an idea that 
I depreciated the B. I; I can't think wherefore; I always 
particularly liked it - one of my best works, and ill to 
equal; and that was why I loved to keep it in portfolio till 
I had time to grow up to some other fruit of the same VENUE.  
However, that is disposed of now, and we must just do the 
best we can.

I am not aware that there is anything to add; the weather is 
hellish, waterspouts, mists, chills, the foul fiend's own 
weather, following on a week of expurgated heaven; so it goes 
at this bewildering season.  I write in the upper floor of my 
new house, of which I will send you some day a plan to 
measure.  'Tis an elegant structure, surely, and the proid of 
me oi.  Was asked to pay for it just now, and genteelly 
refused, and then agreed, in view of general good-will, to 
pay a half of what is still due.


24TH JANUARY 1893.


This ought to have gone last mail and was forgotten.  My best 
excuse is that I was engaged in starting an influenza, to 
which class of exploit our household has been since then 
entirely dedicated.  We had eight cases, one of them very 
bad, and one - mine - complicated with my old friend Bluidy 
Jack.  Luckily neither Fanny, Lloyd or Belle took the 
confounded thing, and they were able to run the household and 
nurse the sick to admiration.

Some of our boys behaved like real trumps.  Perhaps the 
prettiest performance was that of our excellent Henry Simele, 
or, as we sometimes call him, Davy Balfour.  Henry, I maun 
premeese, is a chief; the humblest Samoan recoils from 
emptying slops as you would from cheating at cards; now the 
last nights of our bad time when we had seven down together, 
it was enough to have made anybody laugh or cry to see Henry 
going the rounds with a slop-bucket and going inside the 
mosquito net of each of the sick, Protestant and Catholic 
alike, to pray with them.

I must tell you that in my sickness I had a huge alleviation 
and began a new story.  This I am writing by dictation, and 
really think it is an art I can manage to acquire.  The 
relief is beyond description; it is just like a school-treat 
to me and the amanuensis bears up extraordinar'.  The story 
is to be called ST. IVES; I give you your choice whether or 
not it should bear the subtitle, 'Experiences of a French 
prisoner in England.'  We were just getting on splendidly 
with it, when this cursed mail arrived and requires to be 
attended to.  It looks to me very like as if St. Ives would 
be ready before any of the others, but you know me and how 
impossible it is I should predict.  The Amanuensis has her 
head quite turned and believes herself to be the author of 
this novel (and IS to some extent) - and as the creature (!) 
has not been wholly useless in the matter (I told you so!  
A.M.) I propose to foster her vanity by a little 
commemoration gift!  The name of the hero is Anne de St. Yves 
- he Englishes his name to St. Ives during his escape.  It is 
my idea to get a ring made which shall either represent ANNE 
or A. S. Y. A., of course, would be Amethyst and S. Sapphire, 
which is my favourite stone anyway and was my father's before 
me.  But what would the ex-Slade professor do about the 
letter Y?  Or suppose he took the other version, how would he 
meet the case, the two N.'s?  These things are beyond my 
knowledge, which it would perhaps be more descriptive to call 
ignorance.  But I place the matter in the meanwhile under 
your consideration and beg to hear your views.  I shall tell 
you on some other occasion and when the A.M. is out of 
hearing how VERY much I propose to invest in this 
testimonial; but I may as well inform you at once that I 
intend it to be cheap, sir, damned cheap!  My idea of running 
amanuenses is by praise, not pudding, flattery and not coins!  
I shall send you when the time is ripe a ring to measure by.

To resume our sad tale.  After the other seven were almost 
wholly recovered Henry lay down to influenza on his own 
account.  He is but just better and it looks as though Fanny 
were about to bring up the rear.  As for me, I am all right, 
though I WAS reduced to dictating ANNE in the deaf and dumb 
alphabet, which I think you will admit is a COMBLE.

Politics leave me extraordinary cold.  It seems that so much 
of my purpose has come off, and Cedarcrantz and Pilsach are 
sacked.  The rest of it has all gone to water.  The triple-
headed ass at home, in his plenitude of ignorance, prefers to 
collect the taxes and scatter the Mataafas by force or the 
threat of force.  It may succeed, and I suppose it will.  It 
is none the less for that expensive, harsh, unpopular and 
unsettling.  I am young enough to have been annoyed, and 
altogether eject and renegate the whole idea of political 
affairs.  Success in that field appears to be the 
organisation of failure enlivened with defamation of 
character; and, much as I love pickles and hot water (in your 
true phrase) I shall take my pickles in future from Crosse 
and Blackwell and my hot water with a dose of good Glenlivat.

Do not bother at all about the wall-papers.  We have had the 
whole of our new house varnished, and it looks beautiful.  I 
wish you could see the hall; poor room, it had to begin life 
as an infirmary during our recent visitation; but it is 
really a handsome comely place, and when we get the 
furniture, and the pictures, and what is so very much more 
decorative, the picture frames, will look sublime.


JAN. 30TH.


I have written to Charles asking for Rowlandson's Syntax and 
Dance of Death out of our house, and begging for anything 
about fashions and manners (fashions particularly) for 1814.  
Can you help?  Both the Justice Clerk and St. Ives fall in 
that fated year.  Indeed I got into St. Ives while going over 
the Annual Register for the other.  There is a kind of fancy 
list of Chaps. of St. Ives.  (It begins in Edinburgh Castle.) 
I. Story of a lion rampant (that was a toy he had made, and 
given to a girl visitor).  II.  Story of a pair of scissors.  
III. St. Ives receives a bundle of money.  IV. St. Ives is 
shown a house.  V. The Escape.  VI. The Cottage (Swanston 
College).  VII. The Hen-house.  VIII. Three is company and 
four none.  IX. The Drovers.  X. The Great North Road.  XI. 
Burchell Fenn.  XII. The covered cart.  XIII. The doctor.  
XIV. The Luddites.  V. Set a thief to catch a thief.  XXVI. 
M. le Comte de Keroualle (his uncle, the rich EMIGRE, whom he 
finds murdered).  XVII. The cousins.  XVIII. Mr. Sergeant 
Garrow.  XIX. A meeting at the Ship, Dover.  XX. Diane.  XXI. 
The Duke's Prejudices.  XXII. The False Messenger.  XXIII. 
The gardener's ladder.  XXIV. The officers.  XXV. Trouble 
with the Duke.  XXVI. Fouquet again.  XXVII. The Aeronaut.  
XXVIII. The True-Blooded Yankee.  XXIX. In France.  I don't 
know where to stop.  Apropos, I want a book about Paris, and 
the FIRST RETURN of the EMIGRES and all up to the CENT JOURS: 
d'ye ken anything in my way?  I want in particular to know 
about them and the Napoleonic functionaries and officers, and 
to get the colour and some vital details of the business of 
exchange of departments from one side to the other.  Ten 
chapters are drafted, and VIII. re-copied by me, but will 
want another dressing for luck.  It is merely a story of 
adventure, rambling along; but that is perhaps the guard that 
'sets my genius best,' as Alan might have said.  I wish I 
could feel as easy about the other!  But there, all novels 
are a heavy burthen while they are doing, and a sensible 
disappointment when they are done.

For God's sake, let me have a copy of the new German Samoa 
White book.  R. L. S.



CHAPTER XXVI



AT SEA, S.S. & MARIPOSA,
FEB. 19th, '93.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - You will see from this heading that I am 
not dead yet nor likely to be.  I was pretty considerably out 
of sorts, and that is indeed one reason why Fanny, Belle, and 
I have started out for a month's lark.  To be quite exact, I 
think it will be about five weeks before we get home.  We 
shall stay between two and three in Sydney.  Already, though 
we only sailed yesterday, I am feeling as fit as a fiddle.  
Fanny ate a whole fowl for breakfast, to say nothing of a 
tower of hot cakes.  Belle and I floored another hen betwixt 
the pair of us, and I shall be no sooner done with the 
present amanuensing racket than I shall put myself outside a 
pint of Guinness.  If you think this looks like dying of 
consumption in Apia I can only say I differ from you.  In the 
matter of David, I have never yet received my proofs at all, 
but shall certainly wait for your suggestions.  Certainly, 
Chaps. 17 to 20 are the hitch, and I confess I hurried over 
them with both wings spread.  This is doubtless what you 
complain of.  Indeed, I placed my single reliance on Miss 
Grant.  If she couldn't ferry me over, I felt I had to stay 
there.

About ISLAND NIGHTS' ENTERTAINMENTS all you say is highly 
satisfactory.  Go in and win.

The extracts from the TIMES I really cannot trust myself to 
comment upon.  They were infernally satisfactory; so, and 
perhaps still more so, was a letter I had at the same time 
from Lord Pembroke.  If I have time as I go through Auckland, 
I am going to see Sir George Grey.

Now I really think that's all the business.  I have been 
rather sick and have had two small hemorrhages, but the 
second I believe to have been accidental.  No good denying 
that this annoys, because it do.  However, you must expect 
influenza to leave some harm, and my spirits, appetite, peace 
on earth and goodwill to men are all on a rising market.  
During the last week the amanuensis was otherwise engaged, 
whereupon I took up, pitched into, and about one half 
demolished another tale, once intended to be called THE PEARL 
FISHER, but now razeed and called THE SCHOONER FARRALONE.  We 
had a capital start, the steamer coming in at sunrise, and 
just giving us time to get our letters ere she sailed again.  
The manager of the German firm (O strange, changed days!) 
danced attendance upon us all morning; his boat conveyed us 
to and from the steamer.


FEB. 21ST.


All continues well.  Amanuensis bowled over for a day, but 
afoot again and jolly; Fanny enormously bettered by the 
voyage; I have been as jolly as a sand-boy as usual at sea.  
The Amanuensis sits opposite to me writing to her offspring.  
Fanny is on deck.  I have just supplied her with the Canadian 
Pacific Agent, and so left her in good hands.  You should 
hear me at table with the Ulster purser and a little punning 
microscopist called Davis.  Belle does some kind of abstruse 
Boswellising; after the first meal, having gauged the kind of 
jests that would pay here, I observed, 'Boswell is Barred 
during this cruise.'


23RD


We approach Auckland and I must close my mail.  All goes well 
with the trio.  Both the ladies are hanging round a beau - 
the same - that I unearthed for them: I am general provider, 
and especially great in the beaux business.  I corrected some 
proofs for Fanny yesterday afternoon, fell asleep over them 
in the saloon - and the whole ship seems to have been down 
beholding me.  After I woke up, had a hot bath, a whiskey 
punch and a cigarette, and went to bed, and to sleep too, at 
8.30; a recrudescence of Vailima hours.  Awoke to-day, and 
had to go to the saloon clock for the hour - no sign of dawn 
- all heaven grey rainy fog.  Have just had breakfast, 
written up one letter, register and close this.



CHAPTER XXVII



Bad pen, bad ink,
bad light, bad
blotting-paper.

S. S. MARIPOSA, AT SEA.
APIA DUE BY DAYBREAK TO-MORROW 9 P.M.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - Have had an amusing but tragic holiday, 
from which we return in disarray.  Fanny quite sick, but I 
think slowly and steadily mending; Belle in a terrific state 
of dentistry troubles which now seem calmed; and myself with 
a succession of gentle colds out of which I at last succeeded 
in cooking up a fine pleurisy.  By stopping and stewing in a 
perfectly airless state-room I seem to have got rid of the 
pleurisy.  Poor Fanny had very little fun of her visit, 
having been most of the time on a diet of maltine and slops - 
and this while the rest of us were rioting on oysters and 
mushrooms.  Belle's only devil in the hedge was the dentist.  
As for me, I was entertained at the General Assembly of the 
Presbyterian Church, likewise at a sort of artistic club; 
made speeches at both, and may therefore be said to have 
been, like Saint Paul, all things to all men.  I have an 
account of the latter racket which I meant to have enclosed 
in this. . . . Had some splendid photos taken, likewise a 
medallion by a French sculptor; met Graham, who returned with 
us as far as Auckland.  Have seen a good deal too of Sir 
George Grey; what a wonderful old historic figure to be 
walking on your arm and recalling ancient events and 
instances!  It makes a man small, and yet the extent to which 
he approved what I had done - or rather have tried to do - 
encouraged me.  Sir George is an expert at least, he knows 
these races: he is not a small employe with an ink-pot and a 
Whittaker.

Take it for all in all, it was huge fun: even Fanny had some 
lively sport at the beginning; Belle and I all through.  We 
got Fanny a dress on the sly, gaudy black velvet and Duchesse 
lace.  And alas! she was only able to wear it once.  But 
we'll hope to see more of it at Samoa; it really is lovely.  
Both dames are royally outfitted in silk stockings, etc.  We 
return, as from a raid, with our spoils and our wounded.  I 
am now very dandy: I announced two years ago that I should 
change.  Slovenly youth, all right - not slovenly age.  So 
really now I am pretty spruce; always a white shirt, white 
necktie, fresh shave, silk, socks, O a great sight! - No more 
possible,
R. L. S.



CHAPTER XXVIII



APRIL, 1893.


1. SLIP 3.  Davie would be ATTRACTED into a similar dialect, 
as he is later - e.g., with Doig, chapter XIX.  This is truly 
Scottish.

4, TO LIGHTLY; correct; 'to lightly' is a good regular Scots 
verb.

15. See Allan Ramsay's works.

15, 16. Ay, and that is one of the pigments with which I am 
trying to draw the character of Prestongrange.  'Tis a most 
curious thing to render that kind, insignificant mask.  To 
make anything precise is to risk my effect.  And till the day 
he died, DAVIE was never sure of what P. was after.  Not only 
so; very often P. didn't know himself.  There was an element 
of mere liking for Davie; there was an element of being 
determined, in case of accidents, to keep well with him.  He 
hoped his Barbara would bring him to her feet, besides, and 
make him manageable.  That was why he sent him to Hope Park 
with them.  But Davie cannot KNOW; I give you the inside of 
Davie, and my method condemns me to give only the outside 
both of Prestongrange and his policy.

- I'll give my mind to the technicalities.  Yet to me they 
seem a part of the story, which is historical, after all.

- I think they wanted Alan to escape.  But when or where to 
say so?  I will try.

- 20, DEAN.  I'll try and make that plainer.

CHAP. XIII., I fear it has to go without blows.  If I could 
get the pair - No, can't be.

- XIV.  All right, will abridge.

- XV.  I'd have to put a note to every word; and he who can't 
read Scots can NEVER enjoy Tod Lapraik.

- XVII.  Quite right.  I CAN make this plainer, and will.

- XVIII.  I know, but I have to hurry here; this is the 
broken back of my story; some business briefly transacted, I 
am leaping for Barbara's apron-strings.

SLIP 57.  Quite right again; I shall make it plain.

CHAP. XX.  I shall make all these points clear.  About Lady 
Prestongrange (not LADY Grant, only MISS Grant, my dear, 
though LADY Prestongrange, quoth the dominie) I am taken with 
your idea of her death, and have a good mind to substitute a 
featureless aunt.

SLIP 78.  I don't see how to lessen this effect.  There is 
really not much said of it; and I know Catriona did it.  But 
I'll try.

- 89.  I know.  This is an old puzzle of mine.  You see C.'s 
dialect is not wholly a bed of roses.  If only I knew the 
Gaelic.  Well, I'll try for another expression.

THE END.  I shall try to work it over.  James was at Dunkirk 
ordering post-horses for his own retreat.  Catriona did have 
her suspicions aroused by the letter, and, careless 
gentleman, I told you so - or she did at least. - Yes, the 
blood money, I am bothered about the portmanteau; it is the 
presence of Catriona that bothers me; the rape of the 
pockmantie is historic. . . .

To me, I own, it seems in the proof a very pretty piece of 
workmanship.  David himself I refuse to discuss; he IS.  The 
Lord Advocate I think a strong sketch of a very difficult 
character, James More, sufficient; and the two girls very 
pleasing creatures.  But O dear me, I came near losing my 
heart to Barbara!  I am not quite so constant as David, and 
even he - well, he didn't know it, anyway!  TOD LAPRAIK is a 
piece of living Scots: if I had never writ anything but that 
and THRAWN JANET, still I'd have been a writer.  The defects 
of D.B. are inherent, I fear.  But on the whole, I am far 
indeed from being displeased with the tailie.  They want more 
Alan?  Well, they can't get it.

I found my fame much grown on this return to civilisation.  
DIGITO MONSTRARI is a new experience; people all looked at me 
in the streets in Sydney; and it was very queer.  Here, of 
course, I am only the white chief in the Great House to the 
natives; and to the whites, either an ally or a foe.  It is a 
much healthier state of matters.  If I lived in an atmosphere 
of adulation, I should end by kicking against the pricks.  O 
my beautiful forest, O my beautiful shining, windy house, 
what a joy it was to behold them again!  No chance to take 
myself too seriously here.

The difficulty of the end is the mass of matter to be 
attended to, and the small time left to transact it in.  I 
mean from Alan's danger of arrest.  But I have just seen my 
way out, I do believe.


EASTER SUNDAY.


I have now got as far as slip 28, and finished the chapter of 
the law technicalities.  Well, these seemed to me always of 
the essence of the story, which is the story of a CAUSE 
CELEBRE; moreover, they are the justification of my 
inventions; if these men went so far (granting Davie sprung 
on them) would they not have gone so much further?  But of 
course I knew they were a difficulty; determined to carry 
them through in a conversation; approached this (it seems) 
with cowardly anxiety; and filled it with gabble, sir, 
gabble.  I have left all my facts, but have removed 42 lines.  
I should not wonder but what I'll end by re-writing it.  It 
is not the technicalities that shocked you, it was my bad 
art.  It is very strange that X. should be so good a chapter 
and IX. and XI. so uncompromisingly bad.  It looks as if XI. 
also would have to be re-formed.  If X. had not cheered me 
up, I should be in doleful dumps, but X. is alive anyway, and 
life is all in all.


THURSDAY, APRIL 5TH.


Well, there's no disguise possible; Fanny is not well, and we 
are miserably anxious. . . .


FRIDAY, 7TH.


I am thankful to say the new medicine relieved her at once.  
A crape has been removed from the day for all of us.  To make 
things better, the morning is ah! such a morning as you have 
never seen; heaven upon earth for sweetness, freshness, depth 
upon depth of unimaginable colour, and a huge silence broken 
at this moment only by the far-away murmur of the Pacific and 
the rich piping of a single bird.  You can't conceive what a 
relief this is; it seems a new world.  She has such 
extraordinary recuperative power that I do hope for the best.  
I am as tired as man can be.  This is a great trial to a 
family, and I thank God it seems as if ours was going to bear 
it well.  And O! if it only lets up, it will be but a 
pleasant memory.  We are all seedy, bar Lloyd: Fanny, as per 
above; self nearly extinct; Belle, utterly overworked and bad 
toothache; Cook, down with a bad foot; Butler, prostrate with 
a bad leg.  Eh, what a faim'ly!


SUNDAY.


Grey heaven, raining torrents of rain; occasional thunder and 
lightning.  Everything to dispirit; but my invalids are 
really on the mend.  The rain roars like the sea; in the 
sound of it there is a strange and ominous suggestion of an 
approaching tramp; something nameless and measureless seems 
to draw near, and strikes me cold, and yet is welcome.  I lie 
quiet in bed to-day, and think of the universe with a good 
deal of equanimity.  I have, at this moment, but the one 
objection to it; the FRACAS with which it proceeds.  I do not 
love noise; I am like my grandfather in that; and so many 
years in these still islands has ingrained the sentiment 
perhaps.  Here are no trains, only men pacing barefoot.  No 
carts or carriages; at worst the rattle of a horse's shoes 
among the rocks.  Beautiful silence; and so soon as this 
robustious rain takes off, I am to drink of it again by 
oceanfuls.


APRIL 16TH.


Several pages of this letter destroyed as beneath scorn; the 
wailings of a crushed worm; matter in which neither you nor I 
can take stock.  Fanny is distinctly better, I believe all 
right now; I too am mending, though I have suffered from 
crushed wormery, which is not good for the body, and 
damnation to the soul.  I feel to-night a baseless anxiety to 
write a lovely poem A PROPOS DES BOTTES DE MA GRANDMERE.  I 
see I am idiotic.  I'll try the poem.


17TH.


The poem did not get beyond plovers and lovers.  I am still, 
however, harassed by the unauthentic Muse; if I cared to 
encourage her - but I have not the time, and anyway we are at 
the vernal equinox.  It is funny enough, but my pottering 
verses are usually made (like the God-gifted organ voice's) 
at the autumnal; and this seems to hold at the Antipodes.  
There is here some odd secret of Nature.  I cannot speak of 
politics; we wait and wonder.  It seems (this is partly a 
guess) Ide won't take the C. J. ship, unless the islands are 
disarmed; and that England hesitates and holds off.  By my 
own idea, strongly corroborated by Sir George, I am writing 
no more letters.  But I have put as many irons in against 
this folly of the disarming as I could manage.  It did not 
reach my ears till nearly too late.  What a risk to take!  
What an expense to incur!  And for how poor a gain!  Apart 
from the treachery of it.  My dear fellow, politics is a vile 
and a bungling business.  I used to think meanly of the 
plumber; but how he shines beside the politician!


THURSDAY.


A general, steady advance; Fanny really quite chipper and 
jolly - self on the rapid mend, and with my eye on FORESTS 
that are to fall - and my finger on the axe, which wants 
stoning.


SATURDAY, 22.


Still all for the best; but I am having a heart-breaking time 
over DAVID.  I have nearly all corrected.  But have to 
consider THE HEATHER ON FIRE, THE WOOD BY SILVERMILLS, and 
the last chapter.  They all seem to me off colour; and I am 
not fit to better them yet.  No proof has been sent of the 
title, contents, or dedication.



CHAPTER XXIX



25TH APRIL.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - To-day early I sent down to Maben 
(Secretary of State) an offer to bring up people from Malie, 
keep them in my house, and bring them down day by day for so 
long as the negotiation should last.  I have a favourable 
answer so far.  This I would not have tried, had not old Sir 
George Grey put me on my mettle; 'Never despair,' was his 
word; and 'I am one of the few people who have lived long 
enough to see how true that is.'  Well, thereupon I plunged 
in; and the thing may do me great harm, but yet I do not 
think so - for I think jealousy will prevent the trial being 
made.  And at any rate it is another chance for this 
distracted archipelago of children, sat upon by a clique of 
fools.  If, by the gift of God, I can do - I am allowed to 
try to do - and succeed: but no, the prospect is too bright 
to be entertained.

To-day we had a ride down to Tanugamanono, and then by the 
new wood paths.  One led us to a beautiful clearing, with 
four native houses; taro, yams, and the like, excellently 
planted, and old Folau - 'the Samoan Jew' - sitting and 
whistling there in his new-found and well-deserved well-
being.  It was a good sight to see a Samoan thus before the 
world.  Further up, on our way home, we saw the world clear, 
and the wide die of the shadow lying broad; we came but a 
little further, and found in the borders of the bush a 
Banyan.  It must have been 150 feet in height; the trunk, and 
its acolytes, occupied a great space; above that, in the 
peaks of the branches, quite a forest of ferns and orchids 
were set; and over all again the huge spread of the boughs 
rose against the bright west, and sent their shadow miles to 
the eastward.  I have not often seen anything more satisfying 
than this vast vegetable.


SUNDAY.


A heavenly day again! the world all dead silence, save when, 
from far down below us in the woods, comes up the crepitation 
of the little wooden drum that beats to church.  Scarce a 
leaf stirs; only now and again a great, cool gush of air that 
makes my papers fly, and is gone. - The King of Samoa has 
refused my intercession between him and Mataafa; and I do not 
deny this is a good riddance to me of a difficult business, 
in which I might very well have failed.  What else is to be 
done for these silly folks?


MAY 12TH.


And this is where I had got to, before the mail arrives with, 
I must say, a real gentlemanly letter from yourself.  Sir, 
that is the sort of letter I want!  Now, I'll make my little 
proposal.  I will accept CHILD'S PLAY and PAN'S PIPES. Then I 
want PASTORAL, THE MANSE, THE ISLET, leaving out if you like 
all the prefacial matter and beginning at I. Then the 
portrait of Robert Hunter, beginning 'Whether he was 
originally big or little,' and ending 'fearless and gentle.'  
So much for MEM. AND PORTRAITS.  BEGGARS, sections I. and 
II., RANDOM MEMORIES II., and LANTERN BEARERS; I'm agreeable.  
These are my selections.  I don't know about PULVIS ET UMBRA 
either, but must leave that to you.  But just what you 
please.

About DAVIE I elaborately wrote last time, but still DAVIE is 
not done; I am grinding singly at THE EBB TIDE, as we now 
call the FARALLONE; the most of it will go this mail.  About 
the following, let there be no mistake: I will not write the 
abstract of KIDNAPPED; write it who will, I will not.  
Boccaccio must have been a clever fellow to write both 
argument and story; I am not, ET JE ME RECUSE.

We call it THE EBB TIDE: A TRIO AND QUARTETTE; but that 
secondary name you may strike out if it seems dull to you.  
The book, however, falls in two halves, when the fourth 
character appears.  I am on p. 82 if you want to know, and 
expect to finish on I suppose 110 or so; but it goes slowly, 
as you may judge from the fact that this three weeks past, I 
have only struggled from p. 58 to p. 82: twenty-four pages, 
ET ENCORE sure to be rewritten, in twenty-one days.  This is 
no prize-taker; not much Waverley Novels about this!



MAY 16TH.


I believe it will be ten chapters of THE EBB TIDE that go to 
you; the whole thing should be completed in I fancy twelve; 
and the end will follow punctually next mail.  It is my great 
wish that this might get into THE ILLUSTRATED LONDON NEWS for 
Gordon Browne to illustrate.  For whom, in case he should get 
the job, I give you a few notes.  A purao is a tree giving 
something like a fig with flowers.  He will find some 
photographs of an old marine curiosity shop in my collection, 
which may help him.  Attwater's settlement is to be entirely 
overshadowed everywhere by tall palms; see photographs of 
Fakarava: the verandahs of the house are 12 ft. wide.  Don't 
let him forget the Figure Head, for which I have a great use 
in the last chapter.  It stands just clear of the palms on 
the crest of the beach at the head of the pier; the flag-
staff not far off; the pier he will understand is perhaps 
three feet above high water, not more at any price.  The 
sailors of the FARALLONE are to be dressed like white sailors 
of course.  For other things, I remit this excellent artist 
to my photographs.

I can't think what to say about the tale, but it seems to me 
to go off with a considerable bang; in fact, to be an 
extraordinary work: but whether popular!  Attwater is a no 
end of a courageous attempt, I think you will admit; how far 
successful is another affair.  If my island ain't a thing of 
beauty, I'll be damned.  Please observe Wiseman and Wishart; 
for incidental grimness, they strike me as in it.  Also, 
kindly observe the Captain and ADAR; I think that knocks 
spots.  In short, as you see, I'm a trifle vainglorious.  But 
O, it has been such a grind!  The devil himself would allow a 
man to brag a little after such a crucifixion!  And indeed 
I'm only bragging for a change before I return to the darned 
thing lying waiting for me on p. 88, where I last broke down.  
I break down at every paragraph, I may observe; and lie here 
and sweat, till I can get one sentence wrung out after 
another.  Strange doom; after having worked so easily for so 
long!  Did ever anybody see such a story of four characters?


LATER, 2.30.


It may interest you to know that I am entirely TAPU, and live 
apart in my chambers like a caged beast.  Lloyd has a bad 
cold, and Graham and Belle are getting it.  Accordingly, I 
dwell here without the light of any human countenance or 
voice, and strap away at THE EBB TIDE until (as now) I can no 
more.  Fanny can still come, but is gone to glory now, or to 
her garden.  Page 88 is done, and must be done over again to-
morrow, and I confess myself exhausted.  Pity a man who can't 
work on along when he has nothing else on earth to do!  But I 
have ordered Jack, and am going for a ride in the bush 
presently to refresh the machine; then back to a lonely 
dinner and durance vile.  I acquiesce in this hand of fate; 
for I think another cold just now would just about do for me.  
I have scarce yet recovered the two last.


MAY 18TH.


My progress is crabwise, and I fear only IX. chapters will be 
ready for the mail.  I am on p. 88 again, and with half an 
idea of going back again to 85.  We shall see when we come to 
read: I used to regard reading as a pleasure in my old light 
days.  All the house are down with the influenza in a body, 
except Fanny and me. The influenza appears to become endemic 
here, but it has always been a scourge in the islands.  
Witness the beginning of THE EBB TIDE, which was observed 
long before the Iffle had distinguished himself at home by 
such Napoleonic conquests.  I am now of course 'quite a 
recluse,' and it is very stale, and there is no amanuensis to 
carry me over my mail, to which I shall have to devote many 
hours that would have been more usefully devoted to THE EBB 
TIDE.  For you know you can dictate at all hours of the day 
and at any odd moment; but to sit down and write with your 
red right hand is a very different matter.


MAY 20TH.


Well, I believe I've about finished the thing, I mean as far 
as the mail is to take it.  Chapter X. is now in Lloyd's 
hands for remarks, and extends in its present form to p. 93 
incl.  On the 12th of May, I see by looking back, I was on p. 
82, not for the first time; so that I have made 11 pages in 
nine livelong days.  Well! up a high hill he heaved a huge 
round stone.  But this Flaubert business must be resisted in 
the premises.  Or is it the result of influenza?  God forbid.  
Fanny is down now, and the last link that bound me to my 
fellow men is severed.  I sit up here, and write, and read 
Renan's ORIGINES, which is certainly devilish interesting; I 
read his Nero yesterday, it is very good, O, very good!  But 
he is quite a Michelet; the general views, and such a piece 
of character painting, excellent; but his method sheer 
lunacy.  You can see him take up the block which he had just 
rejected, and make of it the corner-stone: a maddening way to 
deal with authorities; and the result so little like history 
that one almost blames oneself for wasting time.  But the 
time is not wasted; the conspectus is always good, and the 
blur that remains on the mind is probably just enough.  I 
have been enchanted with the unveiling of Revelations.  And 
how picturesque that return of the false Nero!  The Apostle 
John is rather discredited.  And to think how one had read 
the thing so often, and never understood the attacks upon St. 
Paul!  I remember when I was a child, and we came to the Four 
Beasts that were all over eyes, the sickening terror with 
which I was filled.  If that was Heaven, what, in the name of 
Davy Jones and the aboriginal night-mare, could Hell be?  
Take it for all in all, L'ANTECHRIST is worth reading.  The 
HISTOIRE D'ISRAEL did not surprise me much; I had read those 
Hebrew sources with more intelligence than the New Testament, 
and was quite prepared to admire Ahab and Jezebel, etc.  
Indeed, Ahab has always been rather a hero of mine; I mean 
since the years of discretion.


MAY 21ST.


And here I am back again on p. 85! the last chapter demanding 
an entire revision, which accordingly it is to get.  And 
where my mail is to come in, God knows!  This forced, 
violent, alembicated style is most abhorrent to me; it can't 
be helped; the note was struck years ago on the JANET NICOLL, 
and has to be maintained somehow; and I can only hope the 
intrinsic horror and pathos, and a kind of fierce glow of 
colour there is to it, and the surely remarkable wealth of 
striking incident, may guide our little shallop into port.  
If Gordon Browne is to get it, he should see the Brassey 
photographs of Papeete.  But mind, the three waifs were never 
in the town; only on the beach and in the calaboose.  By 
George, but it's a good thing to illustrate for a man like 
that!  Fanny is all right again.  False alarm!  I was down 
yesterday afternoon at Paupata, and heard much growling of 
war, and the delightful news that the C. J. and the President 
are going to run away from Mulinuu and take refuge in the 
Tivoli hotel.


23RD.  MAIL DAY.


And lots of pleasures before me, no doubt!  Among others the 
attempt to extract an answer from - before mail time, which 
may succeed or may not.

THE EBB TIDE, all but (I take it) fifteen pages, is now in 
your hands - possibly only about eleven pp.  It is hard to 
say.  But there it is, and you can do your best with it.  
Personally, I believe I would in this case make even a 
sacrifice to get Gordon Browne and copious illustration.  I 
guess in ten days I shall have finished with it; then I go 
next to D. BALFOUR, and get the proofs ready: a nasty job for 
me, as you know.  And then?  Well, perhaps I'll take a go at 
the family history.  I think that will be wise, as I am so 
much off work.  And then, I suppose, WEIR OF HERMISTON, but 
it may be anything.  I am discontented with THE EBB TIDE, 
naturally; there seems such a veil of words over it; and I 
like more and more naked writing; and yet sometimes one has a 
longing for full colour and there comes the veil again.  THE 
YOUNG CHEVALIER is in very full colour, and I fear it for 
that reason. -
Ever,
R. L S.



CHAPTER XXX



29TH MAY.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - Still grinding at Chap. XI.  I began many 
days ago on p. 93, and am still on p. 93, which is 
exhilarating, but the thing takes shape all the same and 
should make a pretty lively chapter for an end of it.  For 
XII. is only a footnote AD EXPLICANDUM.


JUNE THE 1ST.


Back on p. 93.  I was on 100 yesterday, but read it over and 
condemned it.


10 A. M.


I have worked up again to 97, but how?  The deuce fly away 
with literature, for the basest sport in creation.  But it's 
got to come straight! and if possible, so that I may finish 
D. BALFOUR in time for the same mail.  What a getting 
upstairs!  This is Flaubert outdone.  Belle, Graham, and 
Lloyd leave to-day on a malaga down the coast; to be absent a 
week or so: this leaves Fanny, me, and -, who seems a nice, 
kindly fellow.


JUNE 2ND.


I am nearly dead with dyspepsia, over-smoking, and 
unremunerative overwork.  Last night, I went to bed by seven; 
woke up again about ten for a minute to find myself light-
headed and altogether off my legs; went to sleep again, and 
woke this morning fairly fit.  I have crippled on to p. 101, 
but I haven't read it yet, so do not boast.  What kills me is 
the frame of mind of one of the characters; I cannot get it 
through.  Of course that does not interfere with my total 
inability to write; so that yesterday I was a living half-
hour upon a single clause and have a gallery of variants that 
would surprise you.  And this sort of trouble (which I cannot 
avoid) unfortunately produces nothing when done but 
alembication and the far-fetched.  Well, read it with mercy!


8 A.M.


Going to bed.  Have read it, and believe the chapter 
practically done at last.  But lord! it has been a business.


JULY 3RD, 8.15.


The draft is finished, the end of Chapter II. and the tale, 
and I have only eight pages WIEDERZUARBEITEN.  This is just a 
cry of joy in passing.


10.30.


Knocked out of time.  Did 101 and 102.  Alas, no more to-day, 
as I have to go down town to a meeting.  Just as well though, 
as my thumb is about done up.


SUNDAY, JUNE 4TH.


Now for a little snippet of my life.  Yesterday, 12.30, in a 
heavenly day of sun and trade, I mounted my horse and set 
off.  A boy opens my gate for me.  'Sleep and long life!  A 
blessing on your journey,' says he.  And I reply 'Sleep, long 
life!  A blessing on the house!'  Then on, down the lime 
lane, a rugged, narrow, winding way, that seems almost as if 
it was leading you into Lyonesse, and you might see the head 
and shoulders of a giant looking in.  At the corner of the 
road I meet the inspector of taxes, and hold a diplomatic 
interview with him; he wants me to pay taxes on the new 
house; I am informed I should not till next year; and we 
part, RE INFECTA, he promising to bring me decisions, I 
assuring him that, if I find any favouritism, he will find me 
the most recalcitrant tax-payer on the island.  Then I have a 
talk with an old servant by the wayside.  A little further I 
pass two children coming up.  'Love!' say I; 'are you two 
chiefly-proceeding inland?' and they say, 'Love! yes!' and 
the interesting ceremony is finished.  Down to the post 
office, where I find Vitrolles and (Heaven reward you!) the 
White Book, just arrived per UPOLU, having gone the wrong way 
round, by Australia; also six copies of ISLAND NIGHTS' 
ENTERTAINMENTS.  Some of Weatherall's illustrations are very 
clever; but O Lord! the lagoon!  I did say it was 'shallow,' 
but, O dear, not so shallow as that a man could stand up in 
it!  I had still an hour to wait for my meeting, so 
Postmaster Davis let me sit down in his room and I had a 
bottle of beer in, and read A GENTLEMAN OF FRANCE.  Have you 
seen it coming out in LONGMAN'S?  My dear Colvin! 'tis the 
most exquisite pleasure; a real chivalrous yarn, like the 
Dumas' and yet unlike.  Thereafter to the meeting of the five 
newspaper proprietors.  Business transacted, I have to gallop 
home and find the boys waiting to be paid at the doorstep.



MONDAY, 5TH.


Yesterday, Sunday, the Rev. Dr. Browne, secretary to the 
Wesleyan Mission, and the man who made the war in the Western 
Islands and was tried for his life in Fiji, came up, and we 
had a long, important talk about Samoa.  O, if I could only 
talk to the home men!  But what would it matter? none of them 
know, none of them care.  If we could only have Macgregor 
here with his schooner, you would hear of no more troubles in 
Samoa.  That is what we want; a man that knows and likes the 
natives, QUI PAYE DE SA PERSONNE, AND is not afraid of 
hanging when necessary.  We don't want bland Swedish humbugs, 
and fussy, fostering German barons.  That way the maelstrom 
lies, and we shall soon be in it.

I have to-day written 103 and 104, all perfectly wrong, and 
shall have to rewrite them.  This tale is devilish, and 
Chapter XI. the worst of the lot.  The truth is of course 
that I am wholly worked out; but it's nearly done, and shall 
go somehow according to promise.  I go against all my gods, 
and say it is NOT WORTH WHILE to massacre yourself over the 
last few pages of a rancid yarn, that the reviewers will 
quite justly tear to bits.  As for D.B., no hope, I fear, 
this mail, but we'll see what the afternoon does for me.


4.15.


Well, it's done.  Those tragic 16 pp. are at last finished, 
and I have put away thirty-two pages of chips, and have spent 
thirteen days about as nearly in Hell as a man could expect 
to live through.  It's done, and of course it ain't worth 
while, and who cares?  There it is, and about as grim a tale 
as was ever written, and as grimy, and as hateful.


SACRED
TO THE MEMORY
OF
J. L. HUISH,
BORN 1856, AT HACKNEY,
LONDON,
Accidentally killed upon this
Island,
10th September, 1889.


TUESDAY, 6.


I am exulting to do nothing.  It pours with rain from the 
westward, very unusual kind of weather; I was standing out on 
the little verandah in front of my room this morning, and 
there went through me or over me a wave of extraordinary and 
apparently baseless emotion.  I literally staggered.  And 
then the explanation came, and I knew I had found a frame of 
mind and body that belonged to Scotland, and particularly to 
the neighbourhood of Callander.  Very odd these identities of 
sensation, and the world of connotations implied; highland 
huts, and peat smoke, and the brown, swirling rivers, and wet 
clothes, and whiskey, and the romance of the past, and that 
indescribable bite of the whole thing at a man's heart, which 
is - or rather lies at the bottom of - a story.

I don't know if you are a Barbey d'Aurevilly-an.  I am.  I 
have a great delight in his Norman stories.  Do you know the 
CHEVALIER DES TOUCHES and L'ENSORCELEE?  They are admirable, 
they reek of the soil and the past.  But I was rather 
thinking just now of LE RIDEAU CRAMOISI, and its adorable 
setting of the stopped coach, the dark street, the home-going 
in the inn yard, and the red blind illuminated.  Without 
doubt, THERE was an identity of sensation; one of those 
conjunctions in life that had filled Barbey full to the brim, 
and permanently bent his memory.

I wonder exceedingly if I have done anything at all good; and 
who can tell me? and why should I wish to know?  In so little 
a while, I, and the English language, and the bones of my 
descendants, will have ceased to be a memory!  And yet - and 
yet - one would like to leave an image for a few years upon 
men's minds - for fun.  This is a very dark frame of mind, 
consequent on overwork and the conclusion of the excruciating 
EBB TIDE.  Adieu.

What do you suppose should be done with THE EBB TIDE?  It 
would make a volume of 200 pp.; on the other hand, I might 
likely have some more stories soon: THE OWL, DEATH IN THE 
POT, THE SLEEPER AWAKENED; all these are possible.  THE OWL 
might be half as long; THE SLEEPER AWAKENED, ditto; DEATH IN 
THE POT a deal shorter, I believe.  Then there's the GO-
BETWEEN, which is not impossible altogether.  THE OWL, THE 
SLEEPER AWAKENED, and the GO-BETWEEN end reasonably well; 
DEATH IN THE POT is an ungodly massacre.  O, well, THE OWL 
only ends well in so far as some lovers come together, and 
nobody is killed at the moment, but you know they are all 
doomed, they are Chouan fellows.


FRIDAY, 9TH.


Well, the mail is in; no Blue-book, depressing letter from 
C.; a long, amusing ramble from my mother; vast masses of 
Romeike; they ARE going to war now; and what will that lead 
to? and what has driven, them to it but the persistent 
misconduct of these two officials?  I know I ought to rewrite 
the end of this bluidy EBB TIDE: well, I can't.  CEST PLUS 
FORT QUE MOI; it has to go the way it is, and be jowned to 
it!  From what I make out of the reviews, I think it would be 
better not to republish THE EBB TIDE: but keep it for other 
tales, if they should turn up.  Very amusing how the reviews 
pick out one story and damn the rest I and it is always a 
different one.  Be sure you send me the article from LE 
TEMPS.


SATURDAY, 17TH.


Since I wrote this last, I have written a whole chapter of my 
grandfather, and read it to-night; it was on the whole much 
appreciated, and I kind of hope it ain't bad myself.  'Tis a 
third writing, but it wants a fourth.  By next mail, I 
believe I might send you 3 chapters.  That is to say FAMILY 
ANNALS, THE SERVICE OF THE NORTHERN LIGHTS, and THE BUILDING 
OF THE BELL ROCK.  Possibly even 4 - A HOUSEFUL OF BOYS.  I 
could finish my grandfather very easy now; my father and 
Uncle Alan stop the way.  I propose to call the book: 
NORTHERN LIGHTS: MEMOIRS OF A FAMILY of ENGINEERS.  I tell 
you, it is going to be a good book.  My idea in sending Ms. 
would be to get it set up; two proofs to me, one to Professor 
Swan, Ardchapel, Helensburgh - mark it private and 
confidential - one to yourself; and come on with criticisms!  
But I'll have to see.  The total plan of the book is this -

i. Domestic Annals.
ii. The Service of the Northern Lights.
iii. The Building of the Bell Rock.
iv. A Houseful of Boys (or, 'The Family in Baxter's Place).
v. Education of an Engineer.
vi. The Grandfather.
vii. Alan Stevenson.
viii. Thomas Stevenson.

There will be an Introduction 'The Surname of Stevenson' 
which has proved a mighty queer subject of inquiry.  But, 
Lord! if I were among libraries.


SUNDAY, 18TH.


I shall put in this envelope the end of the ever-to-be-
execrated EBB TIDE, or Stevenson's Blooming Error.  Also, a 
paper apart for DAVID BALFOUR.  The slips must go in another 
enclosure, I suspect, owing to their beastly bulk.  Anyway, 
there are two pieces of work off my mind, and though I could 
wish I had rewritten a little more of DAVID, yet it was 
plainly to be seen it was impossible.  All the points 
indicated by you have been brought out; but to rewrite the 
end, in my present state of over-exhaustion and fiction - 
phobia, would have been madness; and I let it go as it stood.  
My grandfather is good enough for me, these days. I do not 
work any less; on the whole, if anything, a little more.  But 
it is different.

The slips go to you in four packets; I hope they are what 
they should be, but do not think so.  I am at a pitch of 
discontent with fiction in all its form - or my forms - that 
prevents me being able to be even interested.  I have had to 
stop all drink; smoking I am trying to stop also.  It annoys 
me dreadfully: and yet if I take a glass of claret, - I have 
a headache the next day!  O, and a good headache too; none of 
your trifles.

Well, sir, here's to you, and farewell. - Yours ever.
R. L. S.



CHAPTER XXXI



SATURDAY, 24TH (?) JUNE.


MY DEAR COLVIN - Yesterday morning, after a day of absolute 
temperance, I awoke to the worst headache I had had yet.  
Accordingly, temperance was said farewell to, quinine 
instituted, and I believe my pains are soon to be over.  We 
wait, with a kind of sighing impatience, for war to be 
declared, or to blow finally off, living in the meanwhile in 
a kind of children's hour of firelight and shadow and 
preposterous tales; the king seen at night galloping up our 
road upon unknown errands and covering his face as he passes 
our cook; Mataafa daily surrounded (when he awakes) with 
fresh 'white man's boxes' (query, ammunition?) and professing 
to be quite ignorant of where they come from; marches of 
bodies of men across the island; concealment of ditto in the 
bush; the coming on and off of different chiefs; and such a 
mass of ravelment and rag-tag as the devil himself could not 
unwind.


WEDNESDAY, 28TH JUNE.


Yesterday it rained with but little intermission, but I was 
jealous of news.  Graham and I got into the saddle about 1 
o'clock and off down to town.  In town, there was nothing but 
rumours going; in the night drums had been beat, the men had 
run to arms on Mulinuu from as far as Vaiala, and the alarm 
proved false.  There were no signs of any gathering in Apia 
proper, and the Secretary of State had no news to give.  I 
believed him, too, for we are brither Scots.  Then the 
temptation came upon me strong to go on to the ford and see 
the Mataafa villages, where we heard there was more afoot.  
Off we rode.  When we came to Vaimusu, the houses were very 
full of men, but all seemingly unarmed.  Immediately beyond 
is that river over which we passed in our scamper with Lady 
Jersey; it was all solitary.  Three hundred yards beyond is a 
second ford; and there - I came face to face with war.  Under 
the trees on the further bank sat a picket of seven men with 
Winchesters; their faces bright, their eyes ardent.  As we 
came up, they did not speak or move; only their eyes followed 
us.  The horses drank, and we passed the ford.  'Talofa!' I 
said, and the commandant of the picket said 'Talofa'; and 
then, when we were almost by, remembered himself and asked 
where we were going.  'To Faamuina,' I said, and we rode on.  
Every house by the wayside was crowded with armed men.  There 
was the European house of a Chinaman on the right-hand side: 
a flag of truce flying over the gate - indeed we saw three of 
these in what little way we penetrated into Mataafa's lines - 
all the foreigners trying to protect their goods; and the 
Chinaman's verandah overflowed with men and girls and 
Winchesters.  By the way we met a party of about ten or a 
dozen marching with their guns and cartridge-belts, and the 
cheerful alacrity and brightness of their looks set my head 
turning with envy and sympathy.  Arrived at Vaiusu, the 
houses about the MALAE (village green) were thronged with 
men, all armed.  On the outside of the council-house (which 
was all full within) there stood an orator; he had his back 
turned to his audience, and seemed to address the world at 
large; all the time we were there his strong voice continued 
unabated, and I heard snatches of political wisdom rising and 
falling.

The house of Faamuina stands on a knoll in the MALAE.  
Thither we mounted, a boy ran out and took our horses, and we 
went in.  Faamuina was there himself, his wife Pelepa, three 
other chiefs, and some attendants; and here again was this 
exulting spectacle as of people on their marriage day.  
Faamuina (when I last saw him) was an elderly, limping 
gentleman, with much of the debility of age; it was a bright-
eyed boy that greeted me; the lady was no less excited; all 
had cartridge-belts.  We stayed but a little while to smoke a 
sului; I would not have kava made, as I thought my escapade 
was already dangerous (perhaps even blameworthy) enough.  On 
the way back, we were much greeted, and on coming to the 
ford, the commandant came and asked me if there were many on 
the other side.  'Very many,' said I; not that I knew, but I 
would not lead them on the ice.  'That is well!' said he, and 
the little picket laughed aloud as we splashed into the 
river.  We returned to Apia, through Apia, and out to 
windward as far as Vaiala, where the word went that the men 
of the Vaimauga had assembled.  We met two boys carrying 
pigs, and saw six young men busy cooking in a cook-house; but 
no sign of an assembly; no arms, no blackened faces.  I 
forgot!  As we turned to leave Faamuina's, there ran forward 
a man with his face blackened, and the back of his lava-lava 
girded up so as to show his tattooed hips naked; he leaped 
before us, cut a wonderful caper, and flung his knife high in 
the air, and caught it.  It was strangely savage and 
fantastic and high-spirited.  I have seen a child doing the 
same antics long before in a dance, so that it is plainly an 
ACCEPTED SOLEMNITY.  I should say that for weeks the children 
have been playing with spears.  Up by the plantation I took a 
short cut, which shall never be repeated, through grass and 
weeds over the horses' heads and among rolling stones; I 
thought we should have left a horse there, but fortune 
favoured us.  So home, a little before six, in a dashing 
squall of rain, to a bowl of kava and dinner.  But the 
impression on our minds was extraordinary; the sight of that 
picket at the ford, and those ardent, happy faces whirls in 
my head; the old aboriginal awoke in both of us and knickered 
like a stallion.

It is dreadful to think that I must sit apart here and do 
nothing; I do not know if I can stand it out.  But you see, I 
may be of use to these poor people, if I keep quiet, and if I 
threw myself in, I should have a bad job of it to save 
myself.  There; I have written this to you; and it is still 
but 7.30 in the day, and the sun only about one hour up; can 
I go back to my old grandpapa, and men sitting with 
Winchesters in my mind's eye?  No; war is a huge 
ENTRAINEMENT; there is no other temptation to be compared to 
it, not one.  We were all wet, we had been about five hours 
in the saddle, mostly riding hard; and we came home like 
schoolboys, with such a lightness of spirits, and I am sure 
such a brightness of eye, as you could have lit a candle at!


THURSDAY 29TH.


I had two priests to luncheon yesterday: the Bishop and Pere 
Remy.  They were very pleasant, and quite clean too, which 
has been known sometimes not to be - even with bishops.  
Monseigneur is not unimposing; with his white beard and his 
violet girdle he looks splendidly episcopal, and when our 
three waiting lads came up one after another and kneeled 
before him in the big hall, and kissed his ring, it did me 
good for a piece of pageantry.  Remy is very engaging; he is 
a little, nervous, eager man, like a governess, and brimful 
of laughter and small jokes.  So is the bishop indeed, and 
our luncheon party went off merrily - far more merrily than 
many a German spread, though with so much less liquor.  One 
trait was delicious.  With a complete ignorance of the 
Protestant that I would scarce have imagined, he related to 
us (as news) little stories from the gospels, and got the 
names all wrong!  His comments were delicious, and to our 
ears a thought irreverent.  'AH! IL CONNAISSAIT SON MONDE, 
ALLEZ!'  'IL ETAIT FIN, NOTRE SEIGNEUR!' etc.


FRIDAY.


Down with Fanny and Belle, to lunch at the International.  
Heard there about the huge folly of the hour, all the Mulinuu 
ammunition having been yesterday marched openly to vaults in 
Matafele; and this morning, on a cry of protest from the 
whites, openly and humiliatingly disinterred and marched back 
again.  People spoke of it with a kind of shrill note that 
did not quite satisfy me.  They seemed not quite well at 
ease.  Luncheon over, we rode out on the Malie road.  All was 
quiet in Vaiusu, and when we got to the second ford, alas! 
there was no picket - which was just what Belle had come to 
sketch.  On through quite empty roads; the houses deserted, 
never a gun to be seen; and at last a drum and a penny 
whistle playing in Vaiusu, and a cricket match on the MALAE!  
Went up to Faamuina's; he is a trifle uneasy, though he gives 
us kava.  I cannot see what ails him, then it appears that he 
has an engagement with the Chief Justice at half-past two to 
sell a piece of land.  Is this the reason why war has 
disappeared?  We ride back, stopping to sketch here and there 
the fords, a flag of truce, etc.  I ride on to Public Hall 
Committee and pass an hour with my committees very heavily.  
To the hotel to dinner, then to the ball, and home by eleven, 
very tired.  At the ball I heard some news, of how the chief 
of Letonu said that I was the source of all this trouble, and 
should be punished, and my family as well.  This, and the 
rudeness of the man at the ford of the Gase-gase, looks but 
ill; I should have said that Faamuina, as he approached the 
first ford, was spoken to by a girl, and immediately said 
goodbye and plunged into the bush; the girl had told him 
there was a war party out from Mulinuu; and a little further 
on, as we stopped to sketch a flag of truce, the beating of 
drums and the sound of a bugle from that direction startled 
us.  But we saw nothing, and I believe Mulinuu is (at least 
at present) incapable of any act of offence.  One good job, 
these threats to my home and family take away all my childish 
temptation to go out and fight.  Our force must be here, to 
protect ourselves.  I see panic rising among the whites; I 
hear the shrill note of it in their voices, and they talk 
already about a refuge on the war ships.  There are two here, 
both German; and the ORLANDO is expected presently.


SUNDAY 9TH JULY.


Well, the war has at last begun.  For four or five days, Apia 
has been filled by these poor children with their faces 
blacked, and the red handkerchief about their brows, that 
makes the Malietoa uniform, and the boats have been coming in 
from the windward, some of them 50 strong, with a drum and a 
bugle on board - the bugle always ill-played - and a sort of 
jester leaping and capering on the sparred nose of the boat, 
and the whole crew uttering from time to time a kind of 
menacing ululation.  Friday they marched out to the bush; and 
yesterday morning we heard that some had returned to their 
houses for the night, as they found it 'so uncomfortable.'  
After dinner a messenger came up to me with a note, that the 
wounded were arriving at the Mission House.  Fanny, Lloyd and 
I saddled and rode off with a lantern; it was a fine starry 
night, though pretty cold.  We left the lantern at Tanuga-
manono, and then down in the starlight.  I found Apia, and 
myself, in a strange state of flusteration; my own excitement 
was gloomy and (I may say) truculent; others appeared 
imbecile; some sullen.  The best place in the whole town was 
the hospital.  A longish frame-house it was, with a big table 
in the middle for operations, and ten Samoans, each with an 
average of four sympathisers, stretched along the walls.  
Clarke was there, steady as a die; Miss Large, little 
spectacled angel, showed herself a real trump; the nice, 
clean, German orderlies in their white uniforms looked and 
meant business.  (I hear a fine story of Miss Large - a cast-
iron teetotaller - going to the public-house for a bottle of 
brandy.)

The doctors were not there when I arrived; but presently it 
was observed that one of the men was going cold.  He was a 
magnificent Samoan, very dark, with a noble aquiline 
countenance, like an Arab, I suppose, and was surrounded by 
seven people, fondling his limbs as he lay: he was shot 
through both lungs.  And an orderly was sent to the town for 
the (German naval) doctors, who were dining there.  Meantime 
I found an errand of my own.  Both Clarke and Miss Large 
expressed a wish to have the public hall, of which I am 
chairman, and I set off down town, and woke people out of 
their beds, and got a committee together, and (with a great 
deal of difficulty from one man, whom we finally overwhelmed) 
got the public hall for them.  Bar the one man, the committee 
was splendid, and agreed in a moment to share the expense if 
the shareholders object.  Back to the hospital about 11.30; 
found the German doctors there.  Two men were going now, one 
that was shot in the bowels - he was dying rather hard, in a 
gloomy stupor of pain and laudanum, silent, with contorted 
face.  The chief, shot through the lungs, was lying on one 
side, awaiting the last angel; his family held his hands and 
legs; they were all speechless, only one woman suddenly 
clasped his knee, and 'keened' for the inside of five 
seconds, and fell silent again.  Went home, and to bed about 
two A.M.  What actually passed seems undiscoverable; but the 
Mataafas were surely driven back out of Vaitele; that is a 
blow to them, and the resistance was far greater than had 
been anticipated - which is a blow to the Laupepas.  All 
seems to indicate a long and bloody war.

Frank's house in Mulinuu was likewise filled with wounded; 
many dead bodies were brought in; I hear with certainty of 
five, wrapped in mats; and a pastor goes to-morrow to the 
field to bring others.  The Laupepas brought in eleven heads 
to Mulinuu, and to the great horror and consternation of the 
native mind, one proved to be a girl, and was identified as 
that of a Taupou - or Maid of the Village - from Savaii.  I 
hear this morning, with great relief, that it has been 
returned to Malie, wrapped in the most costly silk 
handkerchiefs, and with an apologetic embassy.  This could 
easily happen.  The girl was of course attending on her 
father with ammunition, and got shot; her hair was cut short 
to make her father's war head-dress - even as our own Sina's 
is at this moment; and the decollator was probably, in his 
red flurry of fight, wholly unconscious of her sex.  I am 
sorry for him in the future; he must make up his mind to many 
bitter jests - perhaps to vengeance.  But what an end to one 
chosen for her beauty and, in the time of peace, watched over 
by trusty crones and hunchbacks!


EVENING.


Can I write or not?  I played lawn tennis in the morning, and 
after lunch down with Graham to Apia.  Ulu, he that was shot 
in the lungs, still lives; he that was shot in the bowels is 
gone to his fathers, poor, fierce child!  I was able to be of 
some very small help, and in the way of helping myself to 
information, to prove myself a mere gazer at meteors.  But 
there seems no doubt the Mataafas for the time are scattered; 
the most of our friends are involved in this disaster, and 
Mataafa himself - who might have swept the islands a few 
months ago - for him to fall so poorly, doubles my regret.  
They say the Taupou had a gun and fired; probably an excuse 
manufactured EX POST FACTO.  I go down to-morrow at 12, to 
stay the afternoon, and help Miss Large.  In the hospital to-
day, when I first entered it, there were no attendants; only 
the wounded and their friends, all equally sleeping and their 
heads poised upon the wooden pillows.  There is a pretty 
enough boy there, slightly wounded, whose fate is to be 
envied: two girls, and one of the most beautiful, with 
beaming eyes, tend him and sleep upon his pillow.  In the 
other corner, another young man, very patient and brave, lies 
wholly deserted.  Yet he seems to me far the better of the 
two; but not so pretty!  Heavens, what a difference that 
makes; in our not very well proportioned bodies and our 
finely hideous faces, the 1-32nd - rather the 1-64th - this 
way or that!  Sixteen heads in all at Mulinuu.  I am so stiff 
I can scarce move without a howl.


MONDAY, 10TH.


Some news that Mataafa is gone to Savaii by way of Manono; 
this may mean a great deal more warfaring, and no great 
issue.  (When Sosimo came in this morning with my breakfast 
he had to lift me up.  It is no joke to play lawn tennis 
after carrying your right arm in a sling so many years.)  
What a hard, unjust business this is!  On the 28th, if 
Mataafa had moved, he could have still swept Mulinuu.  He 
waited, and I fear he is now only the stick of a rocket.


WEDNESDAY, 12TH.


No more political news; but many rumours.  The government 
troops are off to Manono; no word of Mataafa.  O, there is a 
passage in my mother's letter which puzzles me as to a date.  
Is it next Christmas you are coming? or the Christmas after?  
This is most important, and must be understood at once.  If 
it is next Christmas, I could not go to Ceylon, for lack of 
gold, and you would have to adopt one of the following 
alternatives: 1st, either come straight on here and pass a 
month with us; 'tis the rainy season, but we have often 
lovely weather.  Or (2nd) come to Hawaii and I will meet you 
there.  Hawaii is only a week's sail from S. Francisco, 
making only about sixteen days on the heaving ocean; and the 
steamers run once a fortnight, so that you could turn round; 
and you could thus pass a day or two in the States - a 
fortnight even - and still see me.  But I have sworn to take 
no further excursions till I have money saved to pay for 
them; and to go to Ceylon and back would be torture unless I 
had a lot.  You must answer this at once, please; so that I 
may know what to do.  We would dearly like you to come on 
here.  I'll tell you how it can be done; I can come up and 
meet you at Hawaii, and if you had at all got over your sea-
sickness, I could just come on board and we could return 
together to Samoa, and you could have a month of our life 
here, which I believe you could not help liking.  Our horses 
are the devil, of course, miserable screws, and some of them 
a little vicious.  I had a dreadful fright - the passage in 
my mother's letter is recrossed and I see it says the end of 
/94: so much the better, then; but I would like to submit to 
you my alternative plan.  I could meet you at Hawaii, and 
reconduct you to Hawaii, so that we could have a full six 
weeks together and I believe a little over, and you would see 
this place of mine, and have a sniff of native life, native 
foods, native houses - and perhaps be in time to see the 
German flag raised, who knows? - and we could generally yarn 
for all we were worth.  I should like you to see Vailima; and 
I should be curious to know how the climate affected you.  It 
is quite hit or miss; it suits me, it suits Graham, it suits 
all our family; others it does not suit at all.  It is either 
gold or poison.  I rise at six, the rest at seven; lunch is 
at 12; at five we go to lawn tennis till dinner at six; and 
to roost early.

A man brought in a head to Mulinuu in great glory; they 
washed the black paint off, and behold! it was his brother.  
When I last heard he was sitting in his house, with the head 
upon his lap, and weeping.  Barbarous war is an ugly 
business; but I believe the civilised is fully uglier; but 
Lord! what fun!

I should say we now have definite news that there are THREE 
women's heads; it was difficult to get it out of the natives, 
who are all ashamed, and the women all in terror of 
reprisals.  Nothing has been done to punish or disgrace these 
hateful innovators.  It was a false report that the head had 
been returned.


THURSDAY, 13TH,


Mataafa driven away from Savaii.  I cannot write about this, 
and do not know what should be the end of it.


MONDAY, 17TH.


Haggard and Ahrens (a German clerk) to lunch yesterday.  
There is no real certain news yet: I must say, no man could 
SWEAR to any result; but the sky looks horribly black for 
Mataafa and so many of our friends along with him.  The thing 
has an abominable, a beastly, nightmare interest.  But it's 
wonderful generally how little one cares about the wounded; 
hospital sights, etc.; things that used to murder me.  I was 
far more struck with the excellent way in which things were 
managed; as if it had been a peep-show; I held some of the 
things at an operation, and did not care a dump.


TUESDAY, 18TH.


Sunday came the KATOOMBA, Captain Bickford, C.M.G.  
Yesterday, Graham and I went down to call, and find he has 
orders to suppress Mataafa at once, and has to go down to-day 
before daybreak to Manono.  He is a very capable, energetic 
man; if he had only come ten days ago, all this would have 
gone by; but now the questions are thick and difficult.  (1) 
Will Mataafa surrender?  (2) Will his people allow themselves 
to be disarmed?  (3) What will happen to them if they do?  
(4) What will any of them believe after former deceptions?  
The three consuls were scampering on horseback to Leulumoega 
to the King; no Cusack-Smith, without whose accession I could 
not send a letter to Mataafa.  I rode up here, wrote my 
letter in the sweat of the concordance and with the able-
bodied help of Lloyd - and dined.  Then down in continual 
showers and pitchy darkness, and to Cusack-Smith's; not re-
returned.  Back to the inn for my horse, and to C.-S.'s, when 
I find him just returned and he accepts my letter.  Thence 
home, by 12.30, jolly tired and wet.  And to-day have been in 
a crispation of energy and ill-temper, raking my wretched 
mail together.  It is a hateful business, waiting for the 
news; it may come to a fearful massacre yet. - Yours ever,

R. L. S.



CHAPTER XXXII



AUGUST, 1893.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - Quite impossible to write.  Your letter is 
due to-day; a nasty, rainy-like morning with huge blue 
clouds, and a huge indigo shadow on the sea, and my lamp 
still burning at near 7.  Let me humbly give you news.  Fanny 
seems on the whole the most, or the only, powerful member of 
the family; for some days she has been the Flower of the 
Flock.  Belle is begging for quinine.  Lloyd and Graham have 
both been down with 'belly belong him' (Black Boy speech).  
As for me, I have to lay aside my lawn tennis, having (as was 
to be expected) had a smart but eminently brief hemorrhage.  
I am also on the quinine flask.  I have been re-casting the 
beginning of the HANGING JUDGE or WEIR OF HERMISTON; then I 
have been cobbling on my grandfather, whose last chapter 
(there are only to be four) is in the form of pieces of 
paper, a huge welter of inconsequence, and that glimmer of 
faith (or hope) which one learns at this trade, that somehow 
and some time, by perpetual staring and glowering and 
rewriting, order will emerge.  It is indeed a queer hope; 
there is one piece for instance that I want in - I cannot put 
it one place for a good reason - I cannot put it another for 
a better - and every time I look at it, I turn sick and put 
the Ms. away.

Well, your letter hasn't come, and a number of others are 
missing.  It looks as if a mail-bag had gone on, so I'll 
blame nobody, and proceed to business.

It looks as if I was going to send you the first three 
chapters of my Grandfather. . . .  If they were set up, it 
would be that much anxiety off my mind.  I have a strange 
feeling of responsibility, as if I had my ancestors' SOULS in 
my charge, and might miscarry with them.

There's a lot of work gone into it, and a lot more is needed.  
Still Chapter I. seems about right to me, and much of Chapter 
II.  Chapter III. I know nothing of, as I told you.  And 
Chapter IV. is at present all ends and beginnings; but it can 
be pulled together.

This is all I have been able to screw up to you for this 
month, and I may add that it is not only more than you 
deserve, but just about more than I was equal to.  I have 
been and am entirely useless; just able to tinker at my 
Grandfather.  The three chapters - perhaps also a little of 
the fourth - will come home to you next mail by the hand of 
my cousin Graham Balfour, a very nice fellow whom I recommend 
to you warmly - and whom I think you will like.  This will 
give you time to consider my various and distracted schemes.

All our wars are over in the meantime, to begin again as soon 
as the war-ships leave.  Adieu.

R. L. S.



CHAPTER XXXIII



23RD AUGUST.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - Your pleasing letter RE THE EBB TIDE, to 
hand.  I propose, if it be not too late, to delete Lloyd's 
name.  He has nothing to do with the last half.  The first we 
wrote together, as the beginning of a long yarn.  The second 
is entirely mine; and I think it rather unfair on the young 
man to couple his name with so infamous a work.  Above all, 
as you had not read the two last chapters, which seem to me 
the most ugly and cynical of all.

You will see that I am not in a good humour; and I am not.  
It is not because of your letter, but because of the 
complicated miseries that surround me and that I choose to 
say nothing of.  Life is not all Beer and Skittles.  The 
inherent tragedy of things works itself out from white to 
black and blacker, and the poor things of a day look ruefully 
on.  Does it shake my cast-iron faith?  I cannot say it does.  
I believe in an ultimate decency of things; ay, and if I woke 
in hell, should still believe it!  But it is hard walking, 
and I can see my own share in the missteps, and can bow my 
head to the result, like an old, stern, unhappy devil of a 
Norseman, as my ultimate character is. . . .

Well, IL FAUT CULTIVER SON JARDIN.  That last expression of 
poor, unhappy human wisdom I take to my heart and go to ST. 
IVES.


24th AUG.


And did, and worked about 2 hours and got to sleep ultimately 
and 'a' the clouds has blawn away.'  'Be sure we'll have some 
pleisand weather, When a' the clouds (storms?) has blawn 
(gone?) away.'  Verses that have a quite inexplicable 
attraction for me, and I believe had for Burns.  They have no 
merit, but are somehow good.  I am now in a most excellent 
humour.

I am deep in ST. IVES which, I believe, will be the next 
novel done.  But it is to be clearly understood that I 
promise nothing, and may throw in your face the very last 
thing you expect - or I expect.  ST. IVES will (to my mind) 
not be wholly bad.  It is written in rather a funny style; a 
little stilted and left-handed; the style of St. Ives; also, 
to some extent, the style of R. L. S. dictating.  ST.  IVES 
is unintellectual and except as an adventure novel, dull.  
But the adventures seem to me sound and pretty probable; and 
it is a love story.  Speed his wings!


SUNDAY NIGHT.


DE COEUR UN PEU PLUS DISPOS, MONSIEUR ET CHER CONFRERE, JE ME 
REMETS A VOUS ECRIRE.  ST. IVES is now in the 5th chapter 
copying; in the 14th chapter of the dictated draft.  I do not 
believe I shall end by disliking it.


MONDAY.


Well, here goes again for the news.  Fanny is VERY WELL 
indeed, and in good spirits; I am in good spirits but not 
VERY well; Lloyd is in good spirits and very well; Belle has 
a real good fever which has put her pipe out wholly.  Graham 
goes back this mail.  He takes with him three chapters of THE 
FAMILY, and is to go to you as soon as he can.  He cannot be 
much the master of his movements, but you grip him when you 
can and get all you can from him, as he has lived about six 
months with us and he can tell you just what is true and what 
is not - and not the dreams of dear old Ross.  He is a good 
fellow, is he not?

Since you rather revise your views of THE EBB TIDE, I think 
Lloyd's name might stick, but I'll leave it to you.  I'll 
tell you just how it stands.  Up to the discovery of the 
champagne, the tale was all planned between us and drafted by 
Lloyd; from that moment he has had nothing to do with it 
except talking it over.  For we changed our plan, gave up the 
projected Monte Cristo, and cut it down for a short story.  
My jmpression - (I beg your pardon - this is a local joke - a 
firm here had on its beer labels, 'sole jmporters') - is that 
it will never be popular, but might make a little SUCCES DE 
SCANDALE.  However, I'm done with it now, and not sorry, and 
the crowd may rave and mumble its bones for what I care.

Hole essential.  I am sorry about the maps; but I want 'em 
for next edition, so see and have proofs sent.  You are quite 
right about the bottle and the great Huish, I must try to 
make it clear.  No, I will not write a play for Irving nor 
for the devil.  Can you not see that the work of 
FALSIFICATION which a play demands is of all tasks the most 
ungrateful?  And I have done it a long while - and nothing 
ever came of it.

Consider my new proposal, I mean Honolulu.  You would get the 
Atlantic and the Rocky Mountains, would you not? for bracing.  
And so much less sea!  And then you could actually see 
Vailima, which I WOULD like you to, for it's beautiful and my 
home and tomb that is to be; though it's a wrench not to be 
planted in Scotland - that I can never deny - if I could only 
be buried in the hills, under the heather and a table 
tombstone like the martyrs, where the whaups and plovers are 
crying!  Did you see a man who wrote the STICKIT MINISTER, 
and dedicated it to me, in words that brought the tears to my 
eyes every time I looked at them, 'Where about the graves of 
the martyrs the whaups are crying.  HIS heart remembers how.'  
Ah, by God, it does!  Singular that I should fulfil the Scots 
destiny throughout, and live a voluntary exile, and have my 
head filled with the blessed, beastly place all the time!

And now a word as regards the delusions of the dear Ross, who 
remembers, I believe, my letters and Fanny's when we were 
first installed, and were really hoeing a hard row.  We have 
salad, beans, cabbages, tomatoes, asparagus, kohl-rabi, 
oranges, limes, barbadines, pine-apples, Cape gooseberries - 
galore; pints of milk and cream; fresh meat five days a week.  
It is the rarest thing for any of us to touch a tin; and the 
gnashing of teeth when it has to be done is dreadful - for no 
one who has not lived on them for six months knows what the 
Hatred of the Tin is.  As for exposure, my weakness is 
certainly the reverse; I am sometimes a month without leaving 
the verandah - for my sins, be it said!  Doubtless, when I go 
about and, as the Doctor says, 'expose myself to malaria,' I 
am in far better health; and I would do so more too - for I 
do not mean to be silly - but the difficulties are great.  
However, you see how much the dear Doctor knows of my diet 
and habits!  Malaria practically does not exist in these 
islands; it is a negligeable quantity.  What really bothers 
us a little is the mosquito affair - the so-called 
elephantiasis - ask Ross about it.  A real romance of natural 
history, QUOI!

Hi! stop! you say THE EBB TIDE is the 'working out of an 
artistic problem of a kind.'  Well, I should just bet it was!  
You don't like Attwater.  But look at my three rogues; 
they're all there, I'll go bail.  Three types of the bad man, 
the weak man, and the strong man with a weakness, that are 
gone through and lived out.

Yes, of course I was sorry for Mataafa, but a good deal 
sorrier and angrier about the mismanagement of all the white 
officials.  I cannot bear to write about that.  Manono all 
destroyed, one house standing in Apolima, the women stripped, 
the prisoners beaten with whips - and the women's heads taken 
- all under white auspices.  And for upshot and result of so 
much shame to the white powers - Tamasese already conspiring! 
as I knew and preached in vain must be the case!  Well, well, 
it is no fun to meddle in politics!

I suppose you're right about Simon.  But it is Symon 
throughout in that blessed little volume my father bought for 
me in Inverness in the year of grace '81, I believe - the 
trial of James Stewart, with the Jacobite pamphlet and the 
dying speech appended - out of which the whole of Davie has 
already been begotten, and which I felt it a kind of loyalty 
to follow.  I really ought to have it bound in velvet and 
gold, if I had any gratitude! and the best of the lark is, 
that the name of David Balfour is not anywhere within the 
bounds of it.

A pretty curious instance of the genesis of a book.  I am 
delighted at your good word for DAVID; I believe the two 
together make up much the best of my work and perhaps of what 
is in me.  I am not ashamed of them, at least.  There is one 
hitch; instead of three hours between the two parts, I fear 
there have passed three years over Davie's character; but do 
not tell anybody; see if they can find it out for themselves; 
and no doubt his experiences in KIDNAPPED would go far to 
form him.  I would like a copy to go to G. Meredith.


WEDNESDAY.


Well, here is a new move.  It is likely I may start with 
Graham next week and go to Honolulu to meet the other steamer 
and return: I do believe a fortnight at sea would do me good; 
yet I am not yet certain.  The crowded UP-steamer sticks in 
my throat.


TUESDAY, 12TH SEPT.


Yesterday was perhaps the brightest in the annals of Vailima.  
I got leave from Captain Bickford to have the band of the 
KATOOMBA come up, and they came, fourteen of 'em, with drum, 
fife, cymbals and bugles, blue jackets, white caps, and 
smiling faces.  The house was all decorated with scented 
greenery above and below.  We had not only our own nine out-
door workers, but a contract party that we took on in charity 
to pay their war-fine; the band besides, as it came up the 
mountain, had collected a following of children by the way, 
and we had a picking of Samoan ladies to receive them.  
Chicken, ham, cake, and fruits were served out with coffee 
and lemonade, and all the afternoon we had rounds of claret 
negus flavoured with rum and limes.  They played to us, they 
danced, they sang, they tumbled.  Our boys came in the end of 
the verandah and gave THEM a dance for a while.  It was 
anxious work getting this stopped once it had begun, but I 
knew the band was going on a programme.  Finally they gave 
three cheers for Mr. and Mrs. Stevens, shook hands, formed up 
and marched off playing - till a kicking horse in the paddock 
put their pipes out something of the suddenest - we thought 
the big drum was gone, but Simele flew to the rescue.  And so 
they wound away down the hill with ever another call of the 
bugle, leaving us extinct with fatigue, but perhaps the most 
contented hosts that ever watched the departure of successful 
guests.  Simply impossible to tell how well these blue-
jackets behaved; a most interesting lot of men; this 
education of boys for the navy is making a class, wholly 
apart - how shall I call them? - a kind of lower-class public 
school boy, well-mannered, fairly intelligent, sentimental as 
a sailor.  What is more shall be writ on board ship if 
anywhere.

Please send CATRIONA to G. Meredith.


S. S. MARIPOSA.


To-morrow I reach Honolulu.  Good-morning to your honour.  R. 
L. S.



CHAPTER XXXIV



WAIKIKI, HONOLULU, H. 1.
OCT. 23rd, 1893.


DEAR COLVIN, - My wife came up on the steamer and we go home 
together in 2 days.  I am practically all right, only sleepy 
and tired easily, slept yesterday from 11 to 11.45, from 1 to 
2.50, went to bed at 8 P.M., and with an hour's interval 
slept till 6 A.M., close upon 14 hours out of the 24.  We 
sail to-morrow.  I am anxious to get home, though this has 
been an interesting visit, and politics have been curious 
indeed to study.  We go to P.P.C. on the 'Queen' this 
morning; poor, recluse lady, ABREUVEE D'INJURES QU'ELLE EST.  
Had a rather annoying lunch on board the American man-of-war, 
with a member of the P.G. (provincial government); and a good 
deal of anti-royalist talk, which I had to sit out - not only 
for my host's sake, but my fellow guests.  At last, I took 
the lead and changed the conversation.

R. L. S.

I am being busted here by party named Hutchinson.  Seems 
good.


[VAILIMA - NOVEMBER.]


Home again, and found all well, thank God.  I am perfectly 
well again and ruddier than the cherry.  Please note that 
8000 is not bad for a volume of short stories; the MERRY MEN 
did a good deal worse; the short story never sells.  I hope 
CATRIONA will do; that is the important.  The reviews seem 
mixed and perplexed, and one had the peculiar virtue to make 
me angry.  I am in a fair way to expiscate my family history.  
Fanny and I had a lovely voyage down, with our new C. J. and 
the American Land Commissioner, and on the whole, and for 
these disgusting steamers, a pleasant ship's company.  I 
cannot understand why you don't take to the Hawaii scheme.  
Do you understand?  You cross the Atlantic in six days, and 
go from 'Frisco to Honolulu in seven.  Thirteen days at sea 
IN ALL. - I have no wish to publish THE EBB TIDE as a book, 
let it wait.  It will look well in the portfolio.  I would 
like a copy, of course, for that end; and to 'look upon't 
again' - which I scarce dare.


[LATER.]


This is disgraceful.  I have done nothing; neither work nor 
letters.  On the Me (May) day, we had a great triumph; our 
Protestant boys, instead of going with their own villages and 
families, went of their own accord in the Vailima uniform; 
Belle made coats for them on purpose to complete the uniform, 
they having bought the stuff; and they were hailed as they 
marched in as the Tama-ona - the rich man's children.  This 
is really a score; it means that Vailima is publicly taken as 
a family.  Then we had my birthday feast a week late, owing 
to diarrhoea on the proper occasion.  The feast was laid in 
the Hall, and was a singular mass of food: 15 pigs, 100 lbs. 
beef, 100 lbs. pork, and the fruit and filigree in a 
proportion.  We had sixty horse-posts driven in the gate 
paddock; how many guests I cannot guess, perhaps 150.  They 
came between three and four and left about seven.  Seumanu 
gave me one of his names; and when my name was called at the 
ava drinking, behold, it was AU MAI TAUA MA MANU-VAO!  You 
would scarce recognise me, if you heard me thus referred to!

Two days after, we hired a carriage in Apia, Fanny, Belle, 
Lloyd and I, and drove in great style, with a native 
outrider, to the prison; a huge gift of ava and tobacco under 
the seats.  The prison is now under the PULE of an Austrian, 
Captain Wurmbrand, a soldier of fortune in Servia and Turkey, 
a charming, clever, kindly creature, who is adored by 'HIS 
chiefs' (as he calls them) meaning OUR political prisoners.  
And we came into the yard, walled about with tinned iron, and 
drank ava with the prisoners and the captain.  It may amuse 
you to hear how it is proper to drink ava.  When the cup is 
handed you, you reach your arm out somewhat behind you, and 
slowly pour a libation, saying with somewhat the manner of 
prayer, 'IA TAUMAFA E LE ATUA.  UA MATAGOFIE LE FESILAFAIGA 
NEI.'  'Be it (high-chief) partaken of by the God.  How (high 
chief) beautiful to view is this (high chief) gathering.'  
This pagan practice is very queer.  I should say that the 
prison ava was of that not very welcome form that we 
elegantly call spit-ava, but of course there was no escape, 
and it had to be drunk.  Fanny and I rode home, and I 
moralised by the way.  Could we ever stand Europe again? did 
she appreciate that if we were in London, we should be 
ACTUALLY JOSTLED in the street? and there was nobody in the 
whole of Britain who knew how to take ava like a gentleman?  
'Tis funny to be thus of two civilisations - or, if you like, 
of one civilisation and one barbarism.  And, as usual, the 
barbarism is the more engaging.

Colvin, you have to come here and see us in our { native / 
mortal } spot.  I just don't seem to be able to make up my 
mind to your not coming.  By this time, you will have seen 
Graham, I hope, and he will be able to tell you something 
about us, and something reliable, I shall feel for the first 
time as if you knew a little about Samoa after that.  Fanny 
seems to be in the right way now.  I must say she is very, 
very well for her, and complains scarce at all.  Yesterday, 
she went down SOLA (at least accompanied by a groom) to pay a 
visit; Belle, Lloyd and I went a walk up the mountain road - 
the great public highway of the island, where you have to go 
single file.  The object was to show Belle that gaudy valley 
of the Vaisigano which the road follows.  If the road is to 
be made and opened, as our new Chief Justice promises, it 
will be one of the most beautiful roads in the world.  But 
the point is this: I forgot I had been three months in 
civilisation, wearing shoes and stockings, and I tell you I 
suffered on my soft feet; coming home, down hill, on that 
stairway of loose stones, I could have cried.  O yes, another 
story, I knew I had.  The house boys had not been behaving 
well, so the other night I announced a FONO, and Lloyd and I 
went into the boys' quarters, and I talked to them I suppose 
for half an hour, and Talolo translated; Lloyd was there 
principally to keep another ear on the interpreter; else 
there may be dreadful misconceptions.  I rubbed all their 
ears, except two whom I particularly praised; and one man's 
wages I announced I had cut down by one half.  Imagine his 
taking this smiling!  Ever since, he has been specially 
attentive and greets me with a face of really heavenly 
brightness.  This is another good sign of their really and 
fairly accepting me as a chief.  When I first came here, if I 
had fined a man a sixpence, he would have quit work that 
hour, and now I remove half his income, and he is glad to 
stay on - nay, does not seem to entertain the possibility of 
leaving.  And this in the face of one particular difficulty - 
I mean our house in the bush, and no society, and no women 
society within decent reach.

I think I must give you our staff in a tabular form.


HOUSE.

+ o SOSIMO, provost and butler, and my valet.

o MISIFOLO, who is Fanny and Belle's chamberlain.

KITCHEN

+ o TALOLO, provost and chief cook.

+ o IOPU, second cook.

TALI, his wife, no wages.

TI'A, Samoan cook.

FEILOA'I, his child, no wages, likewise no work - Belle's 
pet.

+ o LEUELU, Fanny's boy, gardener, odd jobs.

IN APIA.

+ ELIGA, washman and daily errand man.

OUTSIDE.

+ o HENRY SIMELE, provost and overseas of outside boys.

LU.

TASI SELE.

MAIELE.

PULU, who is also our talking man and cries the ava.


The crosses mark out the really excellent boys.  Ti'a is the 
man who has just been fined half his wages; he is a beautiful 
old man, the living image of 'Fighting Gladiator,' my 
favourite statue - but a dreadful humbug.  I think we keep 
him on a little on account of his looks.  This sign o marks 
those who have been two years or upwards in the family.  I 
note all my old boys have the cross of honour, except 
Misifolo; well, poor dog, he does his best, I suppose.  You 
should see him scour.  It is a remark that has often been 
made by visitors: you never see a Samoan run, except at 
Vailima.  Do you not suppose that makes me proud?

I am pleased to see what a success THE WRECKER was, having 
already in little more than a year outstripped THE MASTER OF 
BALLANTRAE.

About DAVID BALFOUR in two volumes, do see that they make it 
a decent-looking book, and tell me, do you think a little 
historical appendix would be of service?  Lang bleats for 
one, and I thought I might address it to him as a kind of 
open letter.


DEC. 4TH.


No time after all.  Good-bye.

R. L S.



CHAPTER XXXV



MY DEAR COLVIN, - One page out of my picture book I must give 
you.  Fine burning day; half past two P.M.  We four begin to 
rouse up from reparatory slumbers, yawn, and groan, get a cup 
of tea, and miserably dress: we have had a party the day 
before, X'mas Day, with all the boys absent but one, and 
latterly two; we had cooked all day long, a cold dinner, and 
lo! at two our guests began to arrive, though dinner was not 
till six; they were sixteen, and fifteen slept the night and 
breakfasted.  Conceive, then, how unwillingly we climb on our 
horses and start off in the hottest part of the afternoon to 
ride 4 and a half miles, attend a native feast in the gaol, 
and ride four and a half miles back.  But there is no help 
for it.  I am a sort of father of the political prisoners, 
and have CHARGE D'AMES in that riotously absurd 
establishment, Apia Gaol.  The twenty-three (I think it is) 
chiefs act as under gaolers.  The other day they told the 
Captain of an attempt to escape.  One of the lesser political 
prisoners the other day effected a swift capture, while the 
Captain was trailing about with the warrant; the man came to 
see what was wanted; came, too, flanked by the former gaoler; 
my prisoner offers to show him the dark cell, shoves him in, 
and locks the door.  'Why do you do that?' cries the former 
gaoler.  'A warrant,' says he.  Finally, the chiefs actually 
feed the soldiery who watch them!

The gaol is a wretched little building, containing a little 
room, and three cells, on each side of a central passage; it 
is surrounded by a fence of corrugated iron, and shows, over 
the top of that, only a gable end with the inscription O LE 
FALE PUIPUI.  It is on the edge of the mangrove swamp, and is 
reached by a sort of causeway of turf.  When we drew near, we 
saw the gates standing open and a prodigious crowd outside - 
I mean prodigious for Apia, perhaps a hundred and fifty 
people.  The two sentries at the gate stood to arms 
passively, and there seemed to be a continuous circulation 
inside and out.  The captain came to meet us; our boy, who 
had been sent ahead was there to take the horses; and we 
passed inside the court which was full of food, and rang 
continuously to the voice of the caller of gifts; I had to 
blush a little later when my own present came, and I heard my 
one pig and eight miserable pine-apples being counted out 
like guineas.  In the four corners of the yard and along one 
wall, there are make-shift, dwarfish, Samoan houses or huts, 
which have been run up since Captain Wurmbrand came to 
accommodate the chiefs.  Before that they were all crammed 
into the six cells, and locked in for the night, some of them 
with dysentery.  They are wretched constructions enough, but 
sanctified by the presence of chiefs.  We heard a man 
corrected loudly to-day for saying 'FALE' of one of them; 
'MAOTA,' roared the highest chief present - 'palace.'  About 
eighteen chiefs, gorgeously arrayed, stood up to greet us, 
and led us into one of these MAOTAS, where you may be sure we 
had to crouch, almost to kneel, to enter, and where a row of 
pretty girls occupied one side to make the ava (kava).  The 
highest chief present was a magnificent man, as high chiefs 
usually are; I find I cannot describe him; his face is full 
of shrewdness and authority; his figure like Ajax; his name 
Auilua.  He took the head of the building and put Belle on 
his right hand.  Fanny was called first for the ava (kava).  
Our names were called in English style, the high-chief wife 
of Mr. St- (an unpronounceable something); Mrs. Straw, and 
the like.  And when we went into the other house to eat, we 
found we were seated alternately with chiefs about the - 
table, I was about to say, but rather floor.  Everything was 
to be done European style with a vengeance!  We were the only 
whites present, except Wurmbrand, and still I had no 
suspicion of the truth.  They began to take off their ulas 
(necklaces of scarlet seeds) and hang them about our necks; 
we politely resisted, and were told that the King (who had 
stopped off their SIVA) had sent down to the prison a message 
to the effect that he was to give a dinner to-morrow, and 
wished their second-hand ulas for it.  Some of them were 
content; others not.  There was a ring of anger in the boy's 
voice, as he told us we were to wear them past the King's 
house.  Dinner over, I must say they are moderate eaters at a 
feast, we returned to the ava house; and then the curtain 
drew suddenly up upon the set scene.  We took our seats, and 
Auilua began to give me a present, recapitulating each 
article as he gave it out, with some appropriate comment.  He 
called me several times 'their only friend,' said they were 
all in slavery, had no money, and these things were all made 
by the hands of their families - nothing bought; he had one 
phrase, in which I heard his voice rise up to a note of 
triumph: 'This is a present from the poor prisoners to the 
rich man.'  Thirteen pieces of tapa, some of them 
surprisingly fine, one I think unique; thirty fans of every 
shape and colour; a kava cup, etc., etc.  At first Auilua 
conducted the business with weighty gravity; but before the 
end of the thirty fans, his comments began to be humorous.  
When it came to a little basket, he said: 'Here was a little 
basket for Tusitala to put sixpence in, when he could get 
hold of one' - with a delicious grimace.  I answered as best 
as I was able through a miserable interpreter; and all the 
while, as I went on, I heard the crier outside in the court 
calling my gift of food, which I perceived was to be 
Gargantuan.  I had brought but three boys with me.  It was 
plain that they were wholly overpowered.  We proposed to send 
for our gifts on the morrow; but no, said the interpreter, 
that would never do; they must go away to-day, Mulinuu must 
see my porters taking away the gifts, - 'make 'em jella,' 
quoth the interpreter.  And I began to see the reason of this 
really splendid gift; one half, gratitude to me - one half, a 
wipe at the King.

And now, to introduce darker colours, you must know this 
visit of mine to the gaol was just a little bit risky; we had 
several causes for anxiety; it MIGHT have been put up, to 
connect with a Tamasese rising.  Tusitala and his family 
would be good hostages.  On the other hand, there were the 
Mulinuu people all about.  We could see the anxiety of 
Captain Wurmbrand, no less anxious to have us go, than he had 
been to see us come; he was deadly white and plainly had a 
bad headache, in the noisy scene.  Presently, the noise grew 
uproarious; there was a rush at the gate - a rush in, not a 
rush out - where the two sentries still stood passive; Auilua 
leaped from his place (it was then that I got the name of 
Ajax for him) and the next moment we heard his voice roaring 
and saw his mighty figure swaying to and fro in the hurly-
burly.  As the deuce would have it, we could not understand a 
word of what was going on.  It might be nothing more than the 
ordinary 'grab racket' with which a feast commonly concludes; 
it might be something worse.  We made what arrangements we 
could for my tapa, fans, etc., as well as for my five pigs, 
my masses of fish, taro, etc., and with great dignity, and 
ourselves laden with ulas and other decorations, passed 
between the sentries among the howling mob to our horses.  
All's well that ends well.  Owing to Fanny and Belle, we had 
to walk; and, as Lloyd said, 'he had at last ridden in a 
circus.'  The whole length of Apia we paced our triumphal 
progress, past the King's palace, past the German firm at 
Sogi - you can follow it on the map - amidst admiring 
exclamations of 'MAWAIA' - beautiful - it may be rendered 'O 
my! ain't they dandy' - until we turned up at last into our 
road as the dusk deepened into night.  It was really 
exciting.  And there is one thing sure: no such feast was 
ever made for a single family, and no such present ever given 
to a single white man.  It is something to have been the hero 
of it.  And whatever other ingredients there were, 
undoubtedly gratitude was present.  As money value I have 
actually gained on the transaction!

Your note arrived; little profit, I must say.  Scott has 
already put his nose in, in ST. IVES, sir; but his appearance 
is not yet complete; nothing is in that romance, except the 
story.  I have to announce that I am off work, probably for 
six months.  I must own that I have overworked bitterly - 
overworked - there, that's legible.  My hand is a thing that 
was, and in the meanwhile so are my brains.  And here, in the 
very midst, comes a plausible scheme to make Vailima pay, 
which will perhaps let me into considerable expense just when 
I don't want it.  You know the vast cynicism of my view of 
affairs, and how readily and (as some people say) with how 
much gusto I take the darker view?

Why do you not send me Jerome K. Jerome's paper, and let me 
see THE EBB TIDE as a serial?  It is always very important to 
see a thing in different presentments.  I want every number.  
Politically we begin the new year with every expectation of a 
bust in 2 or 3 days, a bust which may spell destruction to 
Samoa.  I have written to Baxter about his proposal.



CHAPTER XXXVI



VAILIMA,
JAN. 29TH, 1894.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - I had fully intended for your education and 
moral health to fob you off with the meanest possible letter 
this month, and unfortunately I find I will have to treat you 
to a good long account of matters here.  I believe I have 
told you before about Tui-ma-le-alii-fano and my taking him 
down to introduce him to the Chief Justice.  Well, Tui came 
back to Vailima one day in the blackest sort of spirits, 
saying the war was decided, that he also must join in the 
fight, and that there was no hope whatever of success.  He 
must fight as a point of honour for his family and country; 
and in his case, even if he escaped on the field of battle, 
deportation was the least to be looked for.  He said he had a 
letter of complaint from the Great Council of A'ana which he 
wished to lay before the Chief Justice; and he asked me to 
accompany him as if I were his nurse.  We went down about 
dinner time; and by the way received from a lurking native 
the famous letter in an official blue envelope gummed up to 
the edges.  It proved to be a declaration of war, quite 
formal, but with some variations that really made you bounce.  
White residents were directly threatened, bidden to have 
nothing to do with the King's party, not to receive their 
goods in their houses, etc., under pain of an accident.  
However, the Chief Justice took it very wisely and mildly, 
and between us, he and I and Tui made up a plan which has 
proved successful - so far.  The war is over - fifteen chiefs 
are this morning undergoing a curious double process of law, 
comparable to a court martial; in which their complaints are 
to be considered, and if possible righted, while their 
conduct is to be criticised, perhaps punished.  Up to now, 
therefore, it has been a most successful policy; but the 
danger is before us.  My own feeling would decidedly be that 
all would be spoiled by a single execution.  The great hope 
after all lies in the knotless, rather flaccid character of 
the people.  These are no Maoris.  All the powers that 
Cedarcrantz let go by disuse the new C. J. is stealthily and 
boldly taking back again; perhaps some others also.  He has 
shamed the chiefs in Mulinuu into a law against taking heads, 
with a punishment of six years' imprisonment and, for a 
chief, degradation.  To him has been left the sole conduct of 
this anxious and decisive inquiry.  If the natives stand it, 
why, well!  But I am nervous.



CHAPTER XXXVII



FEB. 1894.


DEAR COLVIN, - By a reaction, when your letter is a little 
decent, mine is to be naked and unashamed.  We have been much 
exercised.  No one can prophesy here, of course, and the 
balance still hangs trembling, but I THINK it will go for 
peace.

The mail was very late this time; hence the paltryness of 
this note.  When it came and I had read it, I retired with 
THE EBB TIDE and read it all before I slept.  I did not dream 
it was near as good; I am afraid I think it excellent.  A 
little indecision about Attwater, not much.  It gives me 
great hope, as I see I CAN work in that constipated, mosaic 
manner, which is what I have to do just now with WEIR OF 
HERMISTON.

We have given a ball; I send you a paper describing the 
event.  We have two guests in the house, Captain-Count 
Wurmbrand and Monsieur Albert de Lautreppe.  Lautreppe is 
awfully nice - a quiet, gentlemanly fellow, GONFLE DE REVES, 
as he describes himself - once a sculptor in the atelier of 
Henry Crosse, he knows something of art, and is really a 
resource to me.

Letter from Meredith very kind.  Have you seen no more of 
Graham?

What about my grandfather?  The family history will grow to 
be quite a chapter.

I suppose I am growing sensitive; perhaps, by living among 
barbarians, I expect more civility.  Look at this from the 
author of a very interesting and laudatory critique.  He 
gives quite a false description of something of mine, and 
talks about my 'insolence.' Frankly, I supposed 'insolence' 
to be a tapua word.  I do not use it to a gentleman, I would 
not write it of a gentleman: I may be wrong, but I believe we 
did not write it of a gentleman in old days, and in my view 
he (clever fellow as he is) wants to be kicked for applying 
it to me.  By writing a novel - even a bad one - I do not 
make myself a criminal for anybody to insult.  This may amuse 
you.  But either there is a change in journalism, too gradual 
for you to remark it on the spot, or there is a change in me.  
I cannot bear these phrases; I long to resent them.  My 
forbears, the tenant farmers of the Mains, would not have 
suffered such expressions unless it had been from Cauldwell, 
or Rowallan, or maybe Auchendrane.  My Family Pride bristles.  
I am like the negro, 'I just heard last night' who my great, 
great, great, great grandfather was. - Ever yours,

R. L. S.



CHAPTER XXXVIII



MARCH 1894.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - This is the very day the mail goes, and I 
have as yet written you nothing.  But it was just as well - 
as it was all about my 'blacks and chocolates,' and what of 
it had relation to whites you will read some of in the TIMES.  
It means, as you will see, that I have at one blow quarrelled 
with all the officials of Samoa, the Foreign Office, and I 
suppose her Majesty the Queen with milk and honey blest.  But 
you'll see in the TIMES.  I am very well indeed, but just 
about dead and mighty glad the mail is near here, and I can 
just give up all hope of contending with my letters, and lie 
down for the rest of the day.  These TIMES letters are not 
easy to write.  And I dare say the Consuls say, 'Why, then, 
does he write them?'

I had miserable luck with ST. IVES; being already half-way 
through it, a book I had ordered six months ago arrives at 
last, and I have to change the first half of it from top to 
bottom!  How could I have dreamed the French prisoners were 
watched over like a female charity school, kept in a 
grotesque livery, and shaved twice a week?  And I had made 
all my points on the idea that they were unshaved and clothed 
anyhow.  However, this last is better business; if only the 
book had come when I ordered it!  A PROPOS, many of the books 
you announce don't come as a matter of fact.  When they are 
of any value, it is best to register them.  Your letter, 
alas! is not here; I sent it down to the cottage, with all my 
mail, for Fanny; on Sunday night a boy comes up with a 
lantern and a note from Fanny, to say the woods are full of 
Atuas and I must bring a horse down that instant, as the 
posts are established beyond her on the road, and she does 
not want to have the fight going on between us.  Impossible 
to get a horse; so I started in the dark on foot, with a 
revolver, and my spurs on my bare feet, leaving directions 
that the boy should mount after me with the horse.  Try such 
an experience on Our Road once, and do it, if you please, 
after you have been down town from nine o'clock till six, on 
board the ship-of-war lunching, teaching Sunday School (I 
actually do) and making necessary visits; and the Saturday 
before, having sat all day from half past six to half-past 
four, scriving at my TIMES letter.  About half-way up, just 
in fact at 'point' of the outposts, I met Fanny coming up.  
Then all night long I was being wakened with scares that 
really should be looked into, though I KNEW there was nothing 
in them and no bottom to the whole story; and the drums and 
shouts and cries from Tanugamanono and the town keeping up an 
all night corybantic chorus in the moonlight - the moon rose 
late - and the search-light of the war-ship in the harbour 
making a jewel of brightness as it lit up the bay of Apia in 
the distance.  And then next morning, about eight o'clock, a 
drum coming out of the woods and a party of patrols who had 
been in the woods on our left front (which is our true rear) 
coming up to the house, and meeting there another party who 
had been in the woods on our right { front / rear } which is 
Vaea Mountain, and 43 of them being entertained to ava and 
biscuits on the verandah, and marching off at last in single 
file for Apia.  Briefly, it is not much wonder if your letter 
and my whole mail was left at the cottage, and I have no 
means of seeing or answering particulars.

The whole thing was nothing but a bottomless scare; it was 
OBVIOUSLY so; you couldn't make a child believe it was 
anything else, but it has made the Consuls sit up.  My own 
private scares were really abominably annoying; as for 
instance after I had got to sleep for the ninth time perhaps 
- and that was no easy matter either, for I had a crick in my 
neck so agonising that I had to sleep sitting up - I heard 
noises as of a man being murdered in the boys' house.  To be 
sure, said I, this is nothing again, but if a man's head was 
being taken, the noises would be the same!  So I had to get 
up, stifle my cries of agony from the crick, get my revolver, 
and creep out stealthily to the boys' house.  And there were 
two of them sitting up, keeping watch of their own accord 
like good boys, and whiling the time over a game of Sweepi 
(Cascino - the whist of our islanders) - and one of them was 
our champion idiot, Misifolo, and I suppose he was holding 
bad cards, and losing all the time - and these noises were 
his humorous protests against Fortune!

Well, excuse this excursion into my 'blacks and chocolates.'  
It is the last.  You will have heard from Lysaght how I 
failed to write last mail.  The said Lysaght seems to me a 
very nice fellow.  We were only sorry he could not stay with 
us longer.  Austin came back from school last week, which 
made a great time for the Amanuensis, you may be sure.  Then 
on Saturday, the CURACOA came in - same commission, with all 
our old friends; and on Sunday, as already mentioned, Austin 
and I went down to service and had lunch afterwards in the 
wardroom.  The officers were awfully nice to Austin; they are 
the most amiable ship in the world; and after lunch we had a 
paper handed round on which we were to guess, and sign our 
guess, of the number of leaves on the pine-apple; I never saw 
this game before, but it seems it is much practised in the 
Queen's Navee.  When all have betted, one of the party begins 
to strip the pine-apple head, and the person whose guess is 
furthest out has to pay for the sherry.  My equanimity was 
disturbed by shouts of THE AMERICAN COMMODORE, and I found 
that Austin had entered and lost about a bottle of sherry!  
He turned with great composure and addressed me.  'I am 
afraid I must look to you, Uncle Louis.'  The Sunday School 
racket is only an experiment which I took up at the request 
of the late American Land Commissioner; I am trying it for a 
month, and if I do as ill as I believe, and the boys find it 
only half as tedious as I do, I think it will end in a month.  
I have CARTE BLANCHE, and say what I like; but does any 
single soul understand me?

Fanny is on the whole very much better.  Lloyd has been under 
the weather, and goes for a month to the South Island of New 
Zealand for some skating, save the mark!  I get all the 
skating I want among officials.

Dear Colvin, please remember that my life passes among my 
'blacks or chocolates.'  If I were to do as you propose, in a 
bit of a tiff, it would cut you off entirely from my life.  
You must try to exercise a trifle of imagination, and put 
yourself, perhaps with an effort, into some sort of sympathy 
with these people, or how am I to write to you?  I think you 
are truly a little too Cockney with me. - Ever yours,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



CHAPTER XXXIX



VAILIMA, MAY 18TH, 1894.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - Your proposals for the Edinburgh edition 
are entirely to my mind.  About the AMATEUR EMIGRANT, it 
shall go to you by this mail well slashed.  If you like to 
slash some more on your own account, I give you permission.  
'Tis not a great work; but since it goes to make up the two 
first volumes as proposed, I presume it has not been written 
in vain. - MISCELLANIES.  I see with some alarm the proposal 
to print JUVENILIA; does it not seem to you taking myself a 
little too much as Grandfather William?  I am certainly not 
so young as I once was - a lady took occasion to remind me of 
the fact no later agone than last night.  'Why don't you 
leave that to the young men, Mr. Stevenson?' said she - but 
when I remember that I felt indignant at even John Ruskin 
when he did something of the kind I really feel myself blush 
from head to heel.  If you want to make up the first volume, 
there are a good many works which I took the trouble to 
prepare for publication and which have never been 
republished.  In addition to ROADS and DANCING CHILDREN, 
referred to by you, there is an Autumn effect in the 
PORTFOLIO, and a paper on FONTAINEBLEAU - FOREST NOTES is the 
name of it - in CORNHILL.  I have no objection to any of 
these being edited, say with a scythe, and reproduced.  But I 
heartily abominate and reject the idea of reprinting the 
PENTLAND RISING.  For God's sake let me get buried first.

TALES AND FANTASIES.  Vols. I. and II. have my hearty 
approval.  But I think III. and IV. had better be crammed 
into one as you suggest.  I will reprint none of the stories 
mentioned.  They are below the mark.  Well, I dare say the 
beastly BODY-SNATCHER has merit, and I am unjust to it from 
my recollections of the PALL MALL.  But the other two won't 
do.  For vols. V. and VI., now changed into IV. and V., I 
propose the common title of SOUTH SEA YARNS.  There!  These 
are all my differences of opinion.  I agree with every detail 
of your arrangement, and, as you see, my objections have 
turned principally on the question of hawking unripe fruit.  
I daresay it is all pretty green, but that is no reason for 
us to fill the barrow with trash.  Think of having a new set 
of type cast, paper especially made, etc., in order to set up 
rubbish that is not fit for the SATURDAY SCOTSMAN.  It would 
be the climax of shame.

I am sending you a lot of verses, which had best, I think, be 
called UNDERWOODS Book III., but in what order are they to 
go?  Also, I am going on every day a little, till I get sick 
of it, with the attempt to get the EMIGRANT compressed into 
life; I know I can - or you can after me - do it.  It is only 
a question of time and prayer and ink, and should leave 
something, no, not good, but not all bad - a very genuine 
appreciation of these folks.  You are to remember besides 
there is that paper of mine on Bunyan in THE MAGAZINE OF ART.  
O, and then there's another thing in SEELEY called some 
spewsome name, I cannot recall it.

Well - come, here goes for JUVENILIA.  DANCING INFANTS, 
ROADS, AN AUTUMN EFFECT, FOREST NOTES (but this should come 
at the end of them, as it's really rather riper), the t'other 
thing from SEELEY, and I'll tell you, you may put in my 
letter to the Church of Scotland - it's not written amiss, 
and I daresay the PHILOSOPHY OF UMBRELLAS might go in, but 
there I stick - and remember THAT was a collaboration with 
James Walter Ferrier.  O, and there was a little skit called 
the CHARITY BAZAAR, which you might see; I don't think it 
would do.  Now, I do not think there are two other words that 
should be printed. - By the way, there is an article of mine 
called THE DAY AFTER TO-MORROW in the CONTEMPORARY which you 
might find room for somewhere; it is no' bad.

Very busy with all these affairs and some native ones also.



CHAPTER XL



VAILIMA, June 18th, 94.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - You are to please understand that my last 
letter is withdrawn unconditionally.  You and Baxter are 
having all the trouble of this Edition, and I simply put 
myself in your hands for you to do what you like with me, and 
I am sure that will be the best, at any rate.  Hence you are 
to conceive me withdrawing all objections to your printing 
anything you please.  After all it is a sort of family 
affair.  About the Miscellany Section, both plans seem to me 
quite good.  Toss up.  I think the OLD GARDENER has to stay 
where I put him last.  It would not do to separate John and 
Robert.

In short, I am only sorry I ever uttered a word about the 
edition, and leave you to be the judge.  I have had a vile 
cold which has prostrated me for more than a fortnight, and 
even now tears me nightly with spasmodic coughs; but it has 
been a great victory.  I have never borne a cold with so 
little hurt; wait till the clouds blow by, before you begin 
to boast!  I have had no fever; and though I've been very 
unhappy, it is nigh over, I think.  Of course, ST. IVES has 
paid the penalty.  I must not let you be disappointed in ST. 
I.  It is a mere tissue of adventures; the central figure not 
very well or very sharply drawn; no philosophy, no destiny, 
to it; some of the happenings very good in themselves, I 
believe, but none of them BILDENDE, none of them 
constructive, except in so far perhaps as they make up a kind 
of sham picture of the time, all in italics and all out of 
drawing.  Here and there, I think, it is well written; and 
here and there it's not.  Some of the episodic characters are 
amusing, I do believe; others not, I suppose.  However, they 
are the best of the thing such as it is.  If it has a merit 
to it, I should say it was a sort of deliberation and swing 
to the style, which seems to me to suit the mail-coaches and 
post-chaises with which it sounds all through.  'Tis my most 
prosaic book.

I called on the two German ships now in port, and we are 
quite friendly with them, and intensely friendly of course 
with our own CURACOAS.  But it is other guess work on the 
beach.  Some one has employed, or subsidised, one of the 
local editors to attack me once a week.  He is pretty 
scurrilous and pretty false.  The first effect of the perusal 
of the weekly Beast is to make me angry; the second is a kind 
of deep, golden content and glory, when I seem to say to 
people: 'See! this is my position - I am a plain man dwelling 
in the bush in a house, and behold they have to get up this 
kind of truck against me - and I have so much influence that 
they are obliged to write a weekly article to say I have 
none.'

By this time you must have seen Lysaght and forgiven me the 
letter that came not at all.  He was really so nice a fellow 
- he had so much to tell me of Meredith - and the time was so 
short - that I gave up the intervening days between mails 
entirely to entertain him.

We go on pretty nicely.  Fanny, Belle, and I have had two 
months alone, and it has been very pleasant.  But by to-
morrow or next day noon, we shall see the whole clan 
assembled again about Vailima table, which will be pleasant 
too; seven persons in all, and the Babel of voices will be 
heard again in the big hall so long empty and silent.  Good-
bye.  Love to all.  Time to close. - Yours ever,

R. L. S.



CHAPTER XLI



JULY, 1894.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - I have to thank you this time for a very 
good letter, and will announce for the future, though I 
cannot now begin to put in practice, good intentions for our 
correspondence.  I will try to return to the old system and 
write from time to time during the month; but truly you did 
not much encourage me to continue!  However, that is all by-
past.  I do not know that there is much in your letter that 
calls for answer.  Your questions about ST. IVES were 
practically answered in my last; so were your wails about the 
edition, AMATEUR EMIGRANT, etc.  By the end of the year ST. 
I. will be practically finished, whatever it be worth, and 
that I know not.  When shall I receive proofs of the MAGNUM 
OPUS? or shall I receive them at all?

The return of the Amanuensis feebly lightens my heart.  You 
can see the heavy weather I was making of it with my unaided 
pen.  The last month has been particularly cheery largely 
owing to the presence of our good friends the CURACOAS.  She 
is really a model ship, charming officers and charming 
seamen.  They gave a ball last month, which was very rackety 
and joyous and naval. . . .

On the following day, about one o'clock, three horsemen might 
have been observed approaching Vailima, who gradually 
resolved themselves into two petty officers and a native 
guide.  Drawing himself up and saluting, the spokesman (a 
corporal of Marines) addressed me thus.  'Me and my shipmates 
inwites Mr. and Mrs. Stevens, Mrs. Strong, Mr. Austin, and 
Mr. Balfour to a ball to be given to-night in the self-same 
'all.'  It was of course impossible to refuse, though I 
contented myself with putting in a very brief appearance.  
One glance was sufficient; the ball went off like a rocket 
from the start.  I had only time to watch Belle careering 
around with a gallant bluejacket of exactly her own height - 
the standard of the British navy - an excellent dancer and 
conspicuously full of small-talk - and to hear a remark from 
a beach-comber, 'It's a nice sight this some way, to see the 
officers dancing like this with the men, but I tell you, sir, 
these are the men that'll fight together!'

I tell you, Colvin, the acquaintance of the men - and boys - 
makes me feel patriotic.  Eeles in particular is a man whom I 
respect.  I am half in a mind to give him a letter of 
introduction to you when he goes home.  In case you feel 
inclined to make a little of him, give him a dinner, ask 
Henry James to come to meet him, etc. - you might let me 
know.  I don't know that he would show his best, but he is a 
remarkably fine fellow, in every department of life.

We have other visitors in port.  A Count Festetics de Solna, 
an Austrian officer, a very pleasant, simple, boyish 
creature, with his young wife, daughter of an American 
millionaire; he is a friend of our own Captain Wurmbrand, and 
it is a great pity Wurmbrand is away.

Glad you saw and liked Lysaght.  He has left in our house a 
most cheerful and pleasing memory, as a good, pleasant, brisk 
fellow with good health and brains, and who enjoys himself 
and makes other people happy.  I am glad he gave you a good 
report of our surroundings and way of life; but I knew he 
would, for I believe he had a glorious time - and gave one.

I am on fair terms with the two Treaty officials, though all 
such intimacies are precarious; with the consuls, I need not 
say, my position is deplorable.  The President (Herr Emil 
Schmidt) is a rather dreamy man, whom I like.  Lloyd, Graham 
and I go to breakfast with him to-morrow; the next day the 
whole party of us lunch on the CURACOA and go in the evening 
to a BIERABEND at Dr. Funk's.  We are getting up a paper-
chase for the following week with some of the young German 
clerks, and have in view a sort of child's party for grown-up 
persons with kissing games, etc., here at Vailima.  Such is 
the gay scene in which we move.  Now I have done something, 
though not as much as I wanted, to give you an idea of how we 
are getting on, and I am keenly conscious that there are 
other letters to do before the mail goes. - Yours ever,

R. L. STEVENSON.



CHAPTER XLII



AUG. 7TH


MY DEAR COLVIN, - This is to inform you, sir, that on Sunday 
last (and this is Tuesday) I attained my ideal here, and we 
had a paper chase in Vailele Plantation, about 15 miles, I 
take it, from us; and it was all that could be wished.  It is 
really better fun than following the hounds, since you have 
to be your own hound, and a precious bad hound I was, 
following every false scent on the whole course to the bitter 
end; but I came in 3rd at the last on my little Jack, who 
stuck to it gallantly, and awoke the praises of some 
discriminating persons.  (5 + 7 + 2.5 = 14.5 miles; yes, that 
is the count.)  We had quite the old sensations of 
exhilaration, discovery, an appeal to a savage instinct; and 
I felt myself about 17 again, a pleasant experience.  
However, it was on the Sabbath Day, and I am now a pariah 
among the English, as if I needed any increment of 
unpopularity.  I must not go again; it gives so much 
unnecessary tribulation to poor people, and, sure, we don't 
want to make tribulation.  I have been forbidden to work, and 
have been instead doing my two or three hours in the 
plantation every morning.  I only wish somebody would pay me 
10 pounds a day for taking care of cacao, and I could leave 
literature to others.  Certainly, if I have plenty of 
exercise, and no work, I feel much better; but there is Biles 
the butcher! him we have always with us.

I do not much like novels, I begin to think, but I am 
enjoying exceedingly Orme's HISTORY OF HINDOSTAN, a lovely 
book in its way, in large quarto, with a quantity of maps, 
and written in a very lively and solid eighteenth century 
way, never picturesque except by accident and from a kind of 
conviction, and a fine sense of order.  No historian I have 
ever read is so minute; yet he never gives you a word about 
the people; his interest is entirely limited in the 
concatenation of events, into which he goes with a lucid, 
almost superhuman, and wholly ghostly gusto.  'By the ghost 
of a mathematician' the book might be announced.  A very 
brave, honest book.

Your letter to hand.

Fact is, I don't like the picter.  O, it's a good picture, 
but if you ASK me, you know, I believe, stoutly believe, that 
mankind, including you, are going mad, I am not in the midst 
with the other frenzy dancers, so I don't catch it wholly; 
and when you show me a thing - and ask me, don't you know - 
Well, well!  Glad to get so good an account of the AMATEUR 
EMIGRANT.  Talking of which, I am strong for making a volume 
out of selections from the South Sea letters; I read over 
again the King of Apemama, and it is good in spite of your 
teeth, and a real curiosity, a thing that can never be seen 
again, and the group is annexed and Tembinoka dead.  I 
wonder, couldn't you send out to me the FIRST five Butaritari 
letters and the Low Archipelago ones (both of which I have 
lost or mislaid) and I can chop out a perfectly fair volume 
of what I wish to be preserved.  It can keep for the last of 
the series.

TRAVELS AND EXCURSIONS, vol. II.  Should it not include a 
paper on S. F. from the MAG. OF ART?  The A. E., the New 
Pacific capital, the Old ditto.  SILVER. SQUAT.  This would 
give all my works on the States; and though it ain't very 
good, it's not so very bad.  TRAVELS AND EXCURSIONS, vol.  
III., to be these resuscitated letters - MISCELLANIES, vol. 
II. - COMME VOUS VOUDREZ, CHER MONSIEUR!


MONDAY, Aug. 13TH


I have a sudden call to go up the coast and must hurry up 
with my information.  There has suddenly come to our naval 
commanders the need of action, they're away up the coast 
bombarding the Atua rebels.  All morning on Saturday the 
sound of the bombardment of Lotuanu'u kept us uneasy.  To-day 
again the big guns have been sounding further along the 
coast.

To-morrow morning early I am off up the coast myself.  
Therefore you must allow me to break off here without further 
ceremony. - Yours ever,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



CHAPTER XLIII



VAILIMA, 1894.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - This must be a very measly letter.  I have 
been trying hard to get along with ST. IVES.  I should now 
lay it aside for a year and I daresay I should make something 
of it after all.  Instead of that, I have to kick against the 
pricks, and break myself, and spoil the book, if there were 
anything to spoil, which I am far from saying.  I'm as sick 
of the thing as ever any one can be; it's a rudderless hulk; 
it's a pagoda, and you can just feel - or I can feel - that 
it might have been a pleasant story, if it had been only 
blessed at baptism.

Our politics have gone on fairly well, but the result is 
still doubtful.


SEPT. 10TH.


I know I have something else to say to you, but unfortunately 
I awoke this morning with collywobbles, and had to take a 
small dose of laudanum with the usual consequences of dry 
throat, intoxicated legs, partial madness and total 
imbecility; and for the life of me I cannot remember what it 
is.  I have likewise mislaid your letter amongst the 
accumulations on my table, not that there was anything in it.  
Altogether I am in a poor state.  I forgot to tell Baxter 
that the dummy had turned up and is a fine, personable-
looking volume and very good reading.  Please communicate 
this to him.

I have just remembered an incident that I really must not let 
pass.  You have heard a great deal more than you wanted about 
our political prisoners.  Well, one day, about a fortnight 
ago, the last of them was set free - Old Poe, whom I think I 
must have mentioned to you, the father-in-law of my cook, was 
one that I had had a great deal of trouble with.  I had taken 
the doctor to see him, got him out on sick leave, and when he 
was put back again gave bail for him.  I must not forget that 
my wife ran away with him out of the prison on the doctor's 
orders and with the complicity of our friend the gaoler, who 
really and truly got the sack for the exploit.  As soon as he 
was finally liberated, Poe called a meeting of his fellow-
prisoners.  All Sunday they were debating what they were to 
do, and on Monday morning I got an obscure hint from Talolo 
that I must expect visitors during the day who were coming to 
consult me.  These consultations I am now very well used to, 
and seeing first, that I generally don't know what to advise, 
and second that they sometimes don't take my advice - though 
in some notable cases they have taken it, generally to my own 
wonder with pretty good results - I am not very fond of these 
calls.  They minister to a sense of dignity, but not peace of 
mind, and consume interminable time always in the morning 
too, when I can't afford it.  However, this was to be a new 
sort of consultation.  Up came Poe and some eight other 
chiefs, squatted in a big circle around the old dining-room 
floor, now the smoking-room.  And the family, being 
represented by Lloyd, Graham, Belle, Austin and myself, 
proceeded to exchange the necessary courtesies.  Then their 
talking man began.  He said that they had been in prison, 
that I had always taken an interest in them, that they had 
now been set at liberty without condition, whereas some of 
the other chiefs who had been liberated before them were 
still under bond to work upon the roads, and that this had 
set them considering what they might do to testify their 
gratitude.  They had therefore agreed to work upon my road as 
a free gift.  They went on to explain that it was only to be 
on my road, on the branch that joins my house with the public 
way.

Now I was very much gratified at this compliment, although 
(to one used to natives) it seemed rather a hollow one.  It 
meant only that I should have to lay out a good deal of money 
on tools and food and to give wages under the guise of 
presents to some workmen who were most of them old and in 
ill-health.  Conceive how much I was surprised and touched 
when I heard the whole scheme explained to me.  They were to 
return to their provinces, and collect their families; some 
of the young men were to live in Apia with a boat, and ply up 
and down the coast to A'ana and A'tua (our own Tuamasaga 
being quite drained of resources) in order to supply the 
working squad with food.  Tools they did ask for, but it was 
especially mentioned that I was to make no presents.  In 
short, the whole of this little 'presentation' to me had been 
planned with a good deal more consideration than goes usually 
with a native campaign.


(I sat on the opposite side of the circle to the talking man.  
His face was quite calm and high-bred as he went through the 
usual Samoan expressions of politeness and compliment, but 
when he came on to the object of their visit, on their love 
and gratitude to Tusitala, how his name was always in their 
prayers, and his goodness to them when they had no other 
friend, was their most cherished memory, he warmed up to 
real, burning, genuine feeling.  I had never seen the Samoan 
mask of reserve laid aside before, and it touched me more 
than anything else.  A.M.)


This morning as ever was, bright and early up came the whole 
gang of them, a lot of sturdy, common-looking lads they 
seemed to be for the most part, and fell to on my new road.  
Old Poe was in the highest of good spirits, and looked better 
in health than he has done any time in two years, being 
positively rejuvenated by the success of his scheme.  He 
jested as he served out the new tools, and I am sorry to say 
damned the Government up hill and down dale, probably with a 
view to show off his position as a friend of the family 
before his work-boys.  Now, whether or not their impulse will 
last them through the road does not matter to me one hair.  
It is the fact that they have attempted it, that they have 
volunteered and are now really trying to execute a thing that 
was never before heard of in Samoa.  Think of it!  It is 
road-making - the most fruitful cause (after taxes) of all 
rebellions in Samoa, a thing to which they could not be wiled 
with money nor driven by punishment.  It does give me a sense 
of having done something in Samoa after all.

Now there's one long story for you about 'my blacks.' - Yours 
ever,

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.



CHAPTER XLIV



VAILIMA, SAMOA,
OCT. 6TH, 1894.


MY DEAR COLVIN, - We have had quite an interesting month and 
mostly in consideration of that road which I think I told you 
was about to be made.  It was made without a hitch, though I 
confess I was considerably surprised.  When they got through, 
I wrote a speech to them, sent it down to a Missionary to be 
translated, and invited the lot to a feast.  I thought a good 
deal of this feast.  The occasion was really interesting.  I 
wanted to pitch it in hot.  And I wished to have as many 
influential witnesses present as possible.  Well, as it drew 
towards the day I had nothing but refusals.  Everybody 
supposed it was to be a political occasion, that I had made a 
hive of rebels up here, and was going to push for new 
hostilities.

The Amanuensis has been ill, and after the above trial 
petered out.  I must return to my own, lone Waverley.  The 
captain refused, telling me why; and at last I had to beat up 
for people almost with prayers.  However, I got a good lot, 
as you will see by the accompanying newspaper report.  The 
road contained this inscription, drawn up by the chiefs 
themselves:


'THE ROAD OF GRATITUDE.'


'Considering the great love of Tusitala in his loving care of 
us in our distress in the prison, we have therefore prepared 
a splendid gift.  It shall never be muddy, it shall endure 
for ever, this road that we have dug.'  This the newspaper 
reporter could not give, not knowing any Samoan.  The same 
reason explains his references to Seumanutafa's speech, which 
was not long and WAS important, for it was a speech of 
courtesy and forgiveness to his former enemies.  It was very 
much applauded.  Secondly, it was not Poe, it was Mataafa 
(don't confuse with Mataafa) who spoke for the prisoners.  
Otherwise it is extremely correct.

I beg your pardon for so much upon my aboriginals.  Even you 
must sympathise with me in this unheard-of compliment, and my 
having been able to deliver so severe a sermon with 
acceptance.  It remains a nice point of conscience what I 
should wish done in the matter.  I think this meeting, its 
immediate results, and the terms of what I said to them, 
desirable to be known.  It will do a little justice to me, 
who have not had too much justice done me.  At the same time, 
to send this report to the papers is truly an act of self-
advertisement, and I dislike the thought.  Query, in a man 
who has been so much calumniated, is that not justifiable?  I 
do not know; be my judge.  Mankind is too complicated for me; 
even myself.  Do I wish to advertise?  I think I do, God help 
me!  I have had hard times here, as every man must have who 
mixes up with public business; and I bemoan myself, knowing 
that all I have done has been in the interest of peace and 
good government; and having once delivered my mind, I would 
like it, I think, to be made public.  But the other part of 
me REGIMBS.

I know I am at a climacteric for all men who live by their 
wits, so I do not despair.  But the truth is I am pretty 
nearly useless at literature, and I will ask you to spare ST. 
IVES when it goes to you; it is a sort of COUNT ROBERT OF 
PARIS.  But I hope rather a DOMBEY AND SON, to be succeeded 
by OUR MUTUAL FRIEND and GREAT EXPECTATIONS and A TALE OF TWO 
CITIES.  No toil has been spared over the ungrateful canvas; 
and it WILL NOT come together, and I must live, and my 
family.  Were it not for my health, which made it impossible, 
I could not find it in my heart to forgive myself that I did 
not stick to an honest, common-place trade when I was young, 
which might have now supported me during these ill years.  
But do not suppose me to be down in anything else; only, for 
the nonce, my skill deserts me, such as it is, or was.  It 
was a very little dose of inspiration, and a pretty little 
trick of style, long lost, improved by the most heroic 
industry.  So far, I have managed to please the journalists.  
But I am a fictitious article and have long known it.  I am 
read by journalists, by my fellow-novelists, and by boys; 
with these, INCIPIT ET EXPLICIT my vogue.  Good thing anyway! 
for it seems to have sold the Edition.  And I look forward 
confidently to an aftermath; I do not think my health can be 
so hugely improved, without some subsequent improvement in my 
brains.  Though, of course, there is the possibility that 
literature is a morbid secretion, and abhors health!  I do 
not think it is possible to have fewer illusions than I.  I 
sometimes wish I had more.  They are amusing.  But I cannot 
take myself seriously as an artist; the limitations are so 
obvious.  I did take myself seriously as a workman of old, 
but my practice has fallen off.  I am now an idler and 
cumberer of the ground; it may be excused to me perhaps by 
twenty years of industry and ill-health, which have taken the 
cream off the milk.

As I was writing this last sentence, I heard the strident 
rain drawing near across the forest, and by the time I was 
come to the word 'cream' it burst upon my roof, and has since 
redoubled, and roared upon it.  A very welcome change.  All 
smells of the good wet earth, sweetly, with a kind of 
Highland touch; the crystal rods of the shower, as I look up, 
have drawn their criss-cross over everything; and a gentle 
and very welcome coolness comes up around me in little 
draughts, blessed draughts, not chilling, only equalising the 
temperature.  Now the rain is off in this spot, but I hear it 
roaring still in the nigh neighbourhood - and that moment, I 
was driven from the verandah by random rain drops, spitting 
at me through the Japanese blinds.  These are not tears with 
which the page is spotted!  Now the windows stream, the roof 
reverberates.  It is good; it answers something which is in 
my heart; I know not what; old memories of the wet moorland 
belike.

Well, it has blown by again, and I am in my place once more, 
with an accompaniment of perpetual dripping on the verandah - 
and very much inclined for a chat.  The exact subject I do 
not know!  It will be bitter at least, and that is strange, 
for my attitude is essentially NOT bitter, but I have come 
into these days when a man sees above all the seamy side, and 
I have dwelt some time in a small place where he has an 
opportunity of reading little motives that he would miss in 
the great world, and indeed, to-day, I am almost ready to 
call the world an error.  Because?  Because I have not 
drugged myself with successful work, and there are all kinds 
of trifles buzzing in my ear, unfriendly trifles, from the 
least to the - well, to the pretty big.  All these that touch 
me are Pretty Big; and yet none touch me in the least, if 
rightly looked at, except the one eternal burthen to go on 
making an income.  If I could find a place where I could lie 
down and give up for (say) two years, and allow the sainted 
public to support me, if it were a lunatic asylum, wouldn't I 
go, just!  But we can't have both extremes at once, worse 
luck!  I should like to put my savings into a proprietarian 
investment, and retire in the meanwhile into a communistic 
retreat, which is double-dealing.  But you men with salaries 
don't know how a family weighs on a fellow's mind.

I hear the article in next week's HERALD is to be a great 
affair, and all the officials who came to me the other day 
are to be attacked!  This is the unpleasant side of being 
(without a salary) in public life; I will leave anyone to 
judge if my speech was well intended, and calculated to do 
good.  It was even daring - I assure you one of the chiefs 
looked like a fiend at my description of Samoan warfare.  
Your warning was not needed; we are all determined to KEEP 
THE PEACE and to HOLD OUR PEACE.  I know, my dear fellow, how 
remote all this sounds!  Kindly pardon your friend.  I have 
my life to live here; these interests are for me immediate; 
and if I do not write of them, I might as soon not write at 
all.  There is the difficulty in a distant correspondence.  
It is perhaps easy for me to enter into and understand your 
interests; I own it is difficult for you; but you must just 
wade through them for friendship's sake, and try to find 
tolerable what is vital for your friend.  I cannot forbear 
challenging you to it, as to intellectual lists.  It is the 
proof of intelligence, the proof of not being a barbarian, to 
be able to enter into something outside of oneself, something 
that does not touch one's next neighbour in the city omnibus.

Good-bye, my lord.  May your race continue and you flourish - 
Yours ever,

TUSITALA.



