
SOLDIERS THREE

by Rudyard Kipling




CONTENTS

"LOVE-O'-WOMEN" - from "Many Inventions"
THE BIG DRUNK DRAF'
THE MUTINY OF THE MAVERICKS
THE MAN WHO WAS
ONLY A SUBALTERN
IN THE MATTER OF A PRIVATE
THE LOST LEGION - from "Many Inventions"
THE DRUMS OF THE FORE AND AFT
JUDSON AND THE EMPIRE - from "Many Inventions"
A CONFERENCE OF THE POWERS - from "Many Inventions"




'LOVE-O'WOMEN'

A lamentable tale of things
Done long ago, and ill done.

The horror, the confusion, and the separation
of the murderer from his comrades were all over before I came.
There remained only on the barrack-square the blood of man calling
from the ground. The hot sun had dried it to a dusky gold-beater-
skin film, cracked lozenge-wise by the heat, and as the wind rose
each lozenge, rising a little, curled up at the edges as if it
were a dumb tongue. Then a heavier gust blew all away down wind in
grains of dark-coloured dust. It was too hot to stand in the
sunshine before breakfast. The men were all in barracks talking
the matter over. A knot of soldiers' wives stood by one of the
entrances to the married quarters, while inside a woman shrieked
and raved with wicked filthy words.

A quiet and well-conducted sergeant had shot down in broad
daylight just after early parade one of his own corporals, had
then returned to barracks and sat on a cot till the guard came for
him. He would, therefore, in due time be handed over to the High
Court for trial. Further, but this he could hardly have considered
in his scheme of revenge, he would horribly upset my work; for the
reporting of the trial would fall on me without a relief. What
that trial would be like I knew even to weariness. There would be
the rifle carefully uncleaned, with the fouling marks about breech
and muzzle, to be sworn to by half a dozen superfluous privates;
there would be heat, reeking heat, till the wet pencil slipped
sideways between the fingers; and the punkah would swish and the
pleaders would jabber in the verandahs, and his Commanding Officer
would put in certificates of the prisoner's moral character, while
the jury would pant and the summer uniforms of the witnesses would
smell of dye and soaps; and some abject barrack-sweeper would lose
his head in cross-examination, and the young barrister who always
defended soldiers' cases for the credit that they never brought
him, would say and do wonderful things, and would then quarrel
with me because I had not reported him correctly. At the last, for
he surely would not be hanged, I might meet the prisoner again,
ruling blank account-forms in the Central Jail, and cheer him with
the hope of a wardership in the Andamans.

The Indian Penal Code and its interpreters do not treat murder,
under any provocation whatever,
in a spirit of jest. Sergeant Raines would be very lucky indeed if
he got off with seven years, I thought. He had slept the night
upon his wrongs, and had killed his man at twenty yards before any
talk was possible. That much I knew. Unless, therefore, the case
was doctored a little, seven years would be his least; and I
fancied it was exceedingly well for Sergeant Raines that he had
been liked by his Company.

That same evening - no day is so long as the day of a murder - I
met Ortheris with the dogs, and he plunged defiantly into the
middle of the matter. "I'll be one o' the witnesses," said he. "I
was in the verandah when Mackie came along. 'E come from Mrs.
Raines's quarters. Quigley, Parsons, an' Trot, they was in the
inside verandah, so they couldn't 'ave 'eard nothing. Sergeant
Raines was in the verandah talkin' to me, an' Mackie 'e come along
acrost the square an' 'e sez, 'Well,' sez 'e, ''ave they pushed
your 'elmet off yet, Sergeant?' 'e sez. An' at that Raines 'e
catches 'is breath an' 'e sez, 'My Gawd, I can't stand this!' sez
'e, an' 'e picks up my rifle an' shoots Mackie. See?"

"But what were you doing with your rifle in the outer verandah an
hour after parade?"

"Cleanin' 'er," said Ortheris, with the sullen brassy stare that
always went with his choice lies.

He might as well have said that he was dancing naked, for at no
time did his rifle need hand or rag on her twenty minutes after
parade. Still the High Court would not know his routine.

"Are you going to stick to that - on the Book?" I asked.

"Yes. Like a bloomin' leech."

"All right, I don't want to know any more. Only remember that
Quigley, Parsons, and Trot couldn't have been where you say
without hearing something; and there's nearly certain to be a
barrack-sweeper who was knocking about the square at the time.
There always is."

"Twasn't the sweeper. It was the beastie. 'E's all right."

Then I knew that there was going to be some spirited doctoring,
and I felt sorry for the Government Advocate who would conduct the
prosecution.

When the trial came on I pitied him more, for he was always quick
to lose his temper, and made a personal matter of each lost cause.
Raines's young barrister had for once put aside his unslaked and
Welling passion for alibis and insanity, had forsworn gymnastics
and fireworks, and worked soberly for his client. Mercifully the
hot weather was yet young, and there had been no flagrant cases of
barrack-shootings up to the time; and the jury was a good one,
even for an Indian jury, where nine men out of every twelve are
accustomed to weighing evidence. Ortheris stood firm and was not
shaken by any cross-examination. The one weak point in his tale -
the presence of his rifle in the outer verandah - went
unchallenged by civilian wisdom, though some of the witnesses
could not help smiling. The Government Advocate called for the
rope; contending throughout
that the murder had been a deliberate one. Time had passed, he
argued, for that reflection which comes so naturally to a man
whose honour is lost. There was also the Law, ever ready and
anxious to right the wrongs of the common soldier if, in deed,
wrong had been done. But he doubted much whether there had been
any sufficient wrong. Causeless suspicion over-long brooded upon
had led, by his theory, to deliberate crime. But his attempts to
minimise the motive failed. The most disconnected witness knew -
had known for weeks - the causes of offence, and the prisoner, who
naturally was the last of all to know, groaned in the
dock while he listened. The one question that the trial circled
round was whether Raines had fired under sudden and blinding
provocation given that very morning, and in the summing up it was
clear that Ortheris's evidence told. He had contrived, most
artistically, to suggest that he personally hated the Sergeant,
who had come into the verandah to give him a talking to for
insubordination. In a weak moment the Government Advocate asked
one question too many, "Beggin' your pardon, sir," Ortheris
replied, "'e was callin' me a dam' impudent little lawyer." The
Court shook. The jury brought it in a killing, but with every
provocation and extenuation known to God or man, and the Judge put
his hand to his brow before giving sentence, and the Adam's apple
in the prisoner's throat went up and down mercury-pumping before a
cyclone.

In consideration of all considerations, from his Commanding
Officer's certificate of good conduct to the sure loss of pension,
service, and honour, the prisoner would get two years, to be
served in India, and - there need be no demonstration in Court.
The Government Advocate scowled and picked up his papers; the
guard wheeled with a clash, and the prisoner was relaxed to the
Secular Arm, and driven to the jail in a broken-down ticca-gharri.

His guard and some ten or twelve military witnesses, being less
important, were ordered to wait till what was officially called
the cool of the evening before marching back to cantonments. They
gathered together in one of the deep red brick verandahs of a
disused lock-up and congratulated Ortheris, who bore his honours
modestly. I sent my work into the office and joined them. Ortheris
watched the Government Advocate driving off lunch.

"That's a nasty little bald-'eaded little butcher, that is," he
said. "'E don't please me. 'E's got a colley dog wot do, though.
I'm goin' up to Murree in a week. That dawg'll bring fifteen
rupees anywheres."

"You had better spend it in Masses," said Terence, unbuckling his
belt, for he had been on the prisoner's guard, standing helmeted
and bolt up right for three long hours.

"Not me," said Ortheris cheerfully. "Gawd'll put it down to B
Comp'ny's barrick damages one o' these days. You look strapped,
Terence."

"Faith, I'm not so young as I was. That guard-mountin' wears on
the sole av the fut, and this" - he sniffed contemptuously at the
brick verandah - "is as hard setting as standin'!"

"Wait a minute. I'll get the cushions out of my cart," I said.

"Strewth - sofies! We're going it gay," said Ortheris, as Terence
dropped himself section by section on the leather cushions, saying
prettily, "May you niver want a soft place wheriver you go, an'
power to share utt wid a frind. Another for yourself? That's good.
It lets me sit long ways. Stanley, pass me a poipe. Augrrh! An'
that's another man gone all to pieces bekaze av a woman. I must
ha' been on forty or fifty prisoners' gyards, first an' last, an'
I hate ut new ivry time."

"Let's see. You were on Losson's, Lancey's, Dugard's, and
Stebbins's, that I can remember," I said.

"Ay, an' before that an' before that - scores av thim," he
answered with a worn smile. "Tis betther to die than to live for
thim, though. Whin Raines comes out - he'll be changin' his kit at
the jail now - he'll think that too. He shud ha' shot himself an'
the woman by rights, an' made a clean bill av all. Now he's left
the woman - she tuk tay wid Dinah Sunday gone last - an' he's left
himself. Mackie's the lucky man."
-
"He's probably getting it hot where he is," I ventured, for I knew
something of the dead Corporal's record.

"Be sure av that," said Terence, spitting over the edge of the
verandah. "But fwhat he'll get there is light marchin'-ordher to
fwhat he'd ha' got here if he'd lived."

"Surely not. He'd have gone on and forgotten like the others."

"Did ye know Mackie well, Sorr?" said Terence.

"He was on the Pattiala guard of honour last winter, and I went
out shooting with him in an ekka for the day, and I found him
rather an amusing man."

"Well, he'll ha' got shut av amusemints, excipt turnin' from wan
side to the other, these few years come. I knew Mackie, an' I've
seen too many to be mistuk in the muster av wan man. He might ha'
gone on an' forgot, as you say, Sorr, but was a man wid an
educashin, an' he used ut for his schames, an' the same educashin,
an' talk an' all that made him able to do fwhat he had a mind to
wid a woman, that same wud turn back again in the long run an'
tear him alive. I can't say fwhat that I mane to say bekaze I
don't know how, but Mackie was the spit an' livin' image av a man
that I saw march the same march all but; an' 'twas worse for him
that he did not come by Mackie's ind. Wait while I remimber now.
'Twas fwhin I was in the Black Tyrone, an' he was drafted us from
Portsmouth; an' fwhat was his misbegotten name? Larry - Larry
Tighe ut was; an' wan of the draft said he was a gentleman ranker,
an' Larry tuk an' three parts killed him for saying so. An' he was
a big man, an' a strong man, an' a handsome man, an' that tells
heavy in practice wid some women, but, takin' thim by an' large,
not wid all. Yet 'twas wid all that Larry dealt - all - for he 'ud
put the comether on any woman that trod the green earth av God,
an' he knew ut. Like Mackie that's roastin' now, he knew ut; an'
niver did he put the comether on any woman save an' excipt for the
black shame. 'Tis not me that shud be talkin', dear knows, dear
knows, but the most av my mis - misalli'nces was for pure devilry,
an' mighty sorry I have been whin harm came; an' time an' again
wid a girl, ay, an' a woman too, for the matter av that, whin I
have seen by the eyes av her that I was makin' more throuble than
I talked, I have hild off an' let be for the sake av the mother
that bore me. But Larry, I'm thinkin', he was suckled by a she-
devil, for he niver let wan go that came nigh to listen to him.
'Twas his business, as if it might ha' bin sinthry-go. He was a
good soldier too. Now there was the Colonel's governess - an' he a
privit too! - that was never known in barricks; an' wan av the
Major's maids, and she was promised to a man; an' some more
outside; an' fwhat ut was amongst us we'll never know till
Judgment Day! 'Twas the nature av the baste to put the comether on
the best av thim - not the prettiest by any manner av manes - but
the like av such woman as you cud lay your band on the Book an'
swear there was niver thought av foolishness in. An' for that very
reason, mark you, he was niver caught. He came close to ut wanst
or twice, but caught he niver was, an' that cost him more at the
ind than the beginnin'. He talked to me more than most, bekaze he
tould me, barrin' the accident av my educashin, I'd ha' been the
same kind av divil he was. 'An' is ut
like,' he wud say, houldin' his head high - 'is ut like that I'd
iver be thrapped? For fwhat am I when all's said an' done?' he
sez. 'A damned privit,' sez he. 'An' is ut like, think you, that
thim I know wud be connect wid a privit like me? Number tin
thousand four hundred an' sivin,' he sez, grinnin'. I knew by the
turn av his spache whin he was not takin' care to talk rough that
he was a gentleman ranker.

I do not undherstan' ut at all,' I sez; 'but I know,' sez I, 'that
the divil looks out av your eyes, an' I'll have no share wid you.
A little fun by way av amusemint where 't will do no harm, Larry,
is right and fair, but I am mistook if 'tis any amusemint to you,'
I sez.

"'You are much mistook,' he sez. 'An' I counsel you not to judge
your betters.'

"'My betthers!' I sez. 'God help you, Larry. There's no betther in
this. 'Tis all bad, as you will find for yoursilf.'

"You're not like me,' he says, tossin' his head.

"'Praise the Saints, I am not,' I sez. 'Fwhat I have done I have
done an' been crool sorry for. Fwhin your time comes,' sez I,
'ye'll remimber fwhat I say.'

"'An' whin that time comes,' sez he, 'I'll come to you for ghostly
consolation, Father Terence,' an' at that he wint off afther some
more divil's business - for to get expayrience, he tould me. He
was wicked - rank wicked - wicked as all Hell! I'm not construct
by nature to go in fear av any man, but, begad, I was afraid av
Larry. He'd come in to barricks wid his cap on three hairs, an'
lie on his cot and stare at the ceilin', and now an' again he'd
fetch a little laugh, the like av a splash in the bottom av a
well, an' by that I knew he was schamin' new wickedness, an' I'd
be afraid. All this was long an' long ago, but ut hild me straight
- for a while.

"I tould you, did I not, Sorr, that I was caressed an' pershuaded
to lave the Tyrone on account av a throuble?"

"Something to do with a belt and a man's head, wasn't it?" Terence
had never given me the exact facts.

"It was. Faith, ivry time I go on prisoner's gyard in coort I
wondher fwhy I am not where the pris'ner is. But the man I struk
tuk it in fair fight, an' he had the good sinse not to die.
Considher now, fwhat wud ha' come to the Arrmy if he had! I was
enthreated to exchange, an' my Commandin' Orf'cer pled wid me. I
wint, not to be disobligin', an' Larry tould me he was powerful
sorry to lose me, though fwhat I'd done to make him sorry I do not
know. So to the Ould Rig'mint I came, lavin' Larry to go to the
divil his own way, an' niver expectin' to see him again except as
a shootin'-case in barricks. . . . Who's
that lavin' the compound?" Terence's quick eye had caught sight of
a white uniform skulking behind hedge.

"The Sergeant's gone visiting," said a voice.

"Thin I command here, an' I will have no
sneakin' away to the bazar, an' huntin' for you wid a pathrol at
midnight. Nalson, for I know ut's you, come back to the verandah."

Nalson, detected, slunk back to his fellows. There was a grumble
that died away in a minute or two, and Terence, turning on the
other side, went on:-

"That was the last I saw av Larry for a while. Exchange is the
same as death for not thinkin', an' by token I married Dinah, an'
that kept me from remimberin' ould times. Thin we wint up to the
Front, an' ut tore my heart in tu to lave
Dinah at the Depot in Pindi. Consequint whin was at the Front I
fought circumspectuous till I warrmed up, an thin I fought double
tides. You remimber fwhat I tould you in the gyard-gate av the
fight at Silver's Theatre."

"Wot's that about Silver's Theayter!" said Ortheris quickly, over
his shoulder.

"Nothin', little man. A tale that ye know. As I was sayin', afther
that fight us av the Ould Rig'mint an' the Tyrone was all mixed
together takin' shtock ay the dead, an' av coorse I wint about to
find if there was any man that remimbered me. The second man I
came acrost - an' how I'd missed him in the fight I do not know -
was Larry, an' a fine man he looked, but oulder, by token that he
had a call to be. 'Larry,' sez I, 'how is ut wid you?'

"'Ye're callin' the wrong man,' he sez, wid his gentleman's smile;
'Larry has been dead these three years. They call him "Love-o'-
Women" now,' he sez. By that I knew the ould divil was in him yet,
but the ind av a fight is no time for the beginnin' av confession,
so we sat down an' talked av times.

"'They tell me you're a married man,' he sez, puffing slow at his
poipe. 'Are ye happy?'

"'I will be whin I get back to Depot,' I sez. ''Tis a
reconnaissance honeymoon now.'

"'I'm married too,' he sez, puffin' slow an' more slow, an'
stopperin' wid his forefinger.

"'Sind you happiness,' I sez. 'That's the best hearin' for a long
time.'

"'Are ye av that opinion?' he sez; an' thin he began talkin' av
the campaign. The sweat av Silver's Theatre was not dhry upon him,
an' he was prayin' for more work. I was well contint to lie and
listen to the cook-pot lids.

"Whin he got up off the ground he shtaggered a little, an' laned
over all twisted.

"'Ye've got more than ye bargained for,' I sez. 'Take an
inventory, Larry. 'Tis like you're hurt.'

"He turned round stiff as a ramrod an' damned the eyes av me up
an' down for an impartinent Irish-faced ape. If that had been in
barricks, I'd ha' stretched him an' no more said; but 'twas at the
Front, an' afther such a fight as Silver's Theatre I knew there
was no callin' a man to account for his timpers. He might as well
ha' kissed me. Aftherwards I was well pleased I kept my fistes
home. Then our Captain Crook - Cruik-na-bul-leen - came up. He'd
been talkin' to the little orf'cer bhoy av the Tyrone. 'We're all
cut to windystraws,' he sez, 'but the Tyrone are damned short for
noncoms. Go you over there, Mulvaney,
an' be Deputy-Sergeant, Corp'ral, Lance, an' everything else ye
can lay hands on till I bid you stop.'

"'I wint over an' tuk hould. There was wan sergeant left standin',
an' they'd pay no heed to him. The remnint was me, an' 'twas high
time I came. Some I talked to, an' some I did not, but before
night the bhoys av the Tyrone stud to attention, begad, if I
sucked on my poipe above a whishper. Betune you an' me an' Bobs, I
was commandin' the company, an' that was what Cruik had
thransferred me for, an' the little orf'cer bhoy knew ut, and I
knew ut, but the comp'ny did not. And there, mark you, is the
vartue that no money an' no dhrill can buy - the vartue av the
ould soldier that knows his orf'cer's work an' does ut - at the
salute!

"Thin the Tyrone, wid the Ould Rig'mint in touch, was sint
maraudin' and prowlin' acrost the hills promishcuous an'
unsatisfactory. 'Tis my privit opinion that a gin'ral does not
know half his time fwhat to do wid three-quarthers his command. So
he shquats on his hunkers an' bids thim run round an' round
forninst him while he considhers on ut. Whin by the process av
nature they get sejuced into a big fight that was none av their
seekin', he sez: 'Obsarve my shuparior janius! I meant ut to come
so.' We ran round an' about, an' all we got was shootin' into the
camp at night, an' rushin' empty sungars wid the long bradawl, an'
bein' hit from behind rocks till we was wore out - all except
Love-o'-Women. That puppy-dog business was mate an' dhrink to him.
Begad, he cud niver get enough av ut. Me well knowin' that it is
just this desultorial campaignin' that kills the best men, an'
suspicionin' that if I was cut the little orf'cer bhoy wud expind
all his men in thryin' to get out, I wud lie most powerful doggo
whin I heard a shot, an' curl my long legs behind a bowlder, an'
run like blazes whin the ground was clear. Faith, if I led the
Tyrone in rethreat wanst I led them forty times. Love-o'-Women wud
stay pottin' an' pottin' from behind a rock, and wait till the
fire was heaviest, an' thin stand up an' fire man-height clear. He
wud lie out in camp too at night snipin' at the shadows, for he
niver tuk a mouthful av slape. My commandin' orf'cer - save his
little soul! - cud not see the beauty av of my strategims, an'
whin the Ould Rig'mint crossed us, an' that was wanst a week, he'd
throt off to Cruik, wid his big blue eyes as round as saucers, an'
lay an information against me. I heard thim wanst talkin' through
the tent-wall, an' I nearly laughed.

"'He runs - runs like a hare,' sez the little orf'cer bhoy. "Tis
demoralisin' my men.'

"'Ye damned little fool,' sez Cruik, laughin'. 'He's larnin' you
your business. Have ye been rushed at night yet?'

"'No,' sez the child, wishful that he had been.

"'Have you any wounded?' sez Cruik.

"'No,' he sez. 'There was no chanst for that. They follow Mulvaney
too quick,' he  sez.

"'Fwhat more do you want, thin?' sez Cruik. 'Terence is bloodin'
you neat an' handy,' he sez. 'He knows fwhat you do not, an'
that's that there's
a time for ivrything. He'll not lead you wrong,' he sez, 'but I'd
give a month's pay to larn fwhat he thinks av you.'

"That	kept the babe quiet, but Love-o'-Women was pokin' at me for
ivrything I did, an' specially my manoeuvres.

"'Mr. Mulvaney,' he sez wan evenin', very contempshus, 'you're
growin' very jeldy wid your feet. Among gentlemen,' he sez, 'among
gentlemen that's called no pretty name.'

"'Among privits 'tis different,' I sez. 'Get back to your tent.
I'm sergeant here,' I sez.

"There was just enough in the voice av me to tell him he was
playin' wid his life betune his teeth. He wint off, an' I noticed
that this man that was contempshus set off from the halt wid a
shunt as tho' he was bein' kicked behind. That same night there
was a Paythan picnic in the hills about, an' firin' into our tents
fit to wake the livin' dead. 'Lie down all,' I sez. 'Lie down an'
kape still. They'll no more than waste ammunition.'

"I heard a man's feet on the ground, an' thin a 'Tini joinin' in
the chorus. I'd been lyin' warm, thinkin' av Dinah an' all, but I
crup out wid the bugle for to look round in case there was a rush,
an' the 'Tini was flashin' at the fore-ind av the camp, an' the
hill near by was fair flickerin' wid long-range fire. Undher the
starlight I beheld Love-o'-Women settin' on a rock wid his belt
and helmet off. He shouted wanst or twice, an' thin I heard him
say: 'They should ha' got the range long ago. Maybe they'll fire
at the flash.' Thin he fired again, an' that dhrew a fresh volley,
and the long slugs that they chew in their teeth came floppin'
among the rocks like tree-toads av a hot night. 'That's better,'
sez Love-o'-Women. 'Oh Lord, how long, how long!' he sez, an' at
that he lit a match an' held ut above his head.

"'Mad,' thinks I, 'mad as a coot,' an' I tuk wan stip
forward, an' the nixt I knew was the sole av my boot flappin' like
a cavalry gydon an' the
-	funny-bone av my toes tinglin'. 'Twas a clane-cut shot - a
slug - that niver touched sock or
hide, but set me bare-fut on the rocks. At that I tuk Love-o'-
Women by the scruff an' threw him under
a bowlder, an' whin I sat down I heard the bullets patterin' on
that good stone.

"'Ye may dhraw your own wicked fire,' I sez, shakin' him, 'but I'm
not goin' to be kilt too.'

"Ye've come too soon,' he sez. 'Ye've come too soon. In another
minute they cud not ha' missed me. Mother av God,' he sez, 'fwhy
did ye not lave me be? Now 'tis all to do again,' an' he hides his
face in his hands.

"'So that's it,' I sez, shakin' him again. 'That's th manin' av
your disobeyin' ordhers.'

"'I dare not kill meself,' he sez, rockin' to and fro. 'My own
hand wud not let me die, and there's not a bullet this month past
wud touch me. I'm to die slow,' he sez. 'I'm to die slow. But I'm
in hell now,' he sez, shriekin' like a woman. 'I'm in hell now!'

"'God be good to us all,' I sez, for I saw his face. 'Will ye tell
a man the throuble. If 'tis not murder, maybe we'll mend it yet.'

"At that he laughed. 'D'you remimber fwhat I said in the Tyrone
barricks about comin' to you for ghostly consolation. I have not
forgot,' he sez. 'That came back, an' the rest av my time is on me
now, Terence. I've fought ut off for months an' months, but the
liquor will not bite any more, Terence,' he sez. 'I can't get
dhrunk.'

"Thin I knew he spoke the truth about bein' in hell, for whin
liquor does not take hould, the sowl av a man is rotten in him.
But me bein' such as I was, fwhat could I say to him?

"'Di'monds an' pearls,' he begins again. 'Di'monds and pearls I
have thrown away wid both hands - an' fwhat have I left? Oh, fwhat
have I left?'

"He was shakin' an' thremblin' up against my shouldher, an' the
slugs was singin' overhead, an' I was wonderin' whether my little
bhoy wud have sinse enough to kape his men quiet through all this
firin'.

"'So long as I did not think,' sez Love-o'-Women, 'so long I did
not see - I wud not see - but I can now, what I've lost. The time
an' the place,' he sez, 'an' the very words I said whin ut pleased
me to go off alone to hell. But thin, even thin,' he sez,
wrigglin' tremenjus, 'I wud not ha' been happy. There was too much
behind av me. How cud I ha' believed her sworn oath - me that have
bruk mine again an' again for the sport av seein' thim cry. An'
there are the  others,' he sez. 'Oh, what will I do - what will I
do'?' He rocked back an' forward again, an' I think he was cryin'
like wan av the women he dealt wid.

"The full half av fwhat he said was Brigade Ordhers to me, but
from the rest an' the remnint I suspicioned somethin' av his
throuble. 'Twas the judgmint av God had grup the heel av him, as I
tould him 'twould in the Tyrone barricks. The slugs was singin'
over our rock more an' more, an' I sez for to divart him: 'Let bad
alone,' I sez. 'They'll be thryin' to rush the camp in a minut'.'

"I had no more than said that whin a Paythan man crep' up on his
belly wid his knife betune his teeth, not twinty yards from us.
Love-o'-Women jumped up an' fetched a yell, an' the man saw him
an' ran at him (he'd left his rifle under the rock) wid the knife.
Love-o'-Women niver turned a hair, but by the Living Power, for I
saw ut, a stone twisted under the Paythan man's feet an' he came
down full sprawl, an' his knife wint tinklin' acrost the rocks! 'I
tould you I was Cain,' sez Love-o'-Women.' 'Fwhat's the use av
killin' him? He's an honest man - by compare.'

"I was not dishputin' about the morils av Paythans that tide, so I
dhropped Love-o'-Women's burt acrost the man's face, an' 'Hurry
into camp,' I sez, 'for this may be the first av a rush.'

"There was no rush afther all, though we waited undher arms to
give thim a chanst. The Paythan man must ha' come alone for the
mischief, an' afther a while Love-o'-Women wint back to his tint
wid that quare lurchin' sind-off in his walk that I cud niver
undherstand. Begad, I pitied him, an' the more bekaze he made me
think for the rest av the night av the day whin I was confirmed
Corp'ril, not actin' Lef'tenant, an' my thoughts was not good.

"Ye can undherstand that afther that night we came to talkin' a
dale together, an' bit by bit ut came out fwhat I'd suspicioned.
The whole av his carr'in's on an' divilmints had come back on him
hard as liquor comes back whin you've been on the dhrink for a
wake. All he'd said an' all he'd done, an' only he cud tell how
much that was, come back, an' there was niver a minut's peace in
his sowl. 'Twas the Horrors widout any cause to see, an' yet, an'
yet - fwhat am I talkin' av? He'd ha' taken the Horrors wid
thankfulness. Beyon' the repentince av the man, an' that was
beyon' the natur av man - awful, awful, to behould! - there was
more that was worst than any repentince. Av the scores an' scores
that he called over in his mind (an' they were dhrivin' him mad),
there was, mark you, wan woman av all, an' she was not his wife,
that cut him to the quick av his marrow. 'Twas there he said that
he'd thrown away di'monds an' pearls past count, an' thin he'd
begin again like a blind byle in an oil-mill, walkin' round an'
round, to considher (him that was beyond all touch av being happy
this side hell!) how happy he wud ha' been wid her. The more he
considhered, the more he'd consate himself that he'd lost mighty
happiness, an' thin he wud work ut all backwards, an' cry that he
niver cud ha' been happy anyways.

"Time an' time an' again in camp, on p'rade, ay, an' in action,
I've seen that man shut his eyes an' duck his head as you wud duck
to the flicker av a bay'nit. For 'twas thin he tould me that the
thought av all he'd missed came an' stud forninst him like red-hot
irons. For what he'd done wid the others he was sorry, but he did
not care; but this wan woman that I've tould of, by the Hilts av
God she made him pay for all the others twice over! Niver did I
know that a man cud enjure such tormint widout his heart crackin'
in his ribs, an' I have been" - Terence turned the pipe-stem
slowly between his teeth -" I have been in some black cells. All I
iver suffered tho' was not to be talked of alongside av him . . .
an' what could I do? Paternosters was no more than peas for his
sorrow.

"Evenshually we finished our prom'nade acrost the hills, and
thanks to me for the same, there was no casualties an' no glory.
The campaign was comin' to an ind, an' all the rig'mints was bein'
drawn together for to be sint back home. Love-o'-Women was mighty
sorry bekaze he had no work to do, an' all his time to think in.
I've heard that man talkin' to his belt-plate an' his side-arms
while he was soldierin' thim, all to prevint himself from
thinkin', an' ivry time he got up afther he had been settin' down
or wint on from the halt, he'd start wid that kick an' traverse
that I tould you of - his legs sprawlin' all ways to wanst. He wud
niver go see the docthor, tho' I tould him to be wise. He'd curse
me up an' down for my advice; but I knew he was no more a man to
be reckoned wid than the little bhoy was a commandin' orf'cer, so
I let his tongue run if it aised him.

"Wan day - 'twas on the way back - I was walkin' round camp wid
him, an' he stopped an' struck ground wid his right fut three or
four times doubtful. 'Fwhat is ut?' I sez. 'Is that ground?' sez
he; an' while I was thinkin' his mind was goin', up comes the
docthor, who'd been anatomisin' a dead bullock. Love-o'-Women
starts to go on quick, an' lands me a kick on the knee while his
legs was gettin' into marchin' ordher.

"Hould on there,' sez the docthor; an' Love-o'-Women's face, that
was lined like a gridiron, turns red as brick.

"'Tention,' says	the docthor; an' Love-o'-Women stud so. 'Now
shut your eyes,' sez the docthor. 'No, ye must not hould by your
comrade.'

"'Tis all up,' sez Love-o'-Women, trying to smile. 'I'd fall,
docthor, an' you know ut.'

"'Fall?' I sez. 'Fall at attention wid your eyes shut! Fwhat do
you mane?'

"The docthor knows,' he sez. 'I've hild up as long as I can, but
begad I'm glad 'tis all done. But I will die slow,' he sez, 'I
will die very slow.'

"I cud see by the docthor's face that he was mortial sorry for the
man, an' he ordhered him to hospital. We wint back together, an' I
was dumbstruck; Love-o'-Women was cripplin' and crumblin' at ivry
step. He walked wid a hand on my shoulder all slued sideways, an'
his right leg swingin' like a lame camel. Me not knowin' more than
the dead fwhat ailed him, 'twas just as though the docthor's word
had done ut all - as if Love-o'-Women had but been waitin' for the
ordher to let go.

"In hospital he sez somethin' to the docthor that I could not
catch.

"'Holy shmoke!' sez the docthor, 'an' who are you to be givin'
names to your diseases? 'Tis ag'in' all the regulations.'

"'I'll not be a privit much longer,' sez Love-o'-Women in his
gentleman's voice, an' the docthor jumped.

"'Thrate me as a study, Docthor Lowndes,' he sez; an' that was the
first time I'd iver heard a docthor called his name.

"'Good-bye, Terence,' sez Love-o'-Women. "Tis a dead man I am
widout the pleasure av dyin'. You'll come an' set wid me sometimes
for the peace av my soul.'

"Now I had been minded to ask Cruik to take me back to the Ould
Rig'mint, for the fightin' was over, an' I was wore out wid the
ways av the bhoys in the Tyrone; but I shifted my will, an' hild
on, an' wint to set wid Love-o'-Women in the hospital. As I have
said, Sorr, the man bruk all to little pieces undher my hand. How
long he had hild up an' forced himself fit to march I cannot tell,
but in hospital but two days later he was such as I hardly knew. I
shuk hands wid him, an' his grip was fair strong, but his hands
wint all ways to wanst, an' he cud not button his tunic.

"'I'll take long an' long to die yet,' he sez, 'for the ways av
sin they're like interest in the rig'mintal savin's-bank - sure,
but a damned long time bein' paid.'

"The docthor sez to me quiet one day, 'Has Tighe there anythin' on
his mind?' he sez. 'He's burnin' himself out.'

"'How shud I know, Sorr?' I sez, as innocent as putty.

"They call him Love-o'-Women in the Tyrone, do they not?' he sez.
'I was a fool to ask. Be wid him all you can. He's houldin' on to
your strength.'

"'But (what ails him, docthor,' I sez.

"'They call ut Locomotus attacks us,' he sez, 'bekaze,' sez he,
'ut attacks us like a locomotive, if ye know fwhat that manes. An'
ut comes,' sez he, lookin' at me, 'ut comes from bein' called
Love-o'-Women.'

"'You're jokin', docthor,' I sez.

"'Jokin'!' sez he. 'If iver you feel that you've got a felt sole
in your boot instead av a Government bull's-wool, come to me,' he
sez, 'an' I'll show you whether 'tis a joke.'

"You would not belave ut, Sorr, but that an' seein' Love-o'-Women
overtuk widout warnin' put the cowld fear av attacks us on me so
strong that for a week an' more I was kickin' my toes against
stones an' stumps for the pleasure av feelin' them hurt.

"An' Love-o'-Women lay in the cot (he might have gone down wid the
wounded before an' before, but he asked to stay wid me), aud fwhat
there was in his mind had full swing at him night an' day an' ivry
hour av the day an' the night, an' he withered like beef rations
in a hot sun, an' his eyes was like owls' eyes, an' his hands was
mut'nous.

"They was gettin' the rig'mints away wan by wan, the campaign
bein' inded, but as ushuil they was behavin' as if niver a
rig'mint had been moved before in the mem'ry av man. Now, fwhy is
that, Sorr? There's fightin' in an' out nine months av the twelve
somewhere in the Army. There has been - for years an' years an'
years, an' I wud ha' thought they'd begin to get the hang av
providin' for throops. But no! Ivry time it's like a girls' school
meetin' a big red bull whin they're goin' to church; an' 'Mother
av God,' sez the Commissariat an' the railways an' the Barrick-
masters, 'fwhat will we do now?' The ordhers came to us av the
Tyrone an' the Ould Rig'mint an' half a dozen more to go down, and
there the ordhers stopped dumb. We wint down, by the special grace
av God - down the Khaiber anyways. There was sick wid us, an' I'm
thinkin' that some av them was jolted to death in the doolies, but
they was anxious to be kilt so if they cud get to Peshawur alive
the sooner. I walked by Love-o'-Women - there was no marchin', an'
Love-o'-Women was not in a stew to get on. 'If I'd only ha' died
up there!' sez he through the doolie-curtains, an' then he'd twist
up his eyes an' duck his head for the thoughts that came to him.

"Dinah was in Depot at Pindi, but I wint circumspectuous, for well
I knew 'tis just at the rump-ind av all things that his luck turns
on a man. By token I ad seen a dhriver of a batthery goin' by at a
trot singin' 'Home, swate home' at the top av his shout, and
takin' no heed o his bridle-hand - I had seen that man dhrop under
the gun in the middle of a word, and come out by the limber like -
like a frog on a pave-stone. No. I wud not hurry, though, God
knows, my heart was all in Pindi. Love-o'-Women saw fwhat was in
my mind, an' 'Go on, Terence,' h sez, 'I know fwhat's waitin' for
you.' 'I will not,' I sez. "Twill kape a little yet.'

"Ye know the turn of the pass forninst Jumrood and the nine mile
road on the flat to Peshawur? All Peshawur was along that road day
and night waitin' for frinds - men, women, childer, and bands.
Some av the throops was camped
round Jumrood, an' some went on to Peshawur to get away down to
their cantonmints. We came through in the early mornin', havin'
been awake the night through, and we dhruv sheer into the middle
av the mess. Mother av Glory, will I ever forget that comin' back?
The light was not fair lifted, and the furst we heard was 'For
'tis my delight av a shiny night,' frum a band that thought we was
the second four comp'nies av the Lincolnshire. At that we was
forced to sind them a yell to say who we was, an' thin up wint
'The wearin' av the Green.' It made me crawl all up my backbone,
not havin' taken my brequist. Thin, right smash into our rear,
came fwhat was left av the Jock Elliotts - wid four pipers an' not
half a kilt among thim, playin' for the dear life, an' swingin'
their rumps like buck rabbits, an' a native rig'mint shrieking
blue murther. Ye niver heard the like. There was men cryin' like
women that did - an' faith I do not blame thim. Fwhat bruk me down
was the Lancers' Band - shinin' an' spick like angels, wid the
ould dhrum-horse at the head an' the silver kettle-dhrums an' all
an' all, waitin' for their men that was behind us. They shtruck up
the Cavalry Canter, an', begad, those poor ghosts that had not a
sound fut in a throop they answered to ut, the men rockin' in
their saddles. We thried to cheer them as they wint by, but ut
came out like a big gruntin' cough, so there must have been many
that was feelin' like me. Oh, but I'm forgettin'! The Fly-by-
Nights was waitin' for their second battalion, an' whin ut came
out, there was the Colonel's horse led at the head - saddle-empty.
The men fair worshipped him, an' he'd died at Au Musjid on the
road down. They waited till the remnint av the battalion was up,
and thin - clane against ordhers, for who wanted that chune that
day? - they wint back to Peshawur slow-time an' tearin' the bowils
out av ivry man that heard, wid 'The Dead March.' Right across our
line they wint, an' ye know their uniforms are as black as the
Sweeps, crawlin' past like the dead, an' the other bands damnin'
them to let be.

"Little they cared. The carpse was wid them, an' they'd ha' taken
ut so through a Coronation. Our ordhers was to go into Peshawur,
an' we wint hot-fut past the Fly-by-Nights, not singin', to lave
that chune behind us. That was how we tuk the road of the other
corps.

"'Twas ringin' in my ears still whin I felt in the bones of me
that Dinah was comin', an' I heard a shout, an' thin I saw a horse
an' a tattoo latherin' down the road, hell to shplit, under women.
I knew - I knew! Wan was the Tyrone Colonel's wife - ould Beeker's
lady - her gray hair flyin' an' her fat round carkiss rowlin' in
the saddle, an' the other was Dinah, that shud ha' been at Pindi.
The Colonel's lady she charged at the head av our column like a
stone wall, an' she all but knocked Beeker off his horse throwin'
her arms round his neck an' blubberin', 'Me bhoy! Me bhoy!' an'
Dinah wheeled left an' came down our flank, an' I let a yell that
had suffered inside av me for months, and - Dinah came. Will I
iver forget that while I live! She'd come on pass from Pindi, an'
the Colonel's lady had lint her the tattoo. They'd been huggin'
an' cryin' in each other's arms all the long night.

"So she walked along wid her hand in mine, askin' forty questions
to wanst, an' beggin' me on the Virgin to make oath that there was
not a bullet consaled in me, unbeknownst somewhere, an' thin I
remimbered Love-o'-Women. He was watchin' us, an' his face was
like the face av a divil that has been cooked too long. I did not
wish Dinah to see ut, for whin a woman's runnin' over wid
happiness she's like to be touched, for harm aftherwards, by the
laste little thing in life. So I dhrew the curtain, an' Love-o'-
Women lay back and groaned.

"Whin we marched into Peshawur, Dinah wint to barracks to wait for
me, an' me feelin' so rich that tide, I wint on to take Love-o'-
Women to hospital. It was the last I cud do, an' to save him the
dust an' the smother I turned the doolie-men down a road well
clear av the rest av the throops, an we wint along, me talkin'
through the curtains. Av a sudden I heard him say: -

"'Let me look. For the Mercy av Hiven, let me look!' I had been so
tuk up wid gettin' him out av the dust and thinkin' of Dinah that
1 had not kept my eyes about me. There was a woman ridin' a little
behind av us, an', talkin' ut over wid Dinah aftherwards, that
same woman must ha' rid not far on the Jumrood road. Dinah said
that she had been hoverin' like a kite on the left flank av the
column.

"I halted the doolie to set the curtains, an' she rode by walkin'-
pace, an' Love-o'-Women's eyes wint afther her as if he would fair
haul her down from the saddle.

"'Follow there,' was all he sez, but I niver heard a man spake in
that voice before or since, an' I knew by those two wan words an'
the look in his face that she was Di'monds-an'-Pearls that he'd
talked av in his disthresses.

"We followed till she turned into the gate av a little house that
stud near the Edwardes's Gate. There was two girls in the
verandah, an' they ran in whin they saw us. Faith, at long eye-
range ut did not take me a wink to see fwhat kind av house ut was.
The throops bein' there an' all, there was three or four such, but
aftherwards the polis bade them go. At the verandah Love-o'-Women
sez, catchin' his breath, 'Stop here,' an' thin, an' thin, wid a
grunt that must ha' tore the heart up from his stomach, he swung
himself out av the doolie, an' my troth he stud up on his feet wid
the sweat pourin' down his face. If Mackie was to walk in here now
I'd be less tuk back than I was thin. Where he'd dhrawn his power
from, God knows or the divil - but 't was a dead man walkin' in
the sun wid the face av a dead man and the breath av a dead man
held up by the Power, an' the legs an' the arms of the carpse
obeyin' ordhers!
-
"The woman stud in the verandah. She'd been a beauty too, though
her eyes was sunk in her head, an' she looked Love-o'-Women up an'
down terrible. 'An',' she sez, kickin' back the tail av her habit,
- 'An',' she sez, 'fwhat are you doin' here, married man?'

"Love-o'-Women said nothin', but a little froth came to his lips,
an' he wiped ut off wid his hand an' looked at her an' the paint
on her, an' looked, an' looked, an' looked.

"'An' yet,' she sez, wid a laugh. (Did you hear Mrs. Raines laugh
whin Mackie died? Ye did not? Well for you.) 'An' yet,' she sez,
'who but you have betther right,' sez she. 'You taught me the
road. You showed me the way,' she sez. 'Ay, look,' she sez, 'for
'tis your work; you that tould me - d'you remimber it? - that a
woman who was false to wan man cud be false to two. I have been
that,' she sez, 'that an' more, for you always said I was a quick
learner, Ellis. Look well,' she sez, 'for it is me that you called
your wife in the sight av God long since!' An' she laughed.

"Love-o'-Women stud still in the sun widout answerin'. Thin he
groaned an' coughed to wanst, an' I thought 'twas the death-
rattle, but he niver tuk his eyes off her face not for a wink. Ye
cud ha' put her eyelashes through the flies av an E. P. tent, they
were so long.

"'Fwhat do you do here?' she sez, word by word, 'that have taken
away my joy in my man this five years gone - that have broken my
rest an' killed my body an' damned my soul for the sake av seem'
how 'twas done? Did your expayrience aftherwards bring you acrost
any woman that gave more than I did? Wud I not ha' died for you
an' wid you, Ellis? Ye know that, man! If ever your lyin' sowl saw
truth in uts life ye know that.'

"An' Love-o'-Women lifted up his head and said, 'I knew,' an' that
was all. While she was spakin' the Power hild him up parade-set in
the 'sun, an the sweat dhropped undher his helmet. 'Twas more an'
more throuble for him to talk, an' his mouth was runnin'
twistways.

"Fwhat do you do here?' she sez, an' her voice whit up. 'Twas like
bells tollin' before. 'Time was whin you were quick enough wid
your words, - you that talked me down to hell. Are ye dumb now?'
An' Love-o'-W omen got his tongue, an' sez simple, like a little
child, 'May I come in?' he sez.

"The house is open day an' night,' she sez, wid a laugh; an' Love-
o'-Women ducked his head an' hild up his hand as tho' he was
gyardin'. The Power was on him still - it hild him up still, for,
by my sowl, as I'll never save ut, he walked up the verandah steps
that had been a livin' corpse in hospital for a month!

"'An' now'?' she sez, lookin' at him; an' the red paint stud lone
on the white av her face like a bull's-eye on a target.

"He lifted up his eyes, slow an' very slow, an' he looked at her
long an' very long, an' he tuk his spache betune his teeth wid a
wrench that shuk him.

"'I'm dyin', Aigypt - dyin',' he sez; ay, those were his words,
for I remimber the name he called her. He was turnin' the death-
colour, but his eyes niver rowled. They were set - set on her.
Widout word or warnin' she opened her arms full stretch, an'
'Here!' she sez. (Oh, fwhat a golden mericle av a voice ut was!)
'Die here,' she sez; an' Love-o'-Women dhropped forward, an' she
hild him up, for she was a fine big woman.

"I had no time to turn, bekaze that minut I heard the sowl quit
him - tore out in the death-rattle - an' she laid him back in a
long chair, an' she sez to me, 'Misther soldier,' she sez, 'will
ye not go in an' talk to wan av the girls. This sun's too much for
him.'

"Well I knew there was no sun he'd iver see, but I cud not spake,
so I wint away wid the empty doolie to find the docthor. He'd been
breakfastin' an' lunchin' ever since we'd come in, an' he was as
full as a tick.

"Faith ye've got dhrunk mighty soon,' he sez, whin I'd tould him,
'to see that man walk. Barrin' a puff or two av life, he was a
corpse before we left Jumrood. I've a great mind,' he sez, 'to
confine you.'

"There's a dale av liquor runnin' about, docthor,' I sez, solemn
as a hard-boiled egg. 'Maybe 'tis so, but will ye not come an' see
the corpse at the house?'

"Tis dishgraceful,' he sez, 'that I would be expected to go to a
place like that. Was she a pretty woman?'' he sez, an' at that he
set off double quick.

"I cud see that the two was in the verandah were I'd left them,
an' I knew by the hang av her head an' the noise av the crows
fwhat had happened. 'Twas the first and the last time that I'd
ever known woman to use the pistol. They dread the shot as a rule,
but Di'monds-an'-Pearls she did not - she did not.

"The docthor touched the long black hair av her head ('twas all
loose upon Love-o'-Women's chest), an' that cleared the liquor out
av him. He stud considherin' a long time, his hands in his
pockets, an' at last he sez to me, 'Here's a double death from
naturil causes, most naturil causes; an' in the presint state av
affairs the rig'mint will be thankful for wan grave the less to
dig. Issiwasti,' he sez, 'Issiwasti, Privit Mulvaney, these two
will be buried together in the Civil Cemet'ry at my expinse, an'
may the good God,' he sez, 'make it SO much for me whin my time
comes. Go to your wife,' he sez; 'go an' be happy. I'll see to
this all.'

"I left him still considherin'. They was buried in the Civil
Cemet'ry together, wid a Church of England service. There was too
many buryin's thin to ask questions, an' the docthor - he ran away
wid Major - Major Van Dyce's lady that year - he saw to ut all.
Fwhat the right an' the wrong av Love-o'-Women an' Di'monds-an'-
Pearls was I niver knew, an' I will niver know; but I've tould ut
as I came acrost ut - here an' there in little pieces. So, being
fwhat I am, an' knowin' fwhat I know, that's fwhy I say in this
shootin'-case here, Mackie that's dead an' in hell is the lucky
man. There are times, Sorr, whin 'tis betther for the man to die
than to live, an' by consequince forty million times betther for
the woman."

"H'up there!" said Ortheris. "It's time to go." The witnesses and
guard formed up in the thick white dust of the parched twilight
and swung off, marching easy and whistling. Down the road to the
green by the church I could hear Ortheris, the black Book-lie
still uncleansed on his lips, setting, with a fine sense of the
fitness of things, the shrill quick-step that runs -

"Oh, do not despise the advice of the wise,
Learn wisdom from those that are older,
And don't try for things that are out of your reach -
An' that's what the Girl told the Soldier
Soldier! Soldier!
Oh, that's what the Girl told the Soldier!"



THE BIG DRUNK DRAF'

We're goin' 'ome, we're goin' 'ome -
Our ship is at the shore,
An' you mus' pack your 'aversack,
For we won't come back no more.
Ho, don't you grieve for me,
My lovely Mary Ann,
For I'll marry you yet on a fourp'ny bit,
As a time-expired ma-a-an

Barrack Room Ballad.


AN awful thing has happened! My friend, Private Mulvaney, who went
home in the Serapis, time-expired, not very long ago, has come
back to India as a civilian! It was all Dinah Shadd's fault. She
could not stand the poky little lodgings, and she missed her
servant Abdullah more than words could tell. The fact was that the
Mulvaneys had been out here too long, and had lost touch of
England.

Mulvaney knew a contractor on one of the new Central India lines,
and wrote to him for some sort of work. The contractor said that
if Mulvaney could pay the passage he would give him command of a
gang of coolies for old sake's sake. The pay was eighty-five
rupees a month, and Dinah Shadd said that if Terence did not
accept she would make his life a "basted purgathory." Therefore
the Mulvaneys came out as "civilians," which was a great and
terrible fall; though Mulvaney tried to disguise it by saying that
he was "Ker'nel on the railway line, an' a consequinshal man."

He wrote me an invitation, on a tool-indent form, to visit him;
and I came down to the funny little "construction" bungalow at the
side of the line. Dinah Shadd had planted peas about and about,
and nature had spread all manner of green stuff round the place.
There was no change in Mulvaney except the change of clothing,
which was deplorable, but could not be helped. He was standing
upon his trolly, haranguing a gangman, and his shoulders were as
well drilled and his big, thick chin was as clean-shaven as ever.

"I'm a civilian now," said Mulvaney. "Cud you tell that I was iver
a martial man'? Don't answer, Sorr, av you're strainin' betune a
complimint an' a lie. There's no houldin' Dinah Shadd now she's
got a house av her own. Go inside, an' dhrink tay out av chiny in
the drrrrawin'-room, an' thin we'll dhrink like Christians undher
the tree here. Scutt, ye naygur-folk! There's a Sahib come to call
on me, an' that's more than he'll iver do for you onless you run!
Get out, an' go on pilin' up the earth, quick, till sundown."


When we three were comfortably settled under the big sisham in
front of the bungalow, and the first rush of questions and answers
about Privates Ortheris and Learoyd and old times and places had
died away, Mulvaney said, reflectively - "Glory be, there's no
p'rade to-morrow, an' no bun-headed Corp'ril-bhoy to give you his
lip. An' yit I don't know. 'Tis harrd to be something ye niver
were an' niver meant to be, an' all the ould days shut up along
wid your papers. Eyah! I'm growin' rusty, an' 'tis the will av God
that a man mustn't serve his Quane for time an' all."

He helped himself to a fresh peg, and sighed furiously.

"Let your beard grow, Mulvaney," said I, "and then you won't be
troubled with those notions. You'll be a real civilian."

Dinah Shadd had told me in the drawing-room of her desire to coax
Mulvaney into letting his beard grow. "'Twas so civilian-like,"
said poor Dinah, who hated her husband's hankering for his old
life.

"Dinah Shadd, you're a dishgrace to an honust, clane-scraped man!
"said Mulvaney, without replying to me. "Grow a beard on your own
chin, darlint, and lave my razors alone. They're all that stand
betune me and dis-ris-pect-ability. Av I didn't shave, I wud be
torminted wid an outrajis thurrst; for there's nothin' so dhryin'
to the throat as a big billy-goat beard waggin' undher the chin.
Ye wudn't have me dhrink always, Dinah Shadd'? By the same token,
you're kapin' me crool dhry now. Let me look at that whiskey."

The whiskey was lent and returned, but Dinah Shadd, who had been
just as eager as her husband in asking after old friends, rent me
with -

"I take shame for you, Sorr, coming down here though the Saints
know you're as welkim as the daylight whin you do come - an'
upsettin' Terence's head wid your nonsense about - about fwhat's
much betther forgotten. He bein' a civilian now, an' you niver was
aught else. Can you not let the Arrmy rest? 'Tis not good for
Terence."

I took refuge by Mulvaney, for Dinah Shadd has a temper of her
own.

"Let be - let be," said Mulvaney. "'Tis only wanst in a way I can
talk about the ould days." Then to me - "Ye say Dhrumshticks is
well, an' his lady tu'? I niver knew how I liked the gray garron
till I was shut av him an' Asia." - "Dhrumshticks" was the
nickname of the Colonel commanding Mulvaney's old regiment. - "
Will you be seein' him again? You will. Thin tell him" -
Mulvaney's eyes began to twinkle - "tell him wid Privit -"
-
"Mister, Terence," interrupted Dinah Shadd. "Now the Divil an' all
his angils an' the Firmament av Hiven fly away wid the 'Mister,'
an' the sin av makin' me swear be on your confession, Dinah Shadd!
Privit, I tell ye. Wid Privit Mulvaney's best obedience, that but
for me the last time-expired wud be still pullin' hair on their
way to the sea."

He threw himself back in the chair, chuckled, and was silent.

"Mrs. Mulvaney," I said, "please take up the whiskey, and don't
let him have it until he has told the story."

Dinah Shadd dexterously whipped the bottle away, saying at the
same time, "'Tis nothing to be proud av," and thus captured by the
enemy, Mulvaney spake: -

"'Twas on Chuseday week. I was behaderin' round wid the gangs on
the 'bankmint - I've taught the hoppers how to kape step an' stop
screechin' - whin a head-gangman comes up to me, wid about two
inches av shirt-tail hanging round his neck an' a disthressful
light in his oi. 'Sahib,' sez he, 'there's a reg'mint an' a half
av soldiers up at the junction, knockin' red cinders out av
ivrything an' ivrybody! They thried to hang me in my cloth,' he
sez, 'an' there will be murdher an' ruin an' rape in the place
before nightfall! They say they're comin' down here to wake us up.
What will we do wid our women-folk?'

"'Fetch my throlly!' sez I; 'my heart's sick in my ribs for a wink
at anything wid the Quane's uniform on ut. Fetch my throlly, an'
six av the jildiest men, and run me up in shtyle.'"

"He tuk his best coat," said Dinah Shadd, reproachfully.

"'Twas to do honour to the Widdy. I cud ha' done no less, Dinah
Shadd. You and your digresshins interfere wid the coorse av the
narrative. Have you iver considhered fwhat I wud look like wid me
head shaved as well as me chin? You bear that in your mind, Dinah
darlin'.

"I was throllied up six miles, all to get a shquint at that draf'.
I knew 'twas a spring draf' goin' home, for there's no rig'mint
hereabouts, more's the pity."

"Praise the Virgin!" murmured Dinah Shadd. But Mulvaney did not
hear.

"Whin I was about three-quarters av a mile off the rest-camp,
powtherin' along fit to burrst, I heard the noise av the men, an',
on my sowl, Sorr, I cud catch the voice av Peg Barney bellowin'
like a bison wid the belly-ache. You remimber Peg Barney that was
in D Comp'ny - a red, hairy scraun, wid a scar on his jaw? Peg
Barney that cleared out the Blue Lights' Jubilee meetin' wid the
cook-room mop last year?

"Thin I knew ut was a draf' av the Ould Rig'mint, an' I was
conshumed wid sorrow for the bhoy that was in charge. We was harrd
scrapin's at any time. Did I iver tell you how Horker Kelley wint
into clink nakid as Phoebus Apollonius, wid the shirts av the
Corp'ril an' file undher his arrum? An' be was a moild man! But
I'm digresshin'. 'Tis a shame both to the rig'mints and the Arrmy
sendin' down little orf'cer bhoys wid a draf' av strong men mad
wid liquor an' the chanst av gettin' shut av India, an' niver a
punishment that's fit to be given right down an' away from
cantonmints to the dock! 'Tis this nonsinse. Whin I am servin' my
time, I'm undher the Articles av War, an' can be whipped on the
peg for thim. But whin I've served my time, I'm a Reserve man, an'
the Articles av War haven't any hould on me. An orf'cer can't do
anythin' to a time-expired savin' confinin' him to barricks. 'Tis
a wise rig'lation, bekaze a time-expired does not have any
barricks; bein' on the move all the time. 'Tis a Solomon av a
rig'lation, is that. I wud like to be inthroduced to the man that
made ut. 'Tis easier to get colts from a Kibbereen horse-fair into
Galway than to take a bad draf' over ten miles av counthry.
Consiquintly that rig'lation - for fear that the men wud be hurt
by the little orf'cer bhoy. No matther. The nearer my throlly came
to the rest-camp, the woilder was the shine, an' the louder was
the voice of Peg Barney. "Tis good I am here,' thinks I to mysilf,
'for Peg alone is employmint for two or three.' He bein', I well
knew, as copped as a dhrover.

"Faith, that rest-camp was a sight! The tent-ropes was all skew-
nosed, an' the pegs looked as dhrunk as the men - fifty av thim -
the scourin's, an' rinsin's, an' Divil's lavin's av the Ould
Rig'mint. I tell you, Sorr, they were dhrunker than any men you've
ever seen in your mortial life. How does a draf' get dhrunk? How
does a frog get fat? They suk ut in through their shkins.

"There was Peg Barney sittin' on the groun' in his shirt - wan
shoe off an' wan shoe on - whackin' a tent-peg over the head wid
his boot, an' singin' fit to wake the dead. 'Twas no clane song
that he sung, though. 'Twas the Divil's Mass."

"What's that?" I asked.

"Whin a bad egg is shut av the Army, he sings the Divil's Mass for
a good riddance; an' that manes swearin' at ivrything from the
Commandher-in-Chief down to the Room-Corp'ril, such as you niver
in your days heard. Some men can swear so as to make green turf
crack! Have you iver heard the Curse in an Orange Lodge? The
Divil's Mass is ten times worse, an' Peg Barney was singin' ut,
whackin' the tent-peg on the head wid his boot for each man that
he cursed. A powerful big voice had Peg Barney, an' a hard swearer
he was whin sober. I stood forninst him, an' 'twas not me oi alone
that cud tell Peg was dhrunk as a coot.
354
"Good mornin', Peg,' I sez, whin he dhrew breath afther dursin'
the Adj'tint-Gen'ral; 'I've put on my best coat to see you, Peg
Barney,' sez I.
"Thin take Ut off again,' sez Peg Barney, latherin' away wid the
boot; 'take ut off an' dance, ye lousy civilian!'
"Wid that he begins cursin' ould Dhrumshticks, being so full he
dane disrernimbers the Brigade-Major an' the Judge-Advokit-
Gen'ral.
"Do you not know me, Peg?' sez I, though me blood was hot in me
wid being called a civilian."
"An' him a decent married man!" wailed Dinah Shadd.
I do not,' sez Peg, 'but dhrunk or sober I'll tear the hide off
your back wid a shovel whin I've stopped singin'.'
"'Say you so, Peg Barney?' sez I. "Tis clear as mud you've
forgotten me. I'll assist your autobiography.' Wid that I
stretched Peg Barney, boot an' all, an' wint into the camp. An
awful sight ut was!
"'Where's the orf'cer in charge av the detachment?' sez I to Scrub
Greene - the manest little worm that ever walked.
"'There's no orf'cer, ye ould cook,' sez Scrub; 'we're a bloomin'
Republic.'

"'Are you that?' sez I; 'thin I'm O'Connell the Dictator, an' by
this you will larn to kape a civil tongue in your rag-box.'

"Wid that I stretched Scrub Greene an' wint to the orf'cer's tent.
'Twas a new little bhoy - not wan I'd iver seen before. He was
sittin' in his tent, purtendin' not to 'ave ear av the racket.

"I saluted - but for the life av me I mint to shake hands whin I
went in. 'Twas the sword hangin' on the tent-pole changed my will.

"'Can't I help, Sorr?' sez I; ''tis a strong man's job they've
given you, an' you'll be wantin' help by sundown.' He was a bhoy
wid bowils, that child, an' a rale gintleman.

"'Sit down,' sez he.

"'Not before my orf'cer,' sez I; an' I tould him fwhat my service
was.

"'I've heard av you,' sez he. 'You tuk the town av Lungtungpen
nakid.'

"'Faith,' thinks I, 'that's Honour an' Glory'; for 'twas Lift'nint
Brazenose did that job. 'I'm wid ye, Sorr,' sez I, 'if I'm av use.
They shud niver ha' sent you down wid the draf'. Savin' your
presince, Sorr,' I sez, ''tis only Lift'nint Hackerston in the
Ould Rig'mint can manage a Home draf'.'

"'I've niver had charge of men like this before,' sez he, playin'
wid the pens on the table; 'an' I see by the Rig'lations -'

"'Shut your oi to the Rig'lations, Sorr,' I sez,  'till the
throoper's into blue wather. By the Rig'lations you've got to tuck
thim up for the night, or they'll be runnin' foul av my coolies
an' makin' a shiverarium half through the counthry. Can you trust
your noncoms, Sorr?'

"'Yes,' sez he.

"'Good,' sez I; 'there'll be throuble before the night. Are you
marchin', Sorr?'

"'To the next station,' sez he.

"'Betther still,' sez I; 'there'll be big throuble.'

"'Can't be too hard on a Home draf,' sez he; 'the great thing is
to get thim in-ship.'

"'Faith, you've larnt the half av your lesson, Sorr,' sez I, 'but
av you shtick to the Rig'lations you'll niver get thim inship at
all, at all. Or there won't be a rag av kit betune thim whin you
do.'

"'Twas a dear little orf'cer bhoy, an' by way av kapin' his heart
up, I tould him fwhat I saw wanst in a draf in Egypt."

"What was that, Mulvaney?" said I.

"Sivin an' fifty men sittin' on the bank av a canal, laughin' at a
poor little squidgereen av an orf'cer that they'd made wade into
the slush an' pitch things out av the boats for their Lord High
Mightinesses. That made me orf'cer bhoy woild wid indignation.

"'Soft an' aisy, Sorr,' sez I; 'you've niver had your draf' in
hannd since you left cantonmints Wait till the night, an' your
work will be ready to you. Wid your permission, Sorr, I will
investigate the camp, an' talk to me ould frinds. 'Tis no manner
av use thryin' to shtop the divilmint now.'

"Wid that I wint out into the camp an' inthrojuced mysilf to ivry
man sober enough to remimber me. I was some wan in the ould days,
an' the bhoys was glad to see me - all excipt Peg Barney wid a eye
like a tomata five days in the bazar, an' a nose to match. They
come round me an' shuk me, an' I tould thim I was in privit employ
wid an income av me own, an' a drrrawin'-room fit to bate the
Quane's; an' wid me lies an' me shtories an' nonsinse gin'rally, I
kept 'em quiet in wan way an' another, knockin' roun' the camp.
'Twas bad even thin whin I was the Angil av Peace.

"I talked to me ould non-coms - they was sober - an' betune me an'
thim we wore the draf' over into their tents at the proper time.
The little orf'cer bhoy he conies round, dacint an' civil-spoken
as might be.

"'Rough quarthers, men,' sez he, 'but you can't look to be as
comfortable as in barricks. We must make the best av things. I've
shut my eyes to a dale av dog's thricks to-day, an' now there must
be no more av ut.'

"No more we will. Come an' have a dhrink, me son,' sez Peg Barney,
staggerin' where he stud. Me little orf'cer bhoy kep' his timper.

"'You're a sulky swine, you are,' sez Peg Barney, an' at that the
men in the tent began to laugh.

"I tould you me orf'cer bhoy had bowils. He cut Peg Barney as near
as might be on the oi that I'd squshed whin we first met. Peg wint
spinnin' acrost the tent.

"Peg him out, Sorr,' sez I, in a whishper.

"Peg him out!' sez me orf'cer bhoy, up loud, just as if 'twas
battalion p'rade an' he pickin' his wurrds from the Sargint.

"The non-coms tuk Peg Barney - a howlin' handful he was - an' in
three minut's he was pegged out - chin down, tight-dhrawn - on his
stummick, a tent-peg to each arm an' leg, swearin' fit to turn a
naygur white.

"I tuk a peg an'' jammed ut into his ugly jaw - 'Bite on that, Peg
Barney,' I sez; 'the night is settin' frosty, an' you'll be
wantin' divarsion before the mornin'. But for the Rig'lations
you'd be bitin' on a bullet now at the thriangles, Peg Barney,'
sez I.

"All the draf' was out av their tents watchin' Barney bein'
pegged.

"''Tis agin the Rig'lations! He strook him!' screeches out Scrub
Greene, who was always a lawyer; an' some of the men tuk up the
shoutin'.

"'Peg out that man!' sez me orf'cer bhoy, niver losin' his timper;
an' the non-coms wint in and pegged out Scrub Greene by the side
av Peg Barney.

"I cud see that the draf' was comin' roun'. The men stud not
knowin' fwhat to do.

"'Get to your tents!' sez me orf'cer bhoy. 'Sargint, put a sinthry
over these two men.'

"The men wint back into the tents like jackals, an' the rest av
the night there was no noise at all excipt the stip av the sinthry
over the two, an' Scrub Greene blubberin' like a child. 'Twas a
chilly night, an' faith, ut sobered Peg Barney.

"Just before Revelly, me orf'cer bhoy comes out an' sez: 'Loose
those men an' send thim to their tents!' Scrub Greene wint away
widout a word, but Peg Barney, stiff wid the cowld, stud like a
sheep, thryin' to make his orf'cer undherstand he was sorry for
playin' the goat.

"There was no tucker in the draf' whin ut fell in for the march,
an' divil a wurrd about 'illegality' cud I hear.

"I wint to the ould Colour-Sargint and I sez: - 'Let me die in
glory,' sez I. 'I've seen a man this day!'

"'A man he is,' sez ould Hother; 'the draf's as sick as a herrin'.
They'll all go down to the sea like lambs. That bhoy has the
bowils av a cantonmint av Gin'rals.'

"'Amin,' sez I, 'an' good luck go wid him,  wheriver he be, by
land or by sea. Let me know how the draf' gets clear.'

"An' do you know how they did? That bhoy, so I was tould by letter
from Bombay, bully-damned 'em down to the dock, till they cudn't
call their sowls their own. From the time they left me oi till
they was 'tween decks, not wan av thim was more than dacintly
dhrunk. An' by the Holy Articles av War, whin they wint aboord
they cheered him till they cudn't spake, an' that, mark you, has
not come about wid a draf' in the mlm'ry av livin' man! You look
to that little orf'cer bhoy. He has bowils. 'Tis not ivry child
that wud chuck the Rig'lations to Flanders an' stretch Peg Barney
on a wink from a brokin an' dilapidated ould carkiss like mysilf.
I'd be proud to serve -"

"Terence, you're a civilian," said Dinah Shadd warningly.

"So I am - so I am. Is ut likely I wud forget ut? But he was a
gran' bhoy all the same, an' I'm only a mudtipper wid a hod on me
shoulthers. The whiskey's in the heel av your hand, Sorr. Wid your
good lave we'll dhrink to the Ould Rig'mint - three fingers -
standin' up!"
And we drank.


THE MUTINEY OF THE MAVERICKS

Sec. 7 (1) - Causing or Conspiring with other persons to cause a
mutiny or sedition in forces belonging to Her Majesty's Regular
forces, Reserve forces, Auxiliary forces, or Navy.

When three obscure gentlemen in San Francisco argued on
insufficient premises they condemned a fellow-creature to a most
unpleasant death in a far country which had nothing whatever to do
with the United States. They foregathered at the top of a
tenement-house in Tehama Street, an unsavoury quarter of the city,
and, there calling for certain drinks, they conspired because they
were conspirators by trade, officially known as the Third Three of
the I. A. A. - an institution for the propagation of pure light,
not to be confounded with any others, though it is affiliated to
many. The Second Three live in Montreal, and work among the poor
there; the First Three have their home in New York, not far from
Castle Garden, and write regularly once a week to a small house
near one of the big hotels at Boulogne. What happens after that, a
particular section of Scotland Yard knows too well and laughs at.
A conspirator detests ridicule. More men have been stabbed with
Lucrezia Borgia daggers and dropped into the Thames for laughing
at Head Centres and Triangles than for betraying secrets; for this
is human nature.

The Third Three conspired over whiskey cocktails and a clean sheet
of note-paper against the British Empire and all that lay therein.
This work is very like what men without discernment call politics
before a general election. You pick out and discuss, in the
company of congenial friends, all the weak points in your
opponents' organisation, and unconsciously dwell upon and
exaggerate all their mishaps, till it seems to you a miracle that
the hated party holds together for an hour.

"Our principle is not so much active demonstration - that we leave
to others - as passive embarrassment, to weaken and unnerve," said
the first man. "Wherever an organisation is crippled, wherever
confusion is thrown into any branch of any department, we gain a
step for those who take on the work; we are but the forerunners."
He was a German enthusiast, and editor of a newspaper, from whose
leading articles he quoted frequently.

"That cursed Empire makes so many blunders of her own that unless
we doubled the year's average I guess it wouldn't strike her
anything special had occurred," said the second man. "Are you
prepared to say that all our resources are equal to blowing off
the muzzle of a hundred-ton gun or spiking a ten-thousand-ton ship
on a plain rock in clear daylight? They can beat us at our own
game. Better join hands with the practical branches; we're in
funds now. Try a direct scare in a crowded street. They value
their greasy hides." He was the drag upon the wheel, and an
Americanised Irishman of the second generation, despising his own
race and hating the other. He had learned caution.

The third man drank his cocktail and spoke no word. He was the
strategist, but unfortunately his knowledge of life was limited.
He picked a letter from his breast-pocket and threw it across the
table. That epistle to the heathen contained some very concise
directions from the First Three in New York.
It said -

"The boom in black iron has already affected the
eastern markets, where our agents have been forcing down the
English-held stock among the smaller buyers who watch the turn of
shares. Any immediate operations, such as western bears, would
increase their willingness to unload.  This, however, cannot be
expected till they see clearly that foreign iron-masters are
willing to co-operate. Mulcahy should be dispatched to feel the
pulse of the market, and act accordingly. Mavericks are at present
the best for our purpose.- P. D. Q."

As a message referring to an iron crisis in Pennsylvania, it was
interesting, if not lucid. As a new departure in organized attack
on an outlying English dependency, it was more than interesting.

The second man read it through and murmured -"

Already? Surely they are in too great a hurry. All that Dhulip
Singh could do in India he has done, down to the distribution of
his photographs among the peasantry. Ho! Ho! The Paris firm
arranged that, and he has no substantial money backing from the
Other Power. Even our agents in India know he hasn't. What is the
use of our organisation wasting men on work that is already done?
Of course the Irish regiments in India are half mutinous as they
stand."

This shows how near a lie may come to the truth. An Irish
regiment, for just so long as it stands still, is generally a hard
handful to control, being reckless and rough. When, however, it is
moved in the direction of musketry-firing, it becomes strangely
and unpatriotically content with its lot. It has even been heard
to cheer the Queen with enthusiasm on these occasions.

But the notion of tampering with the army was, from the point of
view of Tehama Street, an altogether sound one. There is no shadow
of stability in the policy of an English Government, and the most
sacred oaths of England would, even if engrossed on vellum, find
very few buyers among colonies and dependencies that have suffered
from vain beliefs. But there remains to England always her army.
That cannot change except in the matter of uniform and equipment.
The officers may write to the papers demanding the heads of the
Horse Guards in default of cleaner redress for grievances; the men
may break loose across a country town and seriously startle the
publicans; but neither officers nor men have it in their
composition to mutiny after the continental manner. The English
people, when they trouble to think about the army at all, are, and
with justice, absolutely assured that it is absolutely
trustworthy. Imagine for a moment their emotions on realising that
such and such a regiment was in open revolt from causes directly
due to England's management of Ireland. They would probably send
the regiment to the polls forthwith and examine their own
consciences as to their duty to Erin; but they would never be easy
any more. And it was this vague, unhappy mistrust that the I. A.
A. were labouring to produce.

"Sheer waste of breath," said the second man after a pause in the
council. "I don't see the use of tampering with their fool-army,
but it has been tried before and we must try it again. It looks
well in the reports. If we send one man from here you may bet your
life that other men are going too. Order up Mulcahy."

They ordered him up - a slim, slight, dark-haired young man,
devoured with that blind rancorous hatred of England that only
reaches its full growth across the Atlantic. He had sucked it from
his mother's breast in the little cabin at the back of the
northern avenues of New York; he had been taught his rights and
his wrongs, in German and Irish, on the canal fronts of Chicago;
and San Francisco held men who told him strange and awful things
of the great blind power over the seas. Once, when business took
him across the Atlantic, he had served in an English regiment, and
being insubordinate had suffered extremely. He drew all his ideas
of England that
were not bred by the cheaper patriotic prints from one iron-fisted
colonel and an unbending adjutant.
He would go to the mines if need be to teach his gospel. And he
went, as his instructions advised, p. d. q. - which means "with
speed" - to introduce embarrassment into an Irish regiment,
"already half-mutinous, quartered among Sikh peasantry, all
wearing miniatures of His Highness Dhulip Singh, Maharaja of the
Punjab, next their hearts, and all eagerly expecting his arrival."
Other information equally valuable was given him by his masters.
He was to be cautious, but never to grudge expense in winning the
hearts of the men in the regiment. His mother in New York would
supply funds, and he was to write to her once a month. Life is
pleasant for a man who has a mother in New York to send him two
hundred pounds a year over and above his regimental pay.

In process of time, thanks to his intimate knowledge of drill and
musketry exercise, the excellent Mulcahy, wearing the corporal's
stripe, went out in a troopship and joined Her Majesty's Royal
Loyal Musketeers, commonly known as the "Mavericks," because they
were masterless and unbranded cattle - sons of small farmers in
County Clare, shoeless vagabonds of Kerry, herders of Ballyvegan,
much wanted "moonlighters" from the bare rainy headlands of the
south coast, officered by O'Mores, Bradys, Hills, Kilreas, and the
like. Never to outward seeming was there more promising material
to work on. The First Three had chosen their regiment well. It
feared nothing that moved or talked save the colonel and the
regimental Roman Catholic chaplain, the fat Father Dennis, who
held the keys of heaven and hell, and blared like an angry bull
when he desired to be convincing. Him also it loved because on
occasions of stress he was used to tuck up his cassock and charge
with the rest into the merriest of the fray, where he always
found, good man, that the saints sent him a revolver when there
was a fallen private to be protected, or - but this came as an
afterthought
his own gray head to be guarded.

Cautiously as he had been instructed, tenderly and with much beer,
Mulcahy opened his projects to such as he deemed fittest to
listen. And these were, one and all, of that quaint, crooked,
sweet, profoundly irresponsible and profoundly lovable race that
fight like fiends, argue like children, reason like women, obey
like men, and jest like their own goblins of the rath through
rebellion, loyalty, want, woe, or war. The underground work of a
conspiracy is always dull and very much the same the world over.
At the end of six months - the seed always falling on good ground
- Mulcahy spoke almost explicitly, hinting darkly in the approved
fashion at dread powers behind him, and advising nothing more nor
less than mutiny. Were they not dogs, evilly treated? had they not
all their own and their national revenges to satisfy? Who in these
days would do aught to nine hundred men in rebellion? Who, again,
could stay them if they broke for the sea, licking up on their way
other regiments only too anxious to join? And afterwards . . .
here followed windy promises of gold and preferment, office and
honour, ever dear to a certain type of Irishman.

As he finished his speech, in the dusk of a twilight, to his
chosen associates, there was a sound of a rapidly unslung belt
behind him. The arm of one Dan Grady flew out in the gloom and
arrested something. Then said Dan -

"Mulcahy, you're a great man, an' you do credit to whoever sent
you. Walk about a bit while we think of it." Mulcahy departed
elate. He knew his words would sink deep.

"Why the triple-dashed asterisks did ye not let me belt him'?"
grunted a voice.

"Because I'm not a fat-headed fool. Boys, 'tis what he's been
driving at these six months - our superior corp'ril with his
education and his copies of the Irish papers and his everlasting
beer. He's been sent for the purpose, and that's where the money
comes from. Can ye not see? That man's a gold-mine, which Horse
Egan here would have destroyed with a belt-buckle. It would be
throwing away the gifts of Providence not to fall in with his
little plans. Of coorse we'll mut'ny till all's dry. Shoot the
colonel on the parade-ground, massacree the company officers,
ransack the arsenal, and then - Boys, did he tell you what next?
He told me the other night when he was beginning to talk wild.
Then we're to join with the niggers, and look for help from Dhulip
Singh and the Russians!"

"And spoil the best campaign that ever was this side of Hell!
Danny, I'd have lost the beer to ha' given him the belting he
requires."

"Oh, let him go this awhile, man! He's got no - no
constructiveness, but that's the egg-meat of his plan, and you
must understand that I'm in with it, an' so are you. We'll want
oceans of beer to convince us - firmaments full. We'll give him
talk for his money, and one by one all the boys'll come in and
he'll have a nest of nine hundred mutineers to squat in an' give
drink to."

"What makes me killing-mad is his wanting us to do what the
niggers did thirty years gone. That an' his pig's cheek in saying
that other regiments would come along," said a Kerry man.

"That's not so bad as hintin' we should loose off on the colonel."

"Colonel be sugared! I'd as soon as not put a shot through his
helmet to see him jump and clutch his old horse's head. But
Mulcahy talks o' shootin' our comp'ny orf'cers accidental."

"He said that, did he?" said Horse Egan.

"Somethin' like that, anyways. Can't ye fancy ould Barber Brady
wid a bullet in his lungs, coughin' like a sick monkey, an'
sayin', 'Bhoys, I do not mind your gettin' dhrunk, but you must
hould your liquor like men. The man that shot me is dhrunk. I'll
suspend investigations for six hours, while I get this bullet cut
out, and then -'"

"'An' then," continued Horse Egan, for the peppery Major's
peculiarities of speech and manner were as well known as his
tanned face; "'an' then, ye dissolute, half-baked, putty-faced
scum o' Connemara, if I find a man so much as lookin' confused,
begad, I'll coort-martial the whole company. A man that can't get
over his liquor in six hours is not fit to belong to the
Mavericks!'"

A shout of laughter bore witness to the truth of the sketch.

"It's pretty to think of," said the Kerry man slowly. "Mulcahy
would have us do all the devilmint, and get clear himself,
someways. He wudn't be takin' all this fool's throuble in
shpoilin' the reputation of the regimint -"

"Reputation of your grandmother's pig!" said Dan.

"Well, an' he had a good reputation tu; so it's all right. Mulcahy
must see his way to clear out behind him, or he'd not ha' come so
far, talkin' powers of darkness."

"Did you hear anything of a regimental coortmartial among the
Black Boneens, these days? Half a company of 'em took one of the
new draft an' hanged him by his arms with a tent-rope from a
third-story verandah. They gave no reason for so doin', but he was
half dead. I'm thinking that the Boneens are short-sighted. It was
a friend of Mulcahy's, or a man in the same trade. They'd a deal
better ha' taken his beer," returned Dan reflectively.

"Better still ha' handed him up to the Colonel," said Horse Egan,
"onless - but sure the news wud be all over the counthry an' give
the reg'ment a bad name."

"An' there'd be no reward for that man - he but went about
talkin'," said the Kerry man artlessly.

"You speak by your breed," said Dan, with a laugh. "There was
never a Kerry man yet that wudn't sell his brother for a pipe o'
tobacco an' a pat on the back from a p'liceman."

"Praise God I'm not a bloomin' Orangeman," was the answer.

"No, nor never will be," said Dan. "They breed men in Ulster.
Would you like to thry the taste of one?"

The Kerry man looked and longed, but forbore. The odds of battle
were too great.
"Then you'll not even give Mulcahy a - a strike for his money,"
said the voice of Horse Egan, who regarded what he called
"trouble" of any kind as the pinnacle of felicity.

Dan answered not at all, but crept on tip-toe, with long strides,
to the mess-room, the men following. The room was empty. In a
corner, cased like the King of Dahomey's state umbrella, stood the
regimental Colours. Dan lifted them tenderly and unrolled in the
light of the candles the record of the Mavericks - tattered, worn,
and hacked. The white satin was darkened everywhere with big brown
stains, the gold threads on the crowned harp were frayed and
discoloured, and the Red Bull, the totem of the Mavericks, was
coffee-hued. The stiff, embroidered folds, whose price is human
life, rustled down slowly. The Mavericks keep their colours long
and guard them very sacredly.

"Vittoria, Salamanca, Toulouse, Waterloo, Moodkee, Ferozshah, an'
Sobraon - that was fought close next door here, against the very
beggars he wants us to join. Inkerman, The Alma, Sebastopol! 'What
are those little businesses compared to the campaigns of General
Mulcahy? The Mut'ny, think o' that; the Mut'ny an' some dirty
little matters in Afghanistan; an' for that an' these an' those" -
Dan pointed to the names of glorious battles - "that Yankee man
with the partin' in his hair comes an' says as easy as 'have a
drink' . . . Holy Moses, there's the captain!"

But it was the mess-sergeant who came in just as the men clattered
out, and found the colours uncased.

From that day dated the mutiny of the Mavericks, to the joy of
Mulcahy and the pride of his mother in New York - the good lady
who sent the money for the beer. Never, so far as words went, was
such a mutiny. The conspirators, led by Dan Grady and Horse Egan,
poured in daily. They were sound men, men to be trusted, and they
all wanted blood; but first they must have beer. They cursed the
Queen, they mourned over Ireland, they suggested hideous plunder
of the Indian country-side, and then, alas - some of the younger
men would go forth and wallow on the ground in spasms of wicked
laughter The genius of the Irish for conspiracies is remarkable.
None the less they would swear no oaths but those of their own
making, which were rare and curious, and they were always at pains
to impress Mulcahy with the risks they ran. Naturally the flood of
beer wrought demoralisation. But Mulcahy confused the causes of
things, and when a very muzzy Maverick smote a sergeant on the
nose or called his commanding officer a bald-headed old lard-
bladder and even worse names, he fancied that rebellion and not
liquor was at the bottom of the outbreak. Other gentlemen who have
concerned themselves in larger conspiracies have made the same
error.

The hot season, in which they protested no man could rebel, came
to an end, and Mulcahy suggested a visible return for his
teachings. As to the actual upshot of the mutiny he cared nothing.
It would be enough if the English, infatuatedly trusting to the
integrity of their army, should be startled with news of an Irish
regiment revolting from political considerations. His persistent
demands would have ended, at Dan's instigation, in a regimental
belting which in all probability would have killed him and cut off
the supply of beer, had not he been sent on special duty some
fifty miles away from the Cantonment to cool his heels in a mud
fort and dismount obsolete artillery. Then the colonel of the
Mavericks, reading his newspaper diligently, and scenting Frontier
trouble from afar, posted to the army headquarters and pled with
the Commander-in-chief for certain privileges, to be granted under
certain contingencies,; which contingencies came about only a week
later, when the annual little war on the border developed itself
and the colonel returned to carry the good news to the Mavericks.
He held the promise of the Chief for active service, and the men
must get ready.

On the evening of the same day, Mulcahy, an unconsidered corporal
- yet great in conspiracy - returned to cantonments, and heard
sounds of strife and howlings from afar off. The mutiny had broken
out and the barracks of the Mavericks were one white-washed
pandemonium. A private tearing through the barrack-square, gasped
in his ear, "Service! Active service. It's a burnin' shame." Oh
joy, the Mavericks had risen on the eve of battle! They would not
- noble and loyal sons of Ireland - serve the Queen longer. The
news would flash through the country-side and over to England, and
he - Mulcahy - the trusted of the Third Three, had brought about
the crash. The private stood in the middle of the square and
cursed colonel, regiment, officers, and doctor, particularly the
doctor, by his gods. An orderly of the native cavalry regiment
clattered through the mob of soldiers. He was half lifted, half
dragged from his horse, beaten on the back with mighty hand-claps
till his eyes watered, and called all manner of endearing names.
Yes, the Mavericks had fraternized with the native troops. Who
then was the agent among the latter that had blindly wrought with
Mulcahy so well?

An officer slunk, almost ran, from the mess to a barrack. He was
mobbed by the infuriated soldiery, who closed round but did not
kill him, for he fought his way to shelter, flying for the life.
Mulcahy could have wept with pure joy and thankfulness. The very
prisoners in the guard-room were shaking the bars of their cells
and howling like wild beasts, and from every barrack poured the
booming as of a big war-drum.

Mulcahy hastened to his own barrack. He could hardly hear himself
speak. Eighty men were pounding with fist and heel the tables and
trestles - eighty men, flushed with mutiny, stripped to their
shirt sleeves, their knapsacks half-packed for the march to the
sea, made the two-inch boards thunder again as they chanted, to a
tune that Mulcahy knew well, the Sacred War Song of the Mavericks-

Listen in the north, my boys, there's trouble on the wind;
Tramp o' Cossack hooves in front, gray great-coats behind,
Trouble on the Frontier of a most amazin' kind,
Trouble on the waters o' the Oxus!

Then, as the table broke under the furious accompaniment -
Hurrah! hurrah! it's north by west we go;
Hurrah! hurrah! the chance we wanted so;
Let 'em hear the chorus from Umballa to Moscow,
As we go marchin' to the Kremling.

"Mother of all the saints in bliss and all the devils in cinders,
where's my fine new sock widout the heel?" howled Horse Egan,
ransacking everybody's valise but his own. He was engaged in
making up deficiencies of kit preparatory to a campaign, and in
that work he steals best who steals last. "Ah, Mulcahy, you're in
good time," he shouted, "We've got the route, and we're off on
Thursday for a pic-nic wid the Lancers next door."

An ambulance orderly appeared with a huge basket full of lint
rolls, provided by the forethought of the Queen for such as might
need them later on. Horse Egan unrolled his bandage, and flicked
it under Mulcahy's nose, chanting -

"Sheepskin an' bees' wax, thunder, pitch, and plaster,
The more you try to pull it off, the more it sticks the faster.
As I was goin' to New Orleans -

"You know the rest of it, my Irish American-Jew boy. By gad, ye
have to fight for the Queen in the inside av a fortnight, my
darlin'"

A roar of laughter interrupted. Mulcahy looked vacantly down the
room. Bid a boy defy his father when the pantomime-cab is at the
door, or a girl develop a will of her own when her mother is
putting the last touches to the first ball-dress, but do not ask
an Irish regiment to embark upon mutiny on the eve of a campaign,
when it has fraternised with the native regiment that accompanies
it, and driven its officers into retirement with ten thousand
clamorous questions, and the
prisoners dance for joy, and the sick men stand in the open
calling down all known diseases on the head of the doctor, who has
certified that they are
"medically unfit for active service." At even the Mavericks might
have been mistaken for mutineers by one so unversed in their
natures as Mulcahy. At dawn a girls' school might have learned
deportment from them. They knew that their
colonel's hand had closed, and that he who broke that iron
discipline would not go to the front: nothing in the world will
persuade one of our soldiers, when he is ordered to the north on
the smallest of affairs, that he is not immediately going
gloriously to slay Cossacks and cook his kettles in the palace of
the Czar. A few of the younger men mourned for Mulcahy's beer,
because the campaign was to be conducted on strict temperance
principles, but as Dan and Horse Egan said sternly, "We've got the
beer-man with us. He shall drink now on his own hook."

Mulcahy had not taken into account the possibility of being sent
on active service. He had made up his mind that he would not go
under any circumstances, but fortune was against him.

"Sick-you?" said the doctor, who had served an unholy
apprenticeship to his trade in Tralee poorhouses. "You're only
home-sick, and what you call varicose veins come from over-eating.
A little gentle exercise will cure that." And later, "Mulcahy, my
man, everybody is allowed to apply for a sick-certificate once. If
he tries it twice we call him by an ugly name. Go back to your
duty, and let's hear no more of your diseases."

I am ashamed to say that Horse Egan enjoyed the study of Mulcahy's
soul in those days, and Dan took an equal interest. Together they
would communicate to their corporal all the dark lore of death
which is the portion of those who have
seen men die. Egan had the larger experience, but Dan the finer
imagination. Mulcahy shivered when the former spoke of the knife
as an intimate acquaintance, or the latter dwelt with loving
particularity on the fate of those who, wounded and helpless, had
been overlooked by the ambulances, and had fallen into the hands
of the Afghan women-folk.

Mulcahy knew that the mutiny, for the present at least, was dead;
knew, too, that a change had come over Dan's usually respectful
attitude towards him, and Horse Egan's laughter and frequent
allusions to abortive conspiracies emphasised all that the
conspirator had guessed. The horrible fascination of the death-
stories, however, made him seek the men's society. He learned much
more than he had bargained for; and in this manner. It was on the
last night before the regiment entrained to the front. The
barracks were stripped of everything movable, and the men were too
excited to sleep. The bare walls gave out a heavy hospital smell
of chloride of lime.

"And what," said Mulcahy in an awe-stricken whisper, after some
conversation on the eternal subject, "are you going to do to me,
Dan?" This might have been the language of an able conspirator
conciliating a weak spirit.

"You'll see," said Dan grimly, turning over in his cot, "or I
rather shud say you'll not see."

This was hardly the language of a weak spirit. Mulcahy shook under
the bed-clothes.

"Bc easy with him," put in Egan from the next cot. "He has got his
chanst o' goin' clean. Listen, Mulcahy, all we want is for the
good sake of the regiment that you take your death standing up, as
a man shud. There's be heaps an' heaps of enemy - plenshus heaps.
Go there an' do all you can and die decent. You'll die with a good
name there. 'Tis not a hard thing considerin'."
-
Again Mulcahy shivered.

"An' how could a man wish to die better than fightin'?" added Dan
consolingly.

"And if I won't?" said the corporal in a dry whisper.

"There'll be a dale of smoke," returned Dan, sitting up and
ticking off the situation on his fingers, "sure to be, an' the
noise of the firin'll be tremenjus, an' we'll be running about up
and down, the regiment will. But we, Horse and I - we'll stay by
you, Mulcahy, and never let you go. Maybe there'll be an
accident."

"It's playing it low on me. Let me go. For pity's sake, let me go.
I never did you harm, and - and I stood you as much beer as I
could. Oh, don't be hard on me, Dan! You are - you were in it too.
You won't kill me up there, will you?"

"I'm not thinkin' of the treason; though you shud be glad any
honest boys drank with you. It's for the regiment. We can't have
the shame o' you bringin' shame on us. You went to the doctor
quiet as a sick cat to get and stay behind an' live with the women
at the depot - you that wanted us to run to the sea in wolf-packs
like the rebels none of your black blood dared to be! But we knew
about your goin' to the doctor, for he told in mess, and it's all
over the regiment. Bein', as we are, your best friends, we didn't
allow any one to molest you yet. We will see to you ourselves.
Fight which you will - us or the enemy you'll never lie in that
cot again, and there's more glory and maybe less kicks from
fightin' the enemy. That's fair speakin'."
-
"And he told us by word of mouth to go and join with the niggers -
you've forgotten that, Dan," said Horse Egan, to justify sentence.

"What's the use of plaguin'' the man? One shot pays for all. Sleep
ye sound, Mulcahy. But you onderstand, do ye not?"

Mulcahy for some weeks understood very little of anything at all
save that ever at his elbow, in camp or at parade, stood two big
men with soft voices adjuring him to commit hari-kari lest a worse
thing should happen - to die for the honour of the regiment in
decency among the nearest knives. But Mulcahy dreaded death. He
remembered certain things that priests had said in his infancy,
and his mother - not the one at New York - starting from her sleep
with shrieks to pray for a husband's soul in torment. It is well
to be of a cultured intelligence, but in time of trouble the weak
human mind returns to the creed it sucked in at the breast, and if
that creed be not a pretty one trouble follows. Also, the death he
would have to face would be physically painful. Most conspirators
have large imaginations. Mulcahy could see himself, as he lay on
the earth in the night, dying by various causes. They were all
horrible; the mother in New York was very far away, and the
Regiment, the engine that, once you fall in its grip, moves you
forward whether you will or won't, was daily coming closer to the
enemy!

They were brought to the field of MarzunKatai, and with the Black
Boneens to aid, they fought a fight that has never been set down
in the newspapers. In response, many believe, to the fervent
prayers of Father Dennis, the enemy not only elected to fight in
the open, but made a beautiful fight, as many weeping Irish
mothers knew later. They gathered behind walls or flickered across
the open in shouting masses, and were pot-valiant in artillery. It
was expedient to hold a large reserve and wait for the
psychological moment that was being prepared by the shrieking
shrapnel. Therefore the Mavericks lay down in open order on the
brow of a hill to watch the play till their call should come.
Father Dennis, whose duty was in the rear, to smooth the trouble
of the wounded, had naturally managed to make his way to the
foremost of his boys, and lay like a black porpoise, at length on
the grass. To him crawled Mulcahy, ashen-gray, demanding
absolution.

"'Wait till you're shot," said Father Dennis sweetly. "There's a
time for everything."

Dan Grady chuckled as he blew for the fiftieth time into the
breech of his speckless rifle. Mulcahy groaned and buried his head
in his arms till a stray shot spoke like a snipe immediately above
his head, and a general heave and tremour rippled the line. Other
shots followed and a few took effect, as a shriek or a grunt
attested. The officers, who had been lying down with the men, rose
and began to walk steadily up and down the front of their
companies.

This manoeuvre, executed, not for publication, but as a guarantee
of good faith, to soothe men, demands nerve. You must not hurry,
you must not look nervous, though you know that you are a mark for
every rifle within extreme range, and above all if you are smitten
you must make as little noise as possible and roll inwards through
the files. It is at this hour, when the breeze brings the first
salt whiff of the powder to noses rather cold at the tip, and the
eye can quietly take in the appearance of each red casualty, that
the strain on the nerves is strongest. Scotch regiments can endure
for half a day and abate no whit of their zeal at the end; English
regiments sometimes sulk under punishment, while the Irish, like
the French, are apt to run forward by ones and twos, which is just
as bad as running back. The truly wise commandant of highly-strung
troops allows them, in seasons of waiting, to hear the sound of
their own voices uplifted in song. There is a legend of an English
regiment that lay by its arms under fire chaunting "Sam Hall," to
the horror of its newly appointed and pious colonel. The Black
Boneens, who were suffering more than the Mavericks, on a hill
half a mile away, began presently to explain to all who cared to
listen -

We'll sound the jubilee, from the centre to the sea,
And Ireland shall be free, says the Shan-van Vogh.

"Sing, boys," said Father Dennis softly. "It looks as if we cared
for their Afghan peas."

Dan Grady raised himself to his knees and opened his mouth in a
song imparted to him, as to most of his comrades, in the strictest
confidence by Mulcahy - that Mulcahy then lying limp and fainting
on the grass, the chill fear of death upon him.

Company after company caught up the words which, the I. A. A. say,
are to herald the general rising of Erin, and to breathe which,
except to those duly appointed to hear, is death. Wherefore they
are printed in this place.

The Saxon in Heaven's just balance is weighed,
His doom like Belshazzar's in death has been cast,
And the hand of the venger shall never be stayed
Till his race, faith, and speech are a dream of the past.

They were heart-filling lines and they ran with a swirl; the I. A.
A. are better served by their pens than their petards. Dan clapped
Mulcahy merrily on the back, asking him to sing up. The officers
lay down again. There was no need to walk any more. Their men were
soothing themselves thunderously, thus -

St. Mary in Heaven has written the vow
That the land shall not rest till the heretic blood,
From the babe at the breast to the hand at the plough,
Has rolled to the ocean like Shannon in flood!

"I'll speak to you after all's over," said Father Dennis
authoritatively in Dan's ear. "What's the use of confessing to me
when you do this foolishness? Dan, you've been playing with fire!
I'll lay you more penance in a week than -"

"Come along to Purgatory with us, Father dear. The Boneens are on
the move; they'll let us go now!"

The regiment rose to the blast of the bugle as one man; but one
man there was who rose more swiftly than all the others, for half
an inch of bayonet was in the fleshy part of his leg.

"You've got to do it," said Dan grimly. "Do it decent, anyhow;"
and the roar of the rush drowned his words, for the rear companies
thrust forward the first, still singing as they swung down the
slope -

From the child at the breast to the hand at the plough
Shall roll to the ocean like Shannon in flood!

They should have sung it in the face of England, not of the
Afghans, whom it impressed as much as did the wild Irish yell.

"They came down singing," said the unofficial report of the enemy,
borne from village to village the next day. "They continued to
sing, and it was written that our men could not abide when they
came. It is believed that there was magic in the aforesaid song."

Dan and Horse Egan kept themselves in the neighbourhood of
Mulcahy. Twice the man would have bolted back in the confusion.
Twice he was heaved, kicked, and shouldered back again into the
unpaintable inferno of a hotly contested charge.

At the end, the panic excess of his fear drove him into madness
beyond all human courage. His eyes staring at nothing, his mouth
open and frothing, and breathing as one in a cold bath, he went
forward demented, while Dan toiled after him. The charge checked
at a high mud wall. It was Mulcahy who scrambled up tooth and nail
and hurled down among the bayonets the amazed Afghan who barred
his way. It was Mulcahy, keeping to the straight line of the rabid
dog, who led a collection of ardent souls at a newly unmasked
battery and flung himself on the muzzle of a gun as his companions
danced among the gunners. It was Mulcahy who ran wildly on from
that battery into the open plain, where the enemy were retiring in
sullen groups. His hands were empty, he had lost helmet and belt,
and he was bleeding from a wound in the neck. Dan and Horse Egan,
panting and distressed, had thrown themselves down on the ground
by the captured guns, when they noticed Mulcahy's charge.

"Mad," said Horse Egan critically. "Mad with fear! He's going
straight to his death, an' shouting's no use."

"Let him go. Watch now! If we fire we'll hit him maybe."

The last of a hurrying crowd of Afghans turned at the noise of
shod feet behind him, and shifted his knife ready to hand. This,
he saw, was no time to take prisoners. Mulcahy tore on, sobbing;
the straight-held blade went home through the defenceless breast,
and the body pitched forward almost before a shot from Dan's rifle
brought down the slayer and still further hurried the Afghan
retreat. The two Irishmen went out to bring in their dead.

"He was given the point, and that was an easy death," said Horse
Egan, viewing the corpse. "But would you ha' shot him, Danny, if
he had lived?"

"He didn't live, so there's no sayin'. But I doubt I wud have
bekaze of the fun he gave us - let alone the beer. Hike up his
legs, Horse, and we'll bring him in. Perhaps 'tis better this
way."

They bore the poor limp body to the mass of the regiment, lolling
open-mouthed on their rifles; and there was a general snigger when
one of the younger subalterns said, "That was a good man!"

"Phew," said Horse Egan, when a burial-party had taken over the
burden. "I'm powerful dhry, and this reminds me there'll be no
more beer at all."

"Fwhy not?" said Dan, with a twinkle in his eye as he stretched
himself for rest. "Are we not conspirin' all we can, an' while we
conspire are we not entitled to free dhrinks? Sure his ould mother
in New York would not let her son's comrades perish of drouth - if
she can be reached at the end of a letter."

"You're a janius," said Horse Egan. "0' coorse she will not. I
wish this crool war was over, an' we'd get back to canteen. Faith,
the Commander-in-chief ought to be hanged in his own little sword-
belt for makin' us work on wather."

The Mavericks were generally of Horse Egan's opinion. So they made
haste to get their work done as soon as possible, and their
industry was rewarded by unexpected peace. " We can fight the sons
of Adam," said the tribesmen, "but we cannot fight the sons of
Eblis, and this regiment never stays still in one place. Let us
therefore come in." They came in, and "this regiment" withdrew to
conspire under the leadership of Dan Grady.

Excellent as a subordinate, Dan failed altogether as a chief-in-
command - possibly because he was too much swayed by the advice of
the only man in the regiment who could manufacture more than one
kind of handwriting. The same mail that bore to Mulcahy's mother
in New York a letter from the colonel telling her how valiantly
her son had fought for the Queen, and how assuredly he would have
been recommended for the Victoria Cross had he survived, carried a
communication signed, I grieve to say, by that same colonel and
all the officers of the regiment, explaining their willingness to
do "anything which is contrary to the regulations and all kinds of
revolutions" if only a little money could be forwarded to cover
incidental expenses. Daniel Grady, Esquire, would receive funds,
vice Mulcahy, who "was unwell at this present time of writing."

Both letters were forwarded from New York to Tehama Street, San
Francisco, with marginal comments as brief as they were bitter.
The Third Three read and looked at each other. Then the Second
Conspirator - he who believed in "joining hands with the practical
branches" - began to laugh, and on recovering his gravity said,
"Gentlemen, I consider this will be a lesson to us. We're left
again. Those cursed Irish have let us down. I knew they would,
but" - here he laughed afresh - "I'd give considerable to know
what was at the back of it all."

His curiosity would have been satisfied had he seen Dan Grady,
discredited regimental conspirator, trying to explain to his
thirsty comrades in India the non-arrival of funds from New York.


THE MAN WHO WAS

The Earth gave up her dead that tide,
Into our camp he came,
And said his say, and went his way,
And left our hearts aflame.

Keep tally - on the gun-butt score
The vengeance we must take,
When God shall bring full reckoning,
For our dead comrade's sake.

Ballad.

Let it be clearly understood that the Russian is a delightful
person till he tucks in his shirt. As an Oriental he is charming.
It is only when he insists upon being treated as the most easterly
of western peoples instead of the most westerly of easterns that
he becomes a racial anomaly extremely difficult to handle. The
host never knows which side of his nature is going to turn up
next.

Dirkovitch was a Russian - a Russian of the Russians - who
appeared to get his bread by serving the Czar as an officer in a
Cossack regiment, and corresponding for a Russian newspaper with a
name that was never twice alike. He was a handsome young Oriental,
fond of wandering through unexplored portions of the earth, and he
arrived in India from nowhere in particular. At least no living
man could ascertain whether it was by way of Balkh, Badakshan,
Chitral, Beluchistan, or Nepaul, or anywhere else. The Indian
Government, being in an unusually affable mood, gave orders that
he was to be civilly treated and shown everything that was to be
seen. So he drifted, talking bad English and worse French, from
one city to another, till he foregathered with Her Majesty's White
Hussars in the city of Peshawur, which stands at the mouth of that
narrow swordcut in the hills that men call the Khyber Pass. He was
undoubtedly an officer, and he was decorated after the manner of
the Russians with little enamelled crosses, and he could talk, and
(though this has nothing to do with his merits) he had been given
up as a hopeless task, or cask, by the Black Tyrone, who
individually and collectively, with hot whiskey and honey, mulled
brandy, and mixed spirits of every kind, had striven in all
hospitality to make him drunk. And when the Black Tyrone, who are
exclusively Irish, fail to disturb the peace of head of a
foreigner - that foreigner is certain to be a superior man.

The White Hussars were as conscientious in choosing their wine as
in charging the enemy. All that they possessed, including some
wondrous brandy, was placed at the absolute disposition of
Dirkovitch, and he enjoyed himself hugely - even more than among
the Black Tyrones.

But he remained distressingly European through it all. The White
Hussars were "My dear true friends," "Fellow-soldiers glorious,"
and "Brothers inseparable." He would unburden himself by the hour
on the glorious future that awaited the combined arms of England
and Russia when their hearts and their territories should run side
by side, and the great mission of civilising Asia should begin.
That was unsatisfactory, because Asia is not going to be civilised
after the methods of the West. There is too much Asia and she is
too old. You cannot reform a lady of many lovers, and Asia has
been insatiable in her flirtations aforetime. She will never
attend Sunday-school or learn to vote save with swords for
tickets.

Dirkovitch knew this as well as any one else, but it suited him to
talk special-correspondently and to make himself as genial as he
could. Now and then he volunteered a little, a very little,
information about his own sotnia of Cossacks, left apparently to
look after themselves somewhere at the back of beyond. He had done
rough work in Central Asia, and had seen rather more help-yourself
fighting than most men of his years. But he was careful never to
betray his superiority, and more than careful to praise on all
occasions the appearance, drill, uniform, and organisation of Her
Majesty's White Hussars. And indeed they were a regiment to be
admired. When Lady Durgan, widow of the late Sir John Durgan,
arrived in their station, and after a short time had been proposed
to by every single man at mess, she put the public sentiment very
neatly when she explained that they were all so nice that unless
she could marry them all, including the colonel and some majors
already married, she was not going to content herself with one
hussar. Wherefore she wedded a little man in a rifle regiment,
being by nature contradictious; and the White Hussars were going
to wear crape on their arms, but compromised by attending the
wedding in full force, and lining the aisle with unutterable
reproach. She had jilted them all - from Basset-Holmer the senior
captain to little Mildred the junior subaltern, who could have
given her four thousand a year and a title.

The only persons who did not share the general regard for the
White Hussars were a few thousand gentlemen of Jewish extraction
who lived across the border, and answered to the name of Pathan.
They had once met the regiment officially and for something less
than twenty minutes, but the interview, which was complicated with
many casualties, had filled them with prejudice. They even called
the White Hussars children of the devil and sons of persons whom
it would be perfectly impossible to meet in decent society. Yet
they were not above making their aversion fill their money-belts.
The regiment possessed carbines - beautiful Martini-Henry carbines
that would lob a bullet into an enemy's camp at one thousand
yards, and were even handier than the long rifle. Therefore they
were coveted all along the border, and since demand inevitably
breeds supply, they were supplied at the risk of life and limb for
exactly their weight in coined silver - seven and one half pounds'
weight of rupees, or sixteen pounds sterling reckoning the rupee
at par. They were stolen at night by snaky-haired thieves who
crawled on their stomachs under the nose of the sentries; they
disappeared mysteriously from locked arm-racks, and in the hot
weather, when all the barrack doors and windows were open, they
vanished like puffs of their own smoke. The border people desired
them for family vendettas and contingencies. But in the long cold
nights of the northern Indian winter they were stolen most
extensively. The traffic of murder was liveliest among the hills
at that season, and prices ruled high. The regimental guards were
first doubled and then trebled. A trooper does not much care if he
loses a weapon - Government must make it good - but he deeply
resents the loss of his sleep. The regiment grew very angry, and
one rifle-thief bears the visible marks of their anger upon him to
this hour. That incident stopped the burglaries for a time, and
the guards were reduced accordingly, and the regiment devoted
itself to polo with unexpected results; for it beat by two goals
to one that very terrible polo corps the Lushkar Light Horse,
though the latter had four ponies apiece for a short hour's fight,
as well as a native officer who played like a lambent flame across
the ground.

They gave a dinner to celebrate the event. The Lushkar team came,
and Dirkovitch came, in the fullest full uniform of a Cossack
officer, which is as full as a dressing-gown, and was introduced
to the Lushkars, and opened his eyes as he regarded. They were
lighter men than the Hussars, and they carried themselves with the
swing that is the peculiar right of the Punjab Frontier Force and
all Irregular Horse. Like everything else in the Service it has to
be learnt, but, unlike many things, it is never forgotten, and
remains on the body till death.

The great beam-roofed mess-room of the White Hussars was a sight
to be remembered. All the mess plate was out on the long table -
the same table that had served up the bodies of five officers
after a forgotten fight long and long ago - the dingy, battered
standards faced the door of entrance, clumps of winter-roses lay
between the silver candlesticks, and the portraits of eminent
officers deceased looked down on their successors from between the
heads of sambhur, nilghai, markhor, and, pride of all the mess,
two grinning snow-leopards that had cost Basset-Holmer four
months' leave that he might have spent in England, instead of on
the road to Thibet and the daily risk of his life by ledge, snow-
slide, and grassy slope.

The servants in spotless white muslin and the crest of their
regiments on the brow of their turbans waited behind their
masters, who were clad in the scarlet and gold of the White
Hussars, and the cream and silver of the Lushkar Light Horse.
Dirkovitch's dull green uniform was the only dark spot at the
board, but his big onyx eyes made up for it. He was fraternising
effusively with the captain of the Lushkar team, who was wondering
how many of Dirkovitch's Cossacks his own dark wiry down-
countrymen could account for in a fair charge. But one does not
speak of these things openly.

The talk rose higher and higher, and the regimental band played
between the courses, as is the immemorial custom, till all tongues
ceased for a moment with the removal of the dinner-slips and the
first toast of obligation, when an officer rising said, "Mr. Vice,
the Queen," and little Mildred from the bottom of the table
answered, "The Queen, God bless her," and the big spurs clanked as
the big men heaved themselves up and drank the Queen upon whose
pay they were falsely supposed to settle their mess-bills. That
Sacrament of the Mess never grows old, and never ceases to bring a
lump into the throat of the listener wherever he be by sea or by
land. Dirkovitch rose with his "brothers glorious," but he could
not understand. No one but an officer can tell what the toast
means; and the bulk have more sentiment than comprehension.
Immediately after the little silence that follows on the ceremony
there entered the native officer who had played for the Lushkar
team. He could not, of course, eat with the mess, but he came in
at dessert, all six feet of him, with the blue and silver turban
atop, and the big black boots below. The mess rose joyously as he
thrust forward the hilt of his sabre in token of fealty for the
colonel of the White Hussars to touch, and dropped into a vacant
chair amid shouts of: "Rung ho, Hira Singh!" (which being
translated means "Go in and win "). "Did I whack you over the
knee, old man?" "Ressaidar Sahib, what the devil made you play
that kicking pig of a pony in the last ten minutes?" "Shabash,
Ressaidar Sahib!" Then the voice of the colonel, "The health of
Ressaidar Hira Singh!"

After the shouting had died away Hira Singh rose to reply, for he
was the cadet of a royal house, the son of a king's son, and knew
what was due on these occasions. Thus he spoke in the vernacular:
- "Colonel Sahib and officers of this regiment. Much honour have
you done me. This will I remember. We came down from afar to play
you. But we were beaten." (" No fault of yours, Ressaidar Sahib.
Played on our own ground, y' know. Your ponies were cramped from
the railway. Don't apologise!") "Therefore perhaps we will come
again if it be so ordained." (" Hear! Hear! Hear, indeed! Bravo!
Hsh!") "Then we will play you afresh" ("Happy to meet you.") "till
there are left no feet upon our ponies. Thus far for sport." He
dropped one hand on his sword-hilt and his eye wandered to
Dirkovitch lolling back in his chair. "But if by the will of God
there arises any other game which is not the polo game, then be
assured, Colonel Sahib and officers, that we will play it out side
by side, though they," again his eye sought Dirkovitch, "though
they, I say, have fifty ponies to our one horse." And with a deep-
mouthed Rung ho! that sounded like a musket-butt on flagstones he
sat down amid leaping glasses.

Dirkovitch, who had devoted himself steadily to the brandy - the
terrible brandy aforementioned - did not understand, nor did the
expurgated translations offered to him at all convey the point.
Decidedly Hira Singh's was the speech of the evening, and the
clamour might have continued to the dawn had it not been broken by
the noise of a shot without that sent every man feeling at his
defenseless left side. Then there was a scuffle and a yell of
pain.

"Carbine-stealing again!" said the adjutant, calmly sinking back
in his chair. "This comes of reducing the guards. I hope the
sentries have killed him."

The feet of armed men pounded on the verandah flags, and it was as
though something was being dragged.

"Why don't they put him in the cells till the morning?" said the
colonel testily. "See if they've damaged him, sergeant."

The mess sergeant fled out into the darkness and returned with two
troopers and a corporal, all very much perplexed.

"Caught a man stealin' carbines, sir," said the corporal.
"Leastways 'e was crawlin' towards the barricks, sir, past the
main road sentries, an' the sentry 'e sez, sir -"

The limp heap of rags upheld by the three men groaned. Never was
seen so destitute and demoralised an Afghan. He was turbanless,
shoeless, caked with dirt, and all but dead with rough handling.
Hira Singh started slightly at the sound of the man's pain.
Dirkovitch took another glass of brandy.

"What does the sentry say?" said the colonel.

"Sez 'e speaks English, sir," said the corporal.

"So you brought him into mess instead of handing him over to the
sergeant! If he spoke all the Tongues of the Pentecost you've no
business -"

Again the bundle groaned and muttered. Little Mildred had risen
from his place to inspect. He jumped back as though he had been
shot.

"Perhaps it would be better, sir, to send the men away," said he
to the colonel, for he was a much privileged subaltern. He put his
arms round the rag-bound horror as he spoke, and dropped him into
a chair. It may not have been explained that the littleness of
Mildred lay in his being six feet four and big in proportion. The
corporal seeing that an officer was disposed to look after the
capture, and that the colonel's eye was beginning to blaze,
promptly removed himself and his men. The mess was left alone with
the carbine-thief, who laid his head on the table and wept
bitterly, hopelessly, and inconsolably as little children weep.

Hira Singh leapt to his feet. "Colonel Sahib,"
said he, "that man is no Afghan, for they weep Ai! Ai! Nor is he
of Hindustan, for they weep Oh! Ho! He weeps after the fashion of
the white men, who say Ow! Ow!"

"Now where the dickens did you get that knowledge, Hira Singh?"
said the captain of the Lushkar team.

"Hear him!" said Hira Singh simply, pointing at the crumpled
figure that wept as though it would never cease.

"He said, 'My God!" said little Mildred. "I heard him say it."

The colonel and the mess-room looked at the man in silence. It is
a horrible thing to hear a man cry. A woman can sob from the top -
of her palate, or her lips, or anywhere else, but a man must cry
from his diaphragm, and it rends him to pieces.

"Poor devil!" said the colonel, coughing tremendously. "We ought
to send him to hospital. He's been man-handled."

Now the adjutant loved his carbines. They were to him as his
grandchildren, the men standing in the first place. He grunted
rebelliously: "I can understand an Afghan stealing, because he's
built that way. But I can't understand his crying. That makes it
worse."

The brandy must have affected Dirkovitch, for he lay back in his
chair and stared at the ceiling. There was nothing special in the
ceiling beyond a shadow as of a huge black coffin. Owing to some
peculiarity in the construction of the mess-room, this shadow was
always thrown when the candles were lighted. It never disturbed
the digestion of the White Hussars. They were in fact rather proud
of it.

"Is he going to cry all night?" said the colonel, "or are we
supposed to sit up with little Mildred's guest until he feels
better?"

The man in the chair threw up his head and stared at the mess.
"Oh, my God!" he said, and every soul in the mess rose to his
feet. Then the Lushkar captain did a deed for which he ought to
have been given the Victoria Cross - distinguished gallantry in a
fight against overwhelming curiosity. He picked up his team with
his eyes as the hostess picks up the ladies at the opportune
moment, and pausing only by the colonel's chair to say, "This
isn't our affair, you know, sir," led them into the verandah and
the gardens. Hira Singh was the last to go, and he looked at
Dirkovitch. But Dirkovitch had departed into a brandy-paradise of
his own. His lips moved without sound and he was studying the
coffin on the ceiling.

"White - white all over," said Basset-Holmer, the adjutant. "What
a pernicious renegade he must be! I wonder where he came from?"

The colonel shook the man gently by the arm, and "Who are you?"
said he.

There was no answer. The man stared round the mess-room and smiled
in the colonel's face. Little Mildred, who was always more of a
woman than a man till "Boot and saddle" was sounded, repeated the
question in a voice that would have drawn confidences from a
geyser. The man only smiled. Dirkovitch at the far end of the
table slid gently from his chair to the floor. No son of Adam in
this present imperfect world can mix the Hussars' champagne with
the Hussars' brandy by five and eight glasses of each without
remembering the pit whence he was digged and descending thither.
The band began to play the tune with which the White Hussars from
the date of their formation have concluded all their functions.
They would sooner be disbanded than abandon that tune; it is a
part of their system. The man straightened himself in his chair
and drummed on the table with his fingers.

"I don't see why we should entertain lunatics," said the colonel.
"Call a guard and send him off to the cells. We'll look into the
business in the morning. Give him a glass of wine first, though."

Little Mildred filled a sherry-glass with the brandy and thrust it
over to the man. He drank, and the tune rose louder, and he
straightened himself yet more. Then he put out his long-taloned
hands to a piece of plate opposite and fingered it lovingly. There
was a mystery connected with that piece of plate, in the shape of
a spring which converted what was a seven-branched candlestick,
three springs on each side and one in the middle, into a sort of
wheel-spoke candelabrum. He found the spring, pressed it, and
laughed weakly. He rose from his chair and inspected a picture on
the wall, then moved on to another picture, the mess watching him
without a word. When he came to the mantelpiece he shook his head
and seemed distressed. A piece of plate representing a mounted
hussar in full uniform caught his eye. He pointed to it, and then
to the mantelpiece with inquiry in his eyes.

"What is it - Oh, what is it?" said little Mildred. Then as a
mother might speak to a child, "That is a horse. Yes, a horse."

Very slowly came the answer in a thick, passionless guttural-"
Yes, I - have seen. But - where is the horse?"

You could have heard the hearts of the mess beating as the men
drew back to give the stranger full room in his wanderings. There
was no question of calling the guard.

Again he spoke - very slowly, "Where is our horse?"

There is but one horse in the White Hussars, and his portrait
hangs outside the door of the mess-room. He is the piebald drum-
horse, the king of the regimental band, that served the regiment
for seven-and-thirty years, and in the end was shot for old age.
Half the mess tore the thing down from its place and thrust it
into the man's hands. He placed it above the mantelpiece, it
clattered on the ledge as his poor hands dropped it, and he
staggered towards the bottom of the table, falling into Mildred's
chair. Then all the men spoke to one another something after this
fashion, "The drum-horse hasn't hung over the mantelpiece since
'67." "How does he know?" "Mildred, go and speak to him again."
"Colonel, what are you going to do?" "Oh, dry up, and give the
poor devil a chance to pull himself together." "It isn't possible
anyhow. The man's a lunatic."

Little Mildred stood at the colonel's side, talking in his ear.
"Will you be good enough to take your seats please, gentlemen!" he
said, and the mess dropped into the chairs. Only Dirkovitch's
seat, next to little Mildred's, was blank, and little Mildred
himself had found Hira Singh's place. The wide-eyed mess-sergeant
filled the glasses in dead silence. Once more the colonel rose,
but his hand shook, and the port spilled on the table as he looked
straight at the man in little Mildred's chair and said hoarsely,
"Mr. Vice, the Queen." There was a little pause, but the man
sprung to his feet and answered without hesitation, "The Queen,
God bless her!" and as he emptied the thin glass he snapped the
shank between his fingers.

Long and long ago, when the Empress of India was a young woman,
and there were no unclean ideals in the land, it was the custom of
a few messes to drink the Queen's toast in broken glass, to the
vast delight of the mess-contractors. The custom is now dead,
because there is nothing to break anything for, except now and
again the word of a Government, and that has been broken already.

"That settles it," said the colonel, with a gasp. "He's not a
sergeant. What in the world is he?"

The entire mess echoed the word, and the volley of questions would
have scared any man. It was no wonder that the ragged, filthy
invader could only smile and shake his head.

From under the table, calm and smiling, rose Dirkovitch, who had
been roused from healthful slumber by feet upon his body. By the
side of the man he rose, and the man shrieked and grovelled. It
was a horrible sight, coming so swiftly upon the pride and glory
of the toast that had brought the strayed wits together.

Dirkovitch made no offer to raise him, but little Mildred heaved
him up in an instant. It is not good that a gentleman who can
answer to the Queen's toast should lie at the feet of a subaltern
of Cossacks.

The hasty action tore the wretch's upper clothing nearly to the
waist, and his body was seamed with dry black scars. There is only
one weapon in the world that cuts in parallel lines, and it is
neither the cane nor the cat. Dirkovitch saw the marks, and the
pupils of his eyes dilated. Also his face changed. He said
something that sounded like Shto ve takete, and the man fawning
answered, Chetyre.

"What's that?" said everybody together.

"His number. That is number four, you know." Dirkovitch spoke very
thickly.

"What has a Queen's officer to do with a qualified number?" said
the Colonel, and an unpleasant growl ran round the table.

"How can I tell?" said the affable Oriental with a sweet smile.
"He is a - how you have it? - escape - run-a-way, from over
there." He nodded towards the darkness of the night.

"Speak to him if he'll answer you, and speak to him gently," said
little Mildred, settling the man in a chair. It seemed most
improper to all present that Dirkovitch should sip brandy as he
talked in purring, spitting Russian to the creature who answered
so feebly and with such evident dread. But since Dirkovitch
appeared to understand, no one said a word. All breathed heavily,
leaning forward, in the long gaps of the conversation. The next
time that they have no engagements on hand the White Hussars
intend to go to St. Petersburg in a body to learn Russian.

"He does not know how many years ago," said Dirkovitch, facing the
mess, "but he says it was very long ago in a war. I think that
there was an accident. He says he was of this glorious and
distinguished regiment in the war."

"The rolls! The rolls! Holmer, get the rolls!" said little
Mildred, and the adjutant dashed off bare-headed to the orderly-
room, where the muster-rolls of the regiment were kept. He
returned just in time to hear Dirkovitch conclude, "Therefore, my
dear friends, I am most sorry to say there was an accident which
would have been reparable if he had apologised to that our
colonel, which he had insulted."

Then followed another growl which the colonel tried to beat down.
The mess was in no mood just then to weigh insults to Russian
colonels.

"He does not remember, but I think that there was an accident, and
so he was not exchanged among the prisoners, but he was sent to
another place - how do you  say? - the country. So, he says, he
came here. He does not know how he came. Eh? He was at Chepany," -
the man caught the word, nodded, and shivered, - "at Zhigansk and
Irkutsk. I cannot understand how he escaped. He says, too, that he
was in the forests for many years, but how many years he has
forgotten - that with many things. It was an accident; done
because he did not apologise to that our colonel. Ah!"

Instead of echoing Dirkovitch's sigh of regret, it is sad to
record that the White Hussars livelily exhibited un-Christian
delight and other emotions, hardly restrained by their sense of
hospitality. Holmer flung the frayed and yellow regimental rolls
on the table, and the men flung themselves at these.

"Steady! Fifty-six - fifty-five - fifty-four," said Holmer. "Here
we are. 'Lieutenant Austin Limmason. Missing.' That was before
Sebastopol. What an infernal shame! Insulted one of their
colonels, and was quietly shipped off. Thirty years of his life
wiped out."

"But he never apologised. Said he'd see him damned first,"
chorused the mess.

"Poor chap! I suppose he never had the chance afterwards. How did
he come here?" said the colonel.

The dingy heap in the chair could give no answer.

"Do you know who you are?"

It laughed weakly.

"Do you know that you are Limmason -Lieutenant Limmason of the
White Hussars?"

Swiftly as a shot came the answer, in a slightly surprised tone,
"Yes, I'm -Limmason, of course." The light died out in his eyes,
and the man collapsed, watching every motion of Dirkovitch with
terror. A flight from Siberia may fix a few elementary facts in
the mind, but it does not seem to lead to continuity of thought.
The man could not explain how, like a homing pigeon, he had found
his way to his own old mess again. Of what he had suffered or seen
he knew nothing. He cringed before Dirkovitch as instinctively as
he had pressed the spring of the candlestick, sought the picture
of the drum-horse, and answered to the toast of the Queen. The
rest was a blank that the dreaded Russian tongue could only in
part remove. His head bowed on his breast, and he giggled and
cowered alternately.

The devil that lived in the brandy prompted Dirkovitch at this
extremely inopportune moment to make a speech. He rose, swaying
slightly, gripped the table-edge, while his eyes glowed like
opals, and began:

"Fellow-soldiers glorious - true friends and hospitables. It was
an accident, and deplorable - most deplorable." Here he smiled
sweetly all round the mess. "But you will think of this little,
little thing. So little, is it not? The Czar! Posh! I slap my
fingers - I snap my fingers at him. Do I believe in him? No! But
in us Slav who has done nothing, him I believe. Seventy - how much
- millions peoples that have done nothing - not one thing. Posh!
Napoleon was an episode." He banged a hand on the table. "Hear
you, old peoples, we have done nothing in the world - out here.
All our work is to do; and it shall be done, old peoples. Get a-
way!" He waved his hand imperiously, and pointed to the man. "You
see him. He is not good to see. He was just one little - oh, so
little -accident, that no one remembered. Now he is

That! So will you be, brother soldiers so brave so will you be.
But you will never come back. You will all go where he is gone,
or" - he pointed to the great coffin-shadow on the ceiling, and
muttering, "Seventy millions - get a-way, you old peoples," fell
asleep.

"Sweet, and to the point," said little Mildred. "What's the use of
getting wroth? Let's make this poor devil comfortable."

But that was a matter suddenly and swiftly taken from the loving
hands of the White Hussars. The lieutenant had returned only to go
away again three days later, when the wail of the Dead March, and
the tramp of the squadrons, told the wondering Station, who saw no
gap in the mess-table, that an officer of the regiment had
resigned his new-found commission.

And Dirkovitch, bland, supple, and always genial, went away too by
a night train. Little Mildred and another man saw him off, for he
was the guest of the mess, and even had he smitten the colonel
with the open hand, the law of that mess allowed no relaxation of
hospitality.

"Good-bye, Dirkovitch, and a pleasant journey," said little
Mildred.

"Au revoir," said the Russian.

"Indeed! But we thought you were going home?"

"Yes, but I will come again. My dear friends, is that road shut?"
He pointed to where the North Star burned over the Khyber Pass.

"By Jove! I forgot. Of course. Happy to meet you, old man, any
time you like. Got everything you want? Cheroots, ice, bedding?
That's all right. Well, au revoir, Dirkovitch."

"Um," said the other man, as the tail-lights of the train grew
small. "Of - all - the - unmitigated!"

Little Mildred answered nothing, but watched the North Star and
hummed a selection from recent Simla burlesque that had much
delighted the White Hussars. It ran -

I'm sorry for Mister Bluebeard,
I'm sorry to cause him pain;
But a terrible spree there's sure to be
When he comes back again.



ONLY A SUBALTERN

Not only to enforce by command but to encourage by example the
energetic discharge of duty and the steady endurance of the
difficulties and privations inseparable from Military Service. -
Bengal Army Regulations.

They made Bobby Wick pass an examination at Sandhurst. He was a
gentleman before he was gazetted, so, when the Empress announced
that "Gentleman-Cadet Robert Hanna Wick" was posted as Second
Lieutenant to the Tyneside Tail Twisters at Krab Bokhar, he became
an officer and a gentleman, which is an enviable thing; and there
was joy in the house of Wick, where Mamma Wick and all the little
Wicks fell upon their knees and offered incense to Bobby by virtue
of his achievements.

Papa Wick had been a Commissioner in his day, holding authority
over three millions of men in the Chota-Buldana Division, building
great works for the good of the land, and doing his best to make
two blades of grass grow where there was but one before. Of
course, nobody knew anything about this in the little English
village where he was just "old Mr. Wick" and had forgotten that he
was a Companion of the Order of the Star of India.

He patted Bobby on the shoulder and said: "Well done, my boy!"

There followed, while the uniform was being prepared, an interval
of pure delight, during which Bobby took brevet-rank as a "man" at
the women-swamped tennis-parties and tea-fights of the village,
and, I daresay, had his joining-time been extended, would have
fallen in love with several girls at once. Little country villages
at Home are very full of nice girls, because all the young men
come out to India to make their fortunes.

"India," said Papa Wick, "is the place. I've had thirty years of
it, and, begad, I'd like to go back again. When you join the Tail
Twisters you'll be among friends, if every one hasn't forgotten
Wick of Chota-Buldana, and a lot of people will be kind to you for
our sakes. The mother will tell you more about outfit than I can,
but remember this. Stick to your Regiment, Bobby - stick to your
Regiment. You'll see men all round you going into the Staff Corps,
and doing every possible sort of duty but regimental, and you may
be tempted to follow suit. Now so long as you keep within your
allowance, and I haven't stinted you there, stick to the Line, the
whole Line, and nothing but the Line. Be careful how you back
another young fool's bill, and if you fall in love with a woman
twenty years older than yourself, don't tell me about it, that's
all."

With these counsels, and many others equally valuable, did Papa
Wick fortify Bobby ere that last awful night at Portsmouth when
the Officers' Quarters held more inmates than were provided for by
the Regulations, and the liberty-men of the ships fell foul of the
drafts for India, and the battle raged from the Dockyard Gates
even to the slums of Longport, while the drabs of Fratton came
down and scratched the faces of the Queen's Officers.

Bobby Wick, with an ugly bruise on his freckled nose, a sick and
shaky detachment to manoeuvre inship, and the comfort of fifty
scornful females to attend to, had no time to feel homesick till
the Malabar reached mid-Channel, when he doubled his emotions with
a little guard-visiting and a great many other matters.

The Tail Twisters were a most particular Regiment. Those who knew
them least said that they were eaten up with "side." But their
reserve and their internal arrangements generally were merely
protective diplomacy. Some five years before, the Colonel
commanding had looked into the fourteen fearless eyes of seven
plump and juicy subalterns who had all applied to enter the Staff
Corps, and had asked them why the three stars should he, a colonel
of the Line, command a dashed nursery for double-dashed bottle-
suckers who put on condemned tin spurs and rode qualified mokes at
the hiatused heads of forsaken Black Regiments. He was a rude man
and a terrible. Wherefore the remnant took measures (with the
half-butt as an engine of public opinion) till the rumour went
abroad that young men who used the Tail Twisters as a crutch to
the Staff Corps had many and varied trials to endure. However, a
regiment has just as much right to its own secrets as a woman.

When Bobby came up from Deolali and took his place among the Tail
Twisters, it was gently but firmly borne in upon him that the
Regiment was his father and his mother and his indissolubly wedded
wife, and that there was no crime under the canopy of heaven
blacker than that of bringing shame on the Regiment, which was the
best-shooting, best-drilled, best set-up, bravest, most
illustrious, and in all respects most desirable Regiment within
the compass of the Seven Seas. He was taught the legends of the
Mess Plate, from the great grinning Golden Gods that had come out
of the Summer Palace in Pekin to the silver-mounted markhor-horn
snuffmull presented by the last C. 0. (he who spake to the seven
subalterns). And every one of those legends told him of battles
fought at long odds, without fear as without support; of
hospitality catholic as an Arab's; of friendships deep as the sea
and steady as the fighting-line; of honour won by hard roads for
honour's sake; and of instant and unquestioning devotion to the
Regiment - the Regiment that claims the lives of all and lives
forever.

More than once, too, he came officially into contact with the
Regimental colours, which looked like the lining of a bricklayer's
hat on the end of a chewed stick. Bobby did not kneel and worship
them, because British subalterns are not constructed in that
manner. Indeed, he condemned them for their weight at the very
moment that they were filling him with awe and other more noble
sentiments.

But best of all was the occasion when he moved with the Tail
Twisters in review order at the breaking of a November day.
Allowing for duty-men and sick, the Regiment was one thousand and
eighty strong, and Bobby belonged to them; for was he not a
Subaltern of the Line, - the whole Line and nothing but the Line,
- as the tramp of two thousand one hundred and sixty sturdy
ammunition boots attested? He would not have changed places with
Deighton of the Horse Battery, whirling by in a pillar of cloud to
a chorus of "Strong right! Strong left!" or Hogan-Yale of the
White Hussars, leading his squadron for all it was worth, with the
price of horseshoes thrown in; or "Tick" Boileau, trying to live
up to his fierce blue and gold turban while the wasps of the
Bengal Cavalry stretched to a gallop in the wake of the long,
lollopping Walers of the White Hussars.

They fought through the clear cool day, and Bobby felt a little
thrill run down his spine when he heard the tinkle-tinkle-tinkle
of the empty cartridge-cases hopping from the breech-blocks after
the roar of the volleys; for he knew that he should live to hear
that sound in action. The review ended in a glorious chase across
the plain - batteries thundering after cavalry to the huge disgust
of the White Hussars, and the Tyneside Tail Twisters hunting a
Sikh Regiment till the lean, lathy Singhs panted with exhaustion.
Bobby was dusty and dripping long before noon, but his enthusiasm
was merely focused - not diminished.

He returned to sit at the feet of Revere, his "skipper," that is
to say, the Captain of his Company, and to be instructed in the
dark art and mystery of managing men, which is a very large part
of the Profession of Arms.

"If you haven't a taste that way," said Revere between his puffs
of his cheroot, "you'll never be able to get the hang of it, but
remember, Bobby, 'tisn't the best drill, though drill is nearly
everything, that hauls a Regiment through Hell and out on the
other side. It's the man who knows how to handle men - goat-men,
swine-men, dog-men, and so on."

"Dormer, for instance," said Bobby; "I think he comes under the
head of fool-men. He mopes like a sick owl."

"That 's where you make your mistake, my son. Dormer isn't a fool
yet, but he's a dashed dirty soldier, and his room corporal makes
fun of his socks before kit-inspection. Dormer, being two-thirds
pure brute, goes into a corner and growls."

"How do you know'?" said Bobby admiringly.

"Because a Company commander has to know these things - because,
if he does not know, he may have crime - ay, murder - brewing
under his very nose and yet not see that it's there. Dormer is
being badgered out of his mind - big as he is - and he hasn't
intellect enough to resent it. He's taken to quiet boozing, and,
Bobby, when the butt of a room goes on the drink, or takes to
moping by himself, measures are necessary to pull him out of
himself."

"What measures? 'Man can't run round coddling his men for ever."

"No. The men would precious soon show him that he was not wanted.
You've got   to -

Here the Colour-sergeant entered with some papers; Bobby reflected
for a while as Revere looked through the Company forms.

"Does Dormer do anything, Sergeant?" Bobby asked with the air of
one continuing an interrupted conversation.

"No, sir. Does 'is dooty like a hortomato," said the Sergeant, who
delighted in long words. "A dirty soldier, and 'e's under full
stoppages for new kit. It's covered with scales, sir."

"Scales? What scales?"

"Fish-scales, sir. 'E's always pokin' in the mud by the river an'
a-cleanin' them muchly-fish with 'is thumbs." Revere was still
absorbed in the Company papers, and the Sergeant, who was sternly
fond of Bobby, continued, -" 'E generally goes down there when
'e's got 'is skinful, beggin' your pardon, sir, an' they do say
that the more lush - inebriated 'e is, the more fish 'e catches.
They call 'im the Looney Fishmonger in the Comp'ny, sir."

Revere signed the last paper and the Sergeant retreated.

"It's a filthy amusement," sighed Bobby to himself. Then aloud to
Revere: "Are you really worried about Dormer?"

"A little. You see he's never mad enough to send to hospital, or
drunk enough to run in, but at any minute he may flare up,
brooding and sulking as he does. He resents any interest being
shown in him, and the only time I took him out shooting he all but
shot me by accident."

"I fish," said Bobby, with a wry face. "I hire a country-boat and
go down river from Thursday to Sunday, and the amiable Dormer goes
with me - if you can spare us both."

"You blazing young fool!" said Revere, but his heart was full of
much more pleasant words.

Bobby, the Captain of a dhoni, with Private Dormer for mate,
dropped down the river on Thursday morning - the Private at the
bow, the Subaltern at the helm. The Private glared uneasily at the
Subaltern, who respected the reserve of the Private.

After six hours, Dormer paced to the stern, saluted, and said -"
Beg y' pardon, sir, but was you ever on the Durh'm Canal?"

"No," said Bobby Wick. "Come and have some tiffin."

They ate in silence. As the evening fell, Private Dormer broke
forth, speaking to himself -

"Hi was on the Durh'm Canal, jes' such a night, come next week
twelvemonth, a-trailin' of my toes in the water." He smoked and
said no more till bedtime.

The witchery of the dawn turned the gray river-reaches to purple,
gold, and opal; and it was as though the lumbering dhoni crept
across the splendours of a new heaven.

Private Dormer popped his head out of his blanket and gazed at the
glory below and around.

"Well - damn - my eyes!" said Private Dormer in an awed whisper.
"This 'ere is like a bloomin' gallantry-show!" For the rest of the
day he was dumb, but achieved an ensanguined filthiness through
the cleaning of big fish.

The boat returned on Saturday evening. Dormer had been struggling
with speech since noon. As the lines and luggage were being
disembarked, he found tongue.

"Beg y' pardon, sir," he said, "but would you - would you min'
shakin' 'ands with me, sir?"

"Of course not," said Bobby, and he shook accordingly. Dormer
returned to barracks and Bobby to mess.

"He wanted a little quiet and some fishing, I think," said Bobby.
"My aunt, but he's a filthy sort of animal! Have you ever seen him
clean 'them muchly-fish with 'is thumbs?"

"Anyhow," said Revere three weeks later, "he's doing his best to
keep his things clean."

When the spring died, Bobby joined in the general scramble for
Hill leave, and to his surprise and delight secured three months.

"As good a boy as I want," said Revere, the admiring skipper.

"The best of the batch," said the Adjutant to the Colonel. "Keep
back that young skrimshanker Porkiss, sir, and let Revere make him
sit up."

So Bobby departed joyously to Simla Pahar with a tin box of
gorgeous raiment.

"Son of Wick - old Wick of Chota-Buldana? Ask him to dinner,
dear," said the aged men.

"What a nice boy!" said the matrons and the maids.

"First-class place, Simla. Oh, ri - - ipping!" said Bobby Wick,
and ordered new white cord breeches on the strength of it.

"We're in a bad way," wrote Revere to Bobby at the end of two
months. "Since you left, the Regiment has taken to fever and is
fairly rotten with it - two hundred in hospital, about a hundred
in cells - drinking to keep off fever - and the Companies on
parade fifteen file strong at the outside. There's rather more
sickness in the out-villages than I care for, but then I'm so
blistered with prickly-heat that I'm ready to hang myself. What's
the yarn about your mashing a Miss Haverley up there? Not serious,
I hope? You're over-young to hang millstones round your neck, and
the Colonel will turf you out of that in double-quick time if you
attempt it."

It was not the Colonel that brought Bobby out of Simla, but a much
more to be respected Commandant. The sickness in the out-villages
spread, the Bazar was put out of bounds, and then came the news
that the Tail Twisters must go into camp. The message flashed to
the Hill stations. - "Cholera - Leave stopped - Officers
recalled." Alas, for the white gloves in the neatly soldered
boxes, the rides and the dances and picnics that were to be, the
loves half spoken, and the debts
unpaid! Without demur and without question, fast as tonga could
fly or pony gallop, back to their Regiments and their Batteries,
as though they were hastening to their weddings, fled the
subalterns.

Bobby received his orders on returning from a dance at Viceregal
Lodge, where he had but only the Haverley girl knows what Bobby
had said or how many waltzes he had claimed for the next ball. Six
in the morning saw Bobby at the Tonga Office in the drenching
rain, the whirl of the last waltz still in his ears, and an
intoxication due neither to wine nor waltzing in his brain.

"Good man!" shouted Deighton of the Horse Battery through the
mists. "Whar you raise dat tonga? I'm coming with you. Ow! But
I've a head and half. I didn't sit out all night. They say the
Battery's awful bad," and he hummed dolorously -

"Leave the what at the what's-its-name,
Leave the flock without shelter,
Leave the corpse uninterred,
Leave the bride at the altar


"My faith! It'll be more bally corpse than bride, though, this
journey. Jump in, Bobby. Get on, Coachwan!"

On the Umballa platform waited a detachment of officers discussing
the latest news from the stricken cantonment, and it was here that
Bobby learned the real condition of the Tail Twisters.

"They went into camp," said an elderly Major recalled from the
whist-tables at Mussoorie to a sickly Native Regiment, "they went
into camp with two hundred and ten sick in carts. Two hundred and
ten fever cases only, and the balance looking like so many ghosts
with sore eyes. A Madras Regiment could have walked through 'em."

"But they were as fit as be-damned when I left them!" said Bobby.

"Then you'd better make them as fit as be-damned when you rejoin,"
said the Major brutally.

Bobby pressed his forehead against the rain-splashed window-pane
as the train lumbered across the sodden Doab, and prayed for the
health of the Tyneside Tail Twisters. Naini Tal had sent down her
contingent with all speed; the lathering ponies of the Dalhousie
Road staggered into Pathankot, taxed to the full stretch of their
strength; while from cloudy Darjiling the Calcutta Mail whirled up
the last straggler of the little army that was to fight a fight,
in which was neither medal nor honour for the winning, against an
enemy none other than "the sickness that destroyeth in the
noonday."

And as each man reported himself, he said: "This is a bad
business," and went about his own forthwith, for every Regiment
and Battery in the cantonment was under canvas, the sickness
bearing them company.

Bobby fought his way through the rain to the Tail Twisters'
temporary mess, and Revere could have fallen on the boy's neck for
the joy of seeing that ugly, wholesome phiz once more.

"Keep 'em amused and interested," said Revere. "They went on the
drink, poor fools, after the first two cases, and there was no
improvement. Oh, it's good to have you back, Bobby! Porkiss is a -
never mind."

Deighton came over from the Artillery camp to attend a dreary mess
dinner, and contributed to the general gloom by nearly weeping
over the condition of his beloved Battery. Porkiss so far forgot
himself as to insinuate that the presence of the officers could do
no earthly good, and that the best thing would be to send the
entire Regiment into hospital and "let the doctors look after
them." Porkiss was demoralised with fear, nor was his peace of
mind restored when Revere said coldly: "Oh! The sooner you go out
the better, if that's your way of thinking. Any public school
could send us fifty good men in your place, but it takes time,
time, Porkiss, and money, and a certain amount of trouble, to make
a Regiment. S'pose you're the person we go into camp for, eh?"

Whereupon Porkiss was overtaken with a great and chilly fear which
a drenching in the rain did not allay, and, two days later,
quitted this world for another where, men do fondly hope,
allowances are made for the weaknesses of the flesh. The
Regimental Sergeant-Major looked wearily across the Sergeants'
Mess tent when the news was announced.

"There goes the worst of them," he said. "It'll take the best, and
then, please God, it'll stop." The Sergeants were silent till one
said: "It couldn't be him!" and all knew of whom Travis was
thinking.

Bobby Wick stormed through the tents of his Company, rallying,
rebuking, mildly, as is consistent with the Regulations, chaffing
the fainthearted; haling the sound into the watery sunlight when
there was a break in the weather, and bidding them be of good
cheer, for their trouble was nearly at an end; scuttling on his
dun pony round the outskirts of the camp and heading back men who,
with the innate perversity of British soldiers, were always
wandering into infected villages, or drinking deeply from rain-
flooded marshes; comforting the panic-stricken with rude speech,
and more than once tending the dying who had no friends - the men
without "townies"; organizing, with banjos and burnt cork, Sing-
songs which should allow the talent of the Regiment full play; and
generally, as he explained, "playing the giddy garden-goat all
round."

"You're worth half a dozen of us, Bobby," said Revere in a moment
of enthusiasm. "How the devil do you keep it up?"

Bobby made no answer, but had Revere looked into the breast-pocket
of his coat he might have seen there a sheaf of badly-written
letters which perhaps accounted for the power that possessed the
boy. A letter came to Bobby every other day. The spelling was not
above reproach, but the sentiments must have been most
satisfactory, for on receipt Bobby's eyes softened marvellously,
and he was wont to fall into a tender abstraction for a while ere,
shaking his cropped head, he charged into his work.

By what power he drew after him the hearts of the roughest, and
the Tail Twisters counted in their ranks some rough diamonds
indeed, was a mystery to both skipper and C. 0., who learned from
the regimental chaplain that Bobby was considerably more in
request in the hospital tents than the Reverend John Emery.

"The men seem fond of you. Are you in the hospitals much?" said
the Colonel, who did his daily round and ordered the men to get
well with a hardness that did not cover his bitter grief.

"A little, sir," said Bobby.

"Shouldn't go there too often if I were you. They say it's not
contagious, but there's no use in running unnecessary risks. We
can't afford to have you down, y' know."

Six days later, it was with the utmost difficulty that the post-
runner plashed his way out to the camp with the mail-bags, for the
rain was falling in torrents. Bobby received a letter, bore it off
to his tent, and, the programme for the next week's Sing-song
being satisfactorily disposed of, sat down to answer it. For an
hour the unhandy pen toiled over the paper, and where sentiment
rose to more than normal tide-level, Bobby Wick stuck out his
tongue and breathed heavily. He was not used to letter-writing.

"Beg y' pardon, sir," said a voice at the tent door; "but Dormer's
'orrid bad, sir, an' they've taken him orf, sir."

"Damn Private Dormer and you too!" said Bobby Wick, running the
blotter over the half-finished letter. "Tell him I'll come in the
morning."

"'E's awful bad, sir," said the voice hesitatingly. There was an
undecided squelching of heavy boots.

"Well?" said Bobby impatiently.

"Excusin' 'imself before 'and for takin' the liberty, 'e says it
would be a comfort for to assist 'im, sir, if -

"




tattoo lao! Get my pony! Here, come in out of the rain till I'm
ready. What blasted nuisances you are! That's brandy. Drink some;
you want it. Hang on to my stirrup and tell me if I go too fast."

Strengthened by a four-finger "nip" which he swallowed without a
wink, the Hospital Orderly kept up with the slipping, mud-stained,
and very disgusted pony as it shambled to the hospital tent.

Private Dormer was certainly "'orrid bad." He had all but reached
the stage of collapse, and was not pleasant to look upon.

"What's this, Dormer?" said Bobby, bending over the man. "You're
not going out this time. You've got to come fishing with me once
or twice more yet."

The blue lips parted and in the ghost of a whisper said, - "Beg y'
pardon, sir, disturbin' of you now, but would you min' 'oldin' my
'and, sir'?

Bobby sat on the side of the bed, and the icy-cold hand closed on
his own like a vice, forcing a lady's ring which was on the little
finger deep into the flesh. Bobby set his lips and waited, the
water dripping from the hem of his trousers. An hour passed, and
the grasp of the hand did not relax, nor did the expression of the
drawn face change. Bobby with infinite craft lit himself a cheroot
with the left hand (his right arm was numbed to the elbow), and
resigned himself to a night of pain.

Dawn showed a very white-faced Subaltern sitting on the side of a
sick man's cot, and a Doctor in the doorway using language unfit
for publication.

"Have you been here all night, you young ass?" said the Doctor.

"There or thereabouts," said Bobby ruefully. "He's frozen on to
me."

Dormer's mouth shut with a click. He turned his head and sighed.
The clinging hand opened, and Bobby's arm fell useless at his
side.

"He'll do," said the Doctor quietly. "It must have been a toss-up
all through the night. 'Think you're to be congratulated on this
case."

"Oh, bosh!" said Bobby. "I thought the man had gone out long ago -
only - only I didn't care to take my hand away. Rub my arm down,
there's a good chap. What a grip the brute has! I'm chilled to the
marrow!" He passed out of the tent shivering.

Private Dormer was allowed to celebrate his repulse of Death by
strong waters. Four days later, he sat on the side of his cot and
said to the patients mildly: "I'd 'a' liken to 'a' spoken to 'im -
so I should."

But at that time Bobby was reading yet another letter, - he had
the most persistent correspondent of any man in camp, - and was
even then about to write that the sickness had abated, and in
another week at the outside would be gone. He did not intend to
say that the chill of a sick man's hand seemed to have struck into
the heart whose capacities for affection he dwelt on at such
length. He did intend to enclose the illustrated programme of the
forthcoming Sing-song, whereof he was not a little proud. He also
intended to write on many other matters which do not concern us,
and doubtless would have done so but for the slight feverish
headache which made him dull and unresponsive at mess.

"You are overdoing it, Bobby," said his skipper. "'Might give the
rest of us credit of doing a little work. You go on as if you were
the whole Mess rolled into one. Take it easy."

"I will," said Bobby. "I'm feeling done up, somehow." Revere
looked at him anxiously and said nothing.

There was a flickering of lanterns about the camp that night, and
a rumour that brought men out of their cots to the tent doors, a
paddling of the naked feet of doolie-bearers, and the rush of a
galloping horse.

"Wot's up?" asked twenty tents; and through twenty tents ran the
answer - "Wick, 'e's down."

They brought the news to Revere and he groaned. "Any one but Bobby
and I shouldn't have cared! The Sergeant-Major was right."

"Not going out this journey," gasped Bobby, as he was lifted from
the doolie. "Not going out this journey." Then with an air of
supreme conviction - "I can't, you see."

"Not if I can do anything!" said the Surgeon-Major, who had
hastened over from the mess where he had been dining.

He and the Regimental Surgeon fought together with Death for the
life of Bobby Wick. Their work was interrupted by a hairy
apparition in a blue-gray dressing-gown, who stared in horror at
the bed and cried - "Oh, my Gawd! It can't be 'im!" until an
indignant Hospital Orderly whisked him away.

If care of man and desire to live could have done aught, Bobby
would have been saved. As it was, he made a fight of three days,
and the Surgeon-Major's brow uncreased. "We'll save him yet," he
said; and the Surgeon, who, though he ranked with the Captain, had
a very youthful heart, went out upon the word and pranced joyously
in the mud.

"Not going out this journey," whispered Bobby Wick gallantly, at
the end of the third day.

"Bravo!" said the Surgeon-Major. "That's the way to look at it,
Bobby."

As evening fell a gray shade gathered round Bobby's mouth, and he
turned his face to the tent-wall wearily. The Surgeon-Major
frowned.

"I'm awfully tired," said Bobby, very faintly. "What's the use of
bothering me with medicine? I - don't - want - it. Let me alone."

The desire for life had departed, and Bobby was content to drift
away on the easy tide of Death.

"It's no good," said the Surgeon-Major. "He doesn't want to live.
He's meeting it, poor child." And he blew his nose.

Half a mile away, the regimental band was playing the overture to
the Sing-song, for the men had been told that Bobby was out of
danger. The clash of the brass and the wail of the horns reached
Bobby's ears.

Is there a single joy or pain,
That I should never kno-ow?
You do not love me, 'tis in vain,
Bid me good-bye and go!

An expression of hopeless irritation crossed the boy's face, and
he tried to shake his head.

The Surgeon-Major bent down -" What is it, Bobby? "---" Not that
waltz," muttered Bobby. "That's our own - our very ownest own . .
Mummy dear."

With this he sank into the stupor that gave place to death early
next morning.

Revere, his eyes red at the rims and his nose very white, went
into Bobby's tent to write a letter to Papa Wick which should bow
the white head of the ex-Commissioner of Chota-Buldana in the
keenest sorrow of his life. Bobby's little store of papers lay in
confusion on the table, and among them a half-finished letter. The
last sentence ran: "So you see, darling, there is really no fear,
because as long as I know you care for me and I care for you,
nothing can touch me."

Revere stayed in the tent for an hour. When he came out, his eyes
were redder than ever.

Private Conklin sat on a turned-down bucket, and listened to a not
unfamiliar tune. Private Conklin was a convalescent and should
have been tenderly treated.

"Ho! "said Private Conklin. "There's another bloomin' orf'cer da-
ed."

The bucket shot from under him, and his eyes filled with a
smithyful of sparks. A tall man in a blue-gray bedgown was
regarding him with deep disfavour.

"You ought to take shame for yourself, Conky! Orf'cer? - bloomin'
orf'cer? I'll learn you to misname the likes of 'im. Hangel!
Bloomin' Hangel! That's wot 'e is!"

And the Hospital Orderly was so satisfied with the justice of the
punishment that he did not even order Private Dormer back to his
cot.


IN THE MATTER OF A PRIVATE

Hurrah! hurrah! a soldier's life for me!
Shout, boys, shout! for it makes you jolly and free.

The Ramrod Corps.

People who have seen say that one of the quaintest spectacles of
human frailty is an outbreak of hysterics in a girls' school. It
starts without warning, generally on a hot afternoon, among the
elder pupils. A girl giggles till the giggle gets beyond control.
Then she throws up her head and cries, "Honk, honk, honk," like a
wild goose, and tears mix with the laughter. If the mistress be
wise, she will rap out something severe at this point to check
matters. If she be tender-hearted, and send for a drink of water,
the chances are largely in favour of another girl laughing at the
afflicted one and herself collapsing. Thus the trouble spreads,
and may end in half of what answers to the Lower Sixth of a boys'
school rocking and whooping together. Given a week of warm
weather, two stately promenades per diem, a heavy mutton and rice
meal in the middle of the day, a certain amount of nagging from
the teachers, and a few other things, some amazing effects
develop. At least, this is what folk say who have had experience.

Now, the Mother Superior of a Convent and the Colonel of a British
Infantry Regiment would be justly shocked at any comparison being
made between their respective charges. But it is a fact that,
under certain circumstances, Thomas in bulk can be worked up into
ditthering, rippling hysteria. He does not weep, but he shows his
trouble unmistakably, and the consequences get into the
newspapers, and all the good people who hardly know a Martini from
a Snider say: "Take away the brute's ammunition!"

Thomas isn't a brute, and his business, which is to look after the
virtuous people, demands that he shall have his ammunition to his
hand. He doesn't wear silk stockings, and he really ought to be
supplied with a new Adjective to help him to express his opinions:
but, for all that, he is a great man. If you call him "the heroic
defender of the national honour" one day, and "a brutal and
licentious soldiery" the next, you naturally bewilder him, and he
looks upon you with suspicion. There is nobody to speak for Thomas
except people who have theories to work off on him, and nobody
understands Thomas except Thomas, and he does not always know what
is the matter with himself.

That is the prologue. This is the story: -

Corporal Slane was engaged to be married to Miss Jhansi M'Kenna,
whose history is well known in the regiment and elsewhere. He had
his Colonel's permission, and, being popular with the men, every
arrangement had been made to give the wedding what Private
Ortheris called "eeklar." It fell in the heart of the hot weather,
and, after the wedding, Slane was going up to the Hills with the
bride. None the less, Slane's grievance was that the affair would
be only a hired-carriage wedding, and he felt that the "eeklar" of
that was meagre. Miss M'Kenna did not care so much. The Sergeant's
wife was helping her to make her wedding-dress, and she was very
busy. Slane was, just then, the only moderately contented man in
barracks. All the rest were more or less miserable.

And they had so much to make them happy, too. All their work was
over at eight in the morning, and for the rest of the day they
could lie on their backs and smoke Canteen-plug and swear at the
punkah-coolies. They enjoyed a fine, full flesh meal in the middle
of the day, and then threw themselves down on their cots and
sweated and slept till it was cool enough to go out with their
"towny," whose vocabulary contained less than six hundred words,
and the Adjective, and whose views on every conceivable question
they had heard many times before.

There was the Canteen, of course, and there was the Temperance
Room with the second-hand papers in it; but a man of any
profession cannot read for eight hours a day in a temperature of
96° or 98° in the shade, running up sometimes to 103° at midnight.
Very few men, even though they get a pannikin of flat, stale,
muddy beer and hide it under their cots, can continue drinking for
six hours a day. One man tried, but he died, and nearly the whole
regiment went to his funeral because it gave them something to do.
It was too early for the excitement of fever or cholera. The men
could only wait and wait and wait, and watch the shadow of the
barrack creeping across the blinding white dust. That was a gay
life.

They lounged about cantonments - it was too hot for any sort of
game, and almost too hot for vice - and fuddled themselves in the
evening, and filled themselves to distension with the healthy
nitrogenous food provided for them, and the more they stoked the
less exercise they took and more explosive they grew. Then tempers
began to wear away, and men fell a-brooding over insults real or
imaginary, for they had nothing else to think of. The tone of the
repartees changed, and instead of saying light-heartedly: I'll
knock your silly face in," men grew laboriously polite and hinted
that the cantonments were not big enough for themselves and their
enemy, and that there would be more space for one of the two in
another Place.

It may have been the Devil who arranged the thing, but the fact of
the case is that Losson had for a long time been worrying Simmons
in an aimless way. It gave him occupation. The two had their cots
side by side, and would sometimes spend a long afternoon swearing
at each other; but Simmons was afraid of Losson and dared not
challenge him to a fight. He thought over the words in the hot
still nights, and half the hate he felt towards Losson he vented
on the wretched punkah-coolie.

Losson bought a parrot in the bazar, and put it into a little
cage, and lowered the cage into the cool darkness of a well, and
sat on the well-curb, shouting bad language down to the parrot. He
taught it to say: "Simmons, ye so-oor," which means swine, and
several other things entirely unfit for publication. He was a big
gross man, and he shook like a jelly when the parrot had the
sentence correctly. Simmons, however, shook with rage, for all the
room were laughing at him - the parrot was such a disreputable
puff of green feathers and it looked so human when it chattered.
Losson used to sit, swinging his fat legs, on the side of the cot,
and ask the parrot what it thought of Simmons. The parrot would
answer: "Simmons, ye so-oor." Good boy," Losson used to say,
scratching the parrot's head; "ye 'ear that, Sim?" And Simmons
used to turn over on his stomach and make answer: "I 'ear. Take
'eed you don't 'ear something one of these days."

In the restless nights, after he had been asleep all day, fits of
blind rage came upon Simmons and held him till he trembled all
over, while he thought in how many different ways he would slay
Losson. Sometimes he would picture himself trampling the life out
of the man with heavy ammunition-boots, and at others smashing in
his face with the butt, and at others jumping on his shoulders and
dragging the head back till the neckbone cracked. Then his mouth
would feel hot and fevered, and he would reach out for another sup
of the beer in the pannikin.

But the fancy that came to him most frequently and stayed with him
longest was one connected with the great roll of fat under
Losson's right ear. He noticed it first on a moonlight night, and
thereafter it was always before his eyes. It was a fascinating
roll of fat. A man could get his hand upon it and tear away one
side of the neck; or he could place the muzzle of a rifle on it
and blow away all the head in a flash. Losson had no right to be
sleek and contented and well-to-do, when he, Simmons, was the butt
of the room. Some day, perhaps, he would show those who laughed at
the "Simmons, ye so-oor" joke, that he was as good as the rest,
and held a man's life in the crook of his forefinger. When Losson
snored, Simmons hated him more bitterly than ever. Why should
Losson be able to sleep when Simmons had to stay awake hour after
hour, tossing and turning on the tapes, with the dull liver pain
gnawing into his right side and his head throbbing and aching
after Canteen? He thought over this for many, many nights, and the
world became unprofitable to him. He even blunted his naturally
fine appetite with beer and tobacco; and all the while the parrot
talked at and made a mock of him.

The heat continued and the tempers wore away more quickly than
before. A Sergeant's wife died of heat-apoplexy in the night, and
the rumour ran abroad that it was cholera. Men rejoiced openly,
hoping that it would spread and send them into camp. But that was
a false alarm.

It was late on a Tuesday evening, and the men were waiting in the
deep double verandahs for "Last Post," when Simmons went to the
box at the foot of his bed, took out his pipe, and slammed the lid
down with a bang that echoed through the deserted barrack like the
crack of a rifle. Ordinarily speaking, the men would have taken no
notice; but their nerves were fretted to fiddle-strings. They
jumped up, and three or four clattered into the barrack-room only
to find Simmons kneeling by his box.

"Ow! It's you, is it?" they said, and laughed foolishly. "We
thought 'twas -"

Simmons rose slowly. If the accident had so shaken his fellows,
what would not the reality do?

"You thought it was - did you? And what makes you think?" he said,
lashing himself into madness as he went on; "to Hell with your
thinking, ye dirty spies!"

"Simmons, ye so-oor," chuckled the parrot in the verandah
sleepily, recognising a well-known voice. Now that was absolutely
all.

The tension snapped. Simmons fell back on the arm-rack
deliberately, - the men were at the far end of the room, - and
took out his rifle and packet of ammunition. "Don't go playing the
goat, Sim!" said Losson. "Put it down," but there was a quaver in
his voice. Another man stooped, slipped his boot, and hurled it at
Simmons's head. The prompt answer was a shot which, fired at
random, found its billet in Losson's throat. Losson fell forward
without a word, and the others scattered.

"You thought it was!" yelled Simmons. "You're drivin' me to it! I
tell you you're drivin' me to it! Get up, Losson, an' don't lie
shammin' there - you an' your blasted parrit that druv me to it!

But there was an unaffected reality about Losson's pose that
showed Simmons what he had done. The men were still clamouring in
the verandah. Simmons appropriated two more packets of ammunition
and ran into the moonlight, muttering: "I'll make a night of it.
Thirty roun's, an' the last for myself. Take you that, you dogs!"

He dropped on one knee and fired into the brown of the men on the
verandah, but the bullet flew high, and landed in the brickwork
with a vicious phwit that made some of the younger ones turn pale.
It is, as musketry theorists observe, one thing to fire and
another to be fired at.

Then the instinct of the chase flared up. The news spread from
barrack to barrack, and the men doubled out intent on the capture
of Simmons, the wild beast, who was heading for the Cavalry
parade-ground, stopping now and again to send back a shot and a
curse in the direction of his pursuers.

"I'll learn you to spy on me!" he shouted; "I'll learn you to give
me dorg's names! Come on, the 'ole lot o' you! Colonel John
Anthony Deever, C. B.!" -he turned towards the Infantry Mess and
shook his rifle - "you think yourself the devil of a man - but I
tell you that if you put your ugly old carcass outside o' that
door, I'll make you the poorest-lookin' man in the army. Come out,
Colonel John Anthony Deever, C. B.! Come Out and see me practiss
on the rainge. I'm
the crack shot of the 'ole bloomin' battalion." In proof of which
statement Simmons fired at the lighted windows of the mess-house.

"Private Simmons, E Comp'ny, on the Cavalry p'rade-ground, Sir,
with thirty rounds," said a Sergeant breathlessly to the Colonel.
"Shootin' right and lef', Sir. Shot Private Losson. What's to be
done, Sir?"

Colonel John Anthony Deever, C. B., sallied out, only to be
saluted by a spurt of dust at his feet.

"Pull up!" said the Second in Command; "I don't want my step in
that way, Colonel. He's as dangerous as a mad dog."

"Shoot him like one, then," said the Colonel bitterly, "if he
won't take his chance. My regiment, too! If it had been the
Towheads I could have understood."

Private Simmons had occupied a strong position near a well on the
edge of the parade-ground, and was defying the regiment to come
on. The regiment was not anxious to comply, for there is small
honour in being shot by a fellow-private. Only Corporal Slane,
rifle in hand, threw himself down on the ground, and wormed his
way towards the well.

"Don't shoot," said he to the men round him; "like as not you'll
'it me. I'll catch the beggar livin'."

Simmons ceased  shouting for a while, and th noise of trap-wheels
could be heard across the plain. Major Oldyne, Commanding the
Horse Battery, was coming back from a dinner in the Civil Lines;
was driving after his usual custom - that is to say, as fast as
the horse could go.

"A orf'cer! A blooming spangled orf'cer!" shrieked Simmons; "I'll
make a scarecrow of that orf'cer!" The trap stopped.

"What's this?" demanded the Major of Gunners. "You there, drop
your rifle."

"Why, it's Jerry Blazes! I ain't got no quarrel with you, Jerry
Blazes. Pass, frien', an' all's well!"

But Jerry Blazes had not the faintest intention of passing a
dangerous murderer. He was, as his adoring Battery swore long and
fervently, without knowledge of fear, and they were surely the
best judges, for Jerry Blazes, it was notorious, had done his
possible to kill a man each time the Battery went out.

He walked towards Simmons, with the intention of rushing him and
knocking him down.

"Don't make me do it, Sir," said Simmons; "I ain't got nothing
ag'in' you. Ah! you would?" - the Major broke into a run - "Take
that, then!"

The Major dropped with a bullet through his shoulder, and Simmons
stood over him. He had lost the satisfaction of killing Losson in
the desired way: but here was a helpless body to his hand. Should
he slip in another cartridge, and blow off the head, or with the
butt smash in the white face? He stopped to consider, and a cry
went up from the far side of the parade-ground: "He's killed Jerry
Blazes!" But in the shelter of the well-pillars Simmons was safe,
except when he stepped out to fire. "I'll blow yer 'andsome 'ead
off, Jerry Blazes," said Simmons reflectively. "Six and three is
nine an' one is ten, an' that leaves me another nineteen, an' one
for myself" He tugged at the string of the second packet of
ammunition. Corporal Slane crawled out of the shadow of a bank
into the moonlight.

"I see you!" said Simmons. "Come a bit furder on an' I'll do for
you."

"I'm comin'," said Corporal Slane briefly; "you've done a bad
day's work, Sim. Come out 'ere an' come back with me."

"Come to," laughed Simmons, sending a cartridge home with his
thumb. "Not before I've settled you an' Jerry Blazes."

The Corporal was lying at full length in the dust of the parade-
ground, a rifle under him. Some of the less cautious men in the
distance shouted: "Shoot 'im! Shoot 'im, Slane!"

"You move 'and or foot, Slane," said Simmons, "an' I'll kick Jerry
Blazes' 'ead in, and shoot you after."

"I ain't movin'," said the Corporal, raising his head; "you
daren't 'it a man on 'is legs. Let go o' Jerry Blazes an' come out
o' that with your fistes. Come an' 'it me. You daren't, you bloom-
in' dog-shooter!"

"I dare."

"You lie, you man-sticker. You sneakin', Sheeny butcher, you lie.
See there!" Slane kicked the rifle away, and stood up in the peril
of his life. "Come on, now!"

The temptation was more than Simmons could resist, for the
Corporal in his white clothes offered a perfect mark.

"Don't misname me," shouted Simmons, firing as he spoke. The shot
missed, and the shooter, blind with rage, threw his rifle down and
rushed at Slane from the protection of the well. Within striking
distance, he kicked savagely at Slane's stomach, but the weedy
Corporal knew something of Simmons's weakness, and knew, too, the
deadly guard for that kick. Bowing forward and drawing up his
right leg till the heel of the right foot was set some three
inches above the inside of the left knee-cap, he met the blow
standing on one leg - exactly as Gonds stand when they meditate -
and ready for the fall that would follow. There was an oath, the
Corporal fell over to his own left as shinbone met shinbone, and
the Private collapsed, his right leg broken an inch above the
ankle.

"Pity you don't know that guard, Sim," said Slane, spitting out
the dust as he rose. Then raising his voice - "Come an' take him
on. I've bruk 'is leg." This was not strictly true, for the
Private had accomplished his own downfall, since it is the special
merit of that leg-guard that the harder the kick the greater the
kicker's discomfiture.

Slane walked to Jerry Blazes and hung over him with ostentatious
anxiety, while Simmons, weeping with pain, was carried away. "'Ope
you ain't 'urt badly, Sir," said Slane. The Major had fainted, and
there was an ugly, ragged hole through the top of his arm. Slane
knelt down and murmured: "S'elp me, I believe 'e's dead. Well, if
that ain't my blooming luck all over!"

But the Major was destined to lead his Battery afield for many a
long day with unshaken nerve. He was removed, and nursed and
petted into convalescence, while the Battery discussed the wisdom
of capturing Simmons and blowing him from a gun. They idolised
their Major, and his reappearance on parade brought about a scene
nowhere provided for in the Army Regulations.

Great, too, was the glory that fell to Slane's share. The Gunners
would have made him drunk thrice a day for at least a fortnight.
Even the Colonel of his own regiment complimented him upon his
coolness, and the local paper called him a hero. These things did
not puff him up. When the Major offered him money and thanks, the
virtuous Corporal took the one and put aside the other. But he had
a request to make and prefaced it with many a "Beg y' pardon,
Sir." Could the Major see his way to letting the Slane-M'Kenna
wedding be adorned by the presence of four Battery horses to pull
a hired barouche? The Major could, and so could the Battery.
Excessively so. It was a gorgeous wedding.

"Wot did I do it for?" said Corporal Slane.
"For the 'orses o' course. Jhansi ain't a beauty to look at, but I
wasn't goin' to 'ave a hired turnout. Jerry Blazes? If I 'adn't
'a' wanted something, Sim might ha' blowed Jerry Blazes' blooming
'ead into Hirish stew for aught I'd 'a' cared."


And they hanged Private Simmons - hanged him as high as Haman in
hollow square of the regiment; and the Colonel said it was Drink;
and the Chaplain was sure it was the Devil; and Simmons fancied it
was both, but he didn't know, and only hoped his fate would be a
warning to his companions; and half a dozen "intelligent
publicists" wrote six beautiful leading articles on "The
Prevalence of Crime in the Army."

But not a soul thought of comparing the "bloody-minded Simmons" to
the squawking, gaping school-girl with which this story opens.


THE LOST LEGION

When the Indian Mutiny broke out, and a little time before the
siege of Delhi, a regiment of Native Irregular Horse was stationed
at Peshawur on the frontier of India. That regiment caught what
John Lawrence called at the time "the prevalent mania," and would
have thrown in its lot with the mutineers, had it been allowed to
do so. The chance never came, for, as the regiment swept off down
south, it was headed off by a remnant of an English corps into the
hills of Afghanistan, and there the newly conquered tribesmen
turned against it as wolves turn against buck. It was hunted for
the sake of its arms and accoutrements from hill to hill, from
ravine to ravine, up and down the dried beds of rivers and round
the shoulders of bluffs, till it disappeared as water sinks in the
sand
- this officerless rebel regiment. The only trace left of its
existence to-day is a nominal roll drawn up in neat round hand and
countersigned by an officer who called himself, "Adjutant, late
Irregular Cavalry." The paper is yellow with years and dirt, but
on the back of it you can still read a pencil-note by John
Lawrence, to this effect: "See that the two native officers who
remained loyal are not deprived of their estates. -J. L." Of six
hundred and fifty sabres only two stood strain, and John Lawrence
in the midst of all the agony of the first months of the Mutiny
found time to think about their merits.

That was more than thirty years ago, and the tribesmen across the
Afghan border who helped to annihilate the regiment are now old
men. Sometimes a graybeard speaks of his share in the massacre.
"They came," he will say, "across the border, very proud, calling
upon us to rise and kill the English, and go down to the sack of
Delhi. But we who had just been conquered by the same English knew
that they were over-bold, and that the Government could account
easily for those down-country dogs. This Hindustani regiment,
therefore, we treated with fair words, and kept standing in one
place till the redcoats came after them very hot and angry. Then
this regiment ran forward a little more into our hills to avoid
the wrath of the English, and we lay upon their flanks watching
from the sides of the hills till we were well assured that their
path was lost behind them. Then we came down, for we desired their
clothes, and their bridles, and their rifles, and their boots -
more especially their boots. That was a great killing - done
slowly." Here the old man will rub his nose, and shake his long
snaky
locks, and lick his bearded lips, and grin till the yellow tooth-
stumps show. "Yea, we killed them because we needed their gear,
and we knew that their lives had been forfeited to God on account
of their sin - the sin of treachery to the salt which they had
eaten. They rode up and down the valleys, stumbling and rocking in
their saddles, and howling for mercy. We drove them slowly like
cattle till they were all assembled in one place, the flat wide
valley of Sheor Kôt. Many had died from want of water, but there
still were many left, and they could not make any stand. We went
among them pulling them down with our hands two at a time, and our
boys killed them who were new to the sword. My share of the
plunder was such and such - so many guns, and so many saddles. The
guns were good in those days. Now we steal the Government rifles,
and despise smooth barrels. Yes, beyond doubt we wiped that
regiment from off the face of the earth, and even the memory of
the deed is now dying. But men say -"

At this point the tale would stop abruptly, and it was impossible
to find out what men said across the border. The Afghans were
always a secretive race, and vastly preferred doing something
wicked to saying anything at all. They would be quiet and well-
behaved for months, till one night, without word or warning, they
would rush a police-post, cut the throats of a constable or two,
dash through a village, carry away three or four women, and
withdraw, in the red glare of burning thatch, driving the cattle
and goats before them to their own desolate hills. The Indian
Government would become almost tearful on these occasions. First
it would say, "Please be good and we'll forgive you." The tribe
concerned in the latest depredation would collectively put its
thumb to its nose and answer rudely. Then the Government would
say: "Hadn't you better pay up a little money for those few
corpses you left behind you the other night?" Here the tribe would
temporise, and lie and bully, and some of the younger men, merely
to show contempt of authority, would raid another police-post and
fire into some frontier mud-fort, and, if lucky, kill a real
English officer. Then the Government would say: -" Observe; if you
really persist in this line of conduct, you will be hurt." If the
tribe knew exactly what was going on in India, it would apologise
or be rude, according as it learned whether the Government was
busy with other things or able to devote its full attention to
their performances. Some of the tribes knew to one corpse how far
to go. Others became excited, lost their heads, and told the
Government to come on. With sorrow and tears, and one eye on the
British taxpayer at home, who insisted on regarding these
exercises as brutal wars of annexation, the Government would
prepare an expensive little field-brigade and some guns, and send
all up into the hills to chase the wicked tribe out of the
valleys, where the corn grew, into the hill-tops, where there was
nothing to eat. The tribe would turn out in full strength and
enjoy the campaign, for they knew that their women would never be
touched, that their wounded would be nursed, not mutilated, and
that as soon as each man's bag of corn was spent they could
surrender and palaver with the English General as though they had
been a real enemy. Afterwards, years afterwards, they would pay
the blood-money, driblet by driblet, to the Government, and tell
their children how they had slain the redcoats by thousands. The
only drawback to this kind of picnic-war was the weakness of the
redcoats for solemnly blowing up with powder their fortified
towers and keeps. This the tribes always considered mean.

Chief among the leaders of the smaller tribes - the little clans
who knew to a penny the expense of moving white troops against
them - was a priest-bandit-chief whom we will call the Gulla Kutta
Mullah. His enthusiasm for Border murder as an art was almost
dignified. He would cut down a mail-runner from pure wantonness,
or bombard a mud-fort with rifle-fire when he knew that our men
needed to sleep. In his leisure moments he would go on circuit
among his neighbours, and try to incite other tribes to devilry.
Also, he kept a kind of hotel for fellow-outlaws in his own
village, which lay in a valley called Bersund. Any respectable
murderer on that section of the frontier was sure to lie up at
Bersund, for it was reckoned an exceedingly safe place. The sole
entry to it ran through a narrow gorge which could be converted
into a death-trap in five minutes. It was surrounded by high
hills, reckoned inaccessible to all save born mountaineers, and
here the Gulla Kutta Mullah lived in great state, the head of a
colony of mud and stone huts, and in each mud hut hung some
portion of a red uniform and the plunder of dead men. The
Government particularly wished for his capture, and once invited
him formally to come out and be hanged on account of the many
murders in which he had taken a direct part. He replied: -

"I am only twenty miles, as the crow flies, from your border. Come
and fetch me."
"Some day we will come," said the Government, "and hanged you will
be."

The Gulla Kutta Mullah let the matter slip from his mind. He knew
that the patience of the Government was as long as a summer day;
but he did not realise that its arm was as long as a winter night.
Months afterwards, when there was peace on the border, and all
India was quiet, the Indian Government turned in its sleep and
remembered the Gulla Kutta Mullah at Bersund, with his thirteen
outlaws. The movement against him of one single regiment - which
the telegrams would have translated as war - would have been
highly impolitic. This was a time for silence and speed, and,
above all, absence of bloodshed.

You must know that all along the north-west frontier of India
there is spread a force of some thirty thousand foot and horse,
whose duty it is to quietly and unostentatiously shepherd the
tribes in front of them. They move up and down, and down and up,
from one desolate little post to another; they are ready to take
the field at ten minutes' notice; they are always half in and half
out of a difficulty somewhere along the monotonous line; their
lives are as hard as their own muscles, and the papers never say
anything about them. It was from this force that the Government
picked its men.

One night, at a station where the mounted Night Patrol fire as
they challenge, and the wheat rolls in great blue-green waves
under our cold northern moon, the officers were playing billiards
in the mud-walled club-house, when orders came to them that they
were to go on parade at once for a night-drill. They grumbled, and
went to turn out their men - a hundred English troops, let us say,
two hundred Goorkhas, and about a hundred cavalry of the finest
native cavalry in the world.

When they were on the parade-ground, it was explained to them in
whispers that they must set off at once across the hills to
Bersund. The English troops were to post themselves round the
hills at the side of the valley; the Goorkhas would command the
gorge and the death-trap, and the cavalry would fetch a long march
round and get to the back of the circle of hills, whence, if there
were any difficulty, they could charge down on the Mullah's men.
But orders were very strict that there should be no fighting and
no noise. They were to return in the morning with every round of
ammunition intact, and the Mullah and the thirteen outlaws bound
in their midst. If they were successful, no one would know or care
anything about their work; but failure meant probably a small
border war, in which the Gulla Kutta Mullah would pose as a
popular leader against a big bullying power, instead of a common
Border murderer.

Then there was silence, broken only by the clicking of the
compass-needles and snapping of watch-cases, as the heads of
columns compared bearings and made appointments for the
rendezvous. Five minutes later the parade-ground was empty; the
green coats of the Goorkhas and the overcoats of the English
troops had faded into the darkness, and the cavalry were cantering
away in the face of a blinding drizzle.

What the Goorkhas and the English did will be seen later on. The
heavy work lay with the horses, for they had to go far and pick
their way clear of habitations. Many of the troopers were natives
of that part of the world, ready and anxious to fight against
their kin, and some of the officers had made private and
unofficial excursions into those hills before. They crossed the
border, found a dried river-bed, cantered up that, walked through
a stony gorge, risked crossing a low hill under cover of the
darkness, skirted another hill, leaving their hoof-marks deep in
some ploughed ground, felt their way along another water-course,
ran over the neck of a spur praying that no one would hear their
horses grunting, and so worked on in the rain and the darkness
till they had left Bersund and its crater of hills a little behind
them, and to the left, and it was time to swing round. The ascent
commanding the back of Bersund was steep, and they halted to draw
breath in a broad level valley below the height. That is to say,
the men reined up, but the horses, blown as they were, refused to
halt. There was unchristian language, the worse for being
delivered in a whisper, and you heard the saddles squeaking in the
darkness as the horses plunged.

The subaltern at the rear of one troop turned in his saddle and
said very  softly: -

"Carter, what the blessed heavens are you doing at the rear? Bring
your men up, man."

There was no answer, till a trooper replied: -

"Carter Sahib is forward - not here. There is nothing behind us."

"There is," said the subaltern. "The squadron's walking on its own
tail."

Then the Major in command moved down to the rear, swearing softly
and asking for the blood of Lieutenant Halley - the subaltern who
had just spoken.

"Look after your rearguard," said the Major. "Some of your
infernal thieves have got lost. They're at the head of the
squadron, and you're a several kinds of idiot."

"Shall I tell off my men, sir?" said the subaltern sulkily, for he
was feeling wet and cold.

"Tell 'em off!" said the Major. "Whip 'em off, by Gad! You're
squandering them all over the place. There's a troop behind you
now!"

"So I was thinking," said the subaltern calmly. "I have all my men
here, sir. Better speak to Carter."

"Carter Sahib sends salaam and wants to know why the regiment is
stopping," said a trooper to Lieutenant Halley.

"Where under heaven is Carter," said the Major.

"Forward with his troop," was the answer.

"Are we walking in a ring, then, or are we the centre of a blessed
brigade?" said the Major.

By this time there was silence all along the column. The horses
were still; but, through the drive of the fine rain, men could
hear the feet of many horses moving over stony ground.

"We're being stalked," said Lieutenant Halley.

"They've no horses here. Besides they'd have fired before this,"
said the Major. "It's - it's villagers' ponies."

"Then our horses would have neighed and spoilt the attack long
ago. They must have been near us for half an hour," said the
subaltern.

"Queer that we can't smell the horses," said the Major, damping
his finger and rubbing it on his nose as he sniffed up wind.

"Well, it's a bad start," said the subaltern, shaking the wet from
his overcoat. "What shall we do, sir?"

"Get on," said the Major. "We shall catch it to-night."

The column moved forward very gingerly for a few paces. Then there
was an oath, a shower of blue sparks as shod hooves crashed on
small stones, and a man rolled over with a jangle of accoutrements
that would have waked the dead.

"Now we've gone and done it," said Lieutenant Halley. "All the
hillside awake and all the hillside to climb in the face of
musketry-fire! This comes of trying to do night-hawk work."

The trembling trooper picked himself up and tried to explain that
his horse had fallen over one of the little cairns that are built
of loose stones on the spot where a man has been murdered. There
was no need to give reasons. The Major's big Australian charger
blundered next, and the column came to a halt in what seemed to be
a very graveyard of little cairns, all about two feet high. The
manoeuvres of the squadron are not reported. Men said that it felt
like mounted quadrilles without training and without the music;
but at last the horses, breaking rank and choosing their own way,
walked clear of the cairns, till every man of the squadron
reformed and drew rein a few yards up the slope of the hill. Then,
according to Lieutenant Halley, there was another scene very like
the one which has been described. The Major and Carter insisted
that all the men had not joined rank, and that there were more of
them in the rear, clicking and blundering among the dead men's
cairns. Lieutenant Halley told off his own troopers again and
resigned himself to wait. Later on he said to me:

"I didn't much know and I didn't much care what was going on. The
row of that trooper falling ought to have scared half the country,
and I would take my oath that we were being stalked by a full
regiment in the rear, and they were making row enough to rouse all
Afghanistan. I sat tight, but nothing happened."

The mysterious part of the night's work was the silence on the
hillside. Everybody knew that the Gulla Kutta Mullah had his
outpost-huts on the reverse side of the hill, and everybody
expected, by the time that the Major had sworn himself into quiet,
that the watchmen there would open fire. When nothing happened,
they said that the gusts of the rain had deadened the sound of the
horses, and thanked Providence. At last the Major satisfied
himself (a) that he had left no one behind among the cairns, and
(b) that he was not being taken in the rear by a large and
powerful body of cavalry. The men's tempers were thoroughly
spoiled, the horses were lathered and unquiet, and one and all
prayed for the daylight.

They set themselves to climb up the hill, each man leading his
mount carefully. Before they had covered the lower slopes or the
breast-plates had begun to tighten, a thunderstorm came up behind,
rolling across the low hills and drowning any noise less than that
of cannon. The first flash of the lightning showed the bare ribs
of the ascent, thc hill-crest standing steely-blue against the
black sky, the little falling lines of the rain, and, a few yards
to their left flank, an Afghan watch-tower, two-storied, built of
stone, and entered by a ladder from the upper story. The ladder
was up, and a man with a rifle was leaning from the window. The
darkness and the thunder rolled down in an instant, and, when the
lull followed, a voice from the watch-tower cried, "Who goes
there?"

The cavalry were very quiet, but each man gripped his carbine and
stood beside his horse. Again the voice called, "Who goes there?"
and in a louder key, "0 brothers, give the alarm!" Now, every man
in the cavalry would have died in his long boots sooner than have
asked for quarter, but it is a fact that the answer to the second
call was a long wail of "Marf karo! Marf karo!" which means, "Have
mercy! Have mercy!" It came from the climbing regiment.

The cavalry stood dumbfoundered, till the big troopers had time to
whisper one to another:
"Mir Khan, was that thy voice? Abdullah, didst thou call?"
Lieutenant Halley stood beside his charger and waited. So long as
no firing was going on he was content. Another flash of lightning
showed the horses with heaving flanks and nodding heads; the men,
white eye-balled, glaring beside them, and the stone watch-tower
to the left. This time there was no head at the window, and the
rude iron-clamped shutter that could turn a rifle-bullet was
closed.

"Go on, men," said the Major. "Get up to the top at any rate!" The
squadron toiled forward, the horses wagging their tails and the
men pulling at the bridles, the stones rolling down the hillside
and the sparks flying. Lieutenant Halley declares that he never
heard a squadron make so much noise in his life. They scrambled
up, he said, as though each horse had eight legs and a spare horse
to follow him. Even then there was no sound from the watch-tower,
and the men stopped exhausted on the ridge that overlooked the pit
of darkness in which the village of Bersund lay. Girths were
loosed, curb-chains shifted, and saddles adjusted, and the men
dropped down among the stones. Whatever might happen now, they
held the upper ground of any attack.

The thunder ceased, and with it the rain, and the soft thick
darkness of a winter night before the dawn covered them all.
Except for the sound of falling water among the ravines below,
everything was still. They heard the shutter of the watch-tower
below them thrown back with a clang, and the voice of the watcher
calling, "Oh, Hafiz Ullah!"

The echoes took up the call, "La-la-la!" and an answer came from
the watch-tower hidden round the curve of the hill, "What is it,
Shahbaz Khan?"

Shahbaz Khan replied in the high-pitched voice of the mountaineer:
"Hast thou seen?"

The answer came back: "Yes. God deliver us from all evil spirits!

There was a pause, and then: "Hafiz Ullah, I am alone! Come to
me."

"Shahbaz Khan, I am alone also; but I dare not leave my post!"

"That is a lie; thou art afraid."

A longer pause followed, and then: "I am afraid. Be silent! They
are below us still. Pray to God and sleep."

The troopers listened and wondered, for they could not understand
what save earth and stone could lie below the watch-towers.

Shahbaz Khan began to call again: "They are below us. I can see
them! For the pity of God come over to me, Hafiz Ullah! My father
slew ten of them. Come over!"

Hafiz Ullah answered in a very loud voice, "Mine was guiltless.
Hear, ye Men of the Night, neither my father nor my blood had any
part in that sin. Bear thou thine own punishment, Shahbaz Khan."

"Oh, some one ought to stop those two chaps crowing away like
cocks there," said the Lieutenant, shivering under his rock.

He had hardly turned round to expose a new side of him to the rain
before a bearded, long-locked, evil-smelling Afghan rushed up the
hill, and tumbled into his arms. Halley sat upon him, and thrust
as much of a sword-hilt as could be spared down the man's gullet.
"If you cry out, I kill you," he said cheerfully.

The man was beyond any expression of terror. He lay and quaked,
gasping. When Halley took the sword-hilt from between his teeth,
he was still inarticulate, but clung to Halley's arm, feeling it
from elbow to wrist.

"The Rissala! The dead Rissala! " he gasped, "It is down there!"

"No; the Rissala, the very much alive Rissala. It is up here,"
said Halley, unshipping his watering-bridle and fastening the
man's hands. "Why were you in the towers so foolish as to let us
pass?"

"The valley is full of the dead," said the Afghan. "It is better
to fall into the hands of the English than the hands of the dead.
They march to and fro below there. I saw them in the lightning."

He recovered his composure after a little, and whispering, because
Halley's pistol was at his stomach, said: "What is this? There is
no war between us now, and the Mullah will kill me for not seeing
you pass!"

"Rest easy," said Halley; "we are coming to kill the Mullah, if
God please. His teeth have grown too long. No harm will come to
thee unless the daylight shows thee as a face which is desired by
the gallows for crime done. But what of the dead regiment?"

"I only kill within my own border," said the man, immensely
relieved. "The dead regiment is below. The men must have passed
through it on their journey - four hundred dead on horses,
stumbling among their own graves, among the little heaps - dead
men all, whom we slew."

"Whew!" said Halley. "That accounts for my cursing Carter and the
Major cursing me. Four hundred sabres, eh? No wonder we thought
there were a few extra men in the troop. Kurruk Shah," he
whispered to a grizzled native officer that lay within a few feet
of him, "hast thou heard anything of a dead Rissala in these
hills?

"Assuredly," said Kurruk Shah with a grim chuckle. "Otherwise, why
did I, who have served the Queen for seven-and-twenty years, and
killed many hill-dogs, shout aloud for quarter when the lightning
revealed us to the watch-towers? When I was a young man I saw the
killing in the valley of Sheor-Kôt there at our feet, and I know
the tale that grew up therefrom. But how can the ghosts of
unbelievers prevail against us who are of the Faith? Strap that
dog's hands a little tighter, Sahib. An Afghan is like an eel."

"But a dead Rissala," said Halley, jerking his captive's wrist.
"That is foolish talk, Kurruk Shah. The dead are dead. Hold still,
Sag." The Afghan wriggled.

"The dead are dead, and for that reason they walk at night. What
need to talk? We be men; we have our eyes and ears. Thou canst
both see and hear them down the hillside," said Kurruk Shah
composedly.

Halley stared and listened long and intently. The valley was full
of stifled noises, as every valley must be at night; but whether
he saw or heard more than was natural Halley alone knows, and he
does not choose to speak on the subject.

At last, and just before the dawn, a green rocket shot up from the
far side of the valley of Bersund, at the head of the gorge, to
show that the Goorkhas were in position. A red light from the
infantry at left and right answered it, and the cavalry burnt a
white flare. Afghans in winter are late sleepers, and it was not
till full day that the Gulla Kutta Mullah's men began to straggle
from their huts, rubbing their eyes. They saw men in green, and
red, and brown uniforms, leaning on their arms, neatly arranged
all round the crater of the village of Bersund, in a cordon that
not even a wolf could have broken. They rubbed their eyes the more
when a pink-faced young man, who was not even in the Army, but
represented the Political Department, tripped down the hillside
with two orderlies, rapped at the door of the Gulla Kutta Mullah's
house, and told him quietly to step out and be tied up for safe
transport. That same young man passed on through the huts, tapping
here one cateran and there another lightly with his cane; and as
each was pointed out, so he was tied up, staring hopelessly at the
crowned heights around where the English soldiers looked down with
incurious eyes. Only the Mullah tried to carry it off with curses
and high words, till a soldier who was tying his hands said: -

"None o' your lip! Why didn't you come out when you was ordered,
instead o' keeping us awake all night? You're no better than my
own barrack-sweeper, you white-'eaded old polyanthus! Kim up!"

Half an hour later the troops had gone away with the Mullah and
his thirteen friends. The dazed villagers were looking ruefully at
a pile of broken muskets and snapped swords, and wondering how in
the world they had come so to miscalculate the forbearance of the
Indian Government.

It was a very neat little affair, neatly carried out, and the men
concerned were unofficially thanked for their services.

Yet it seems to me that much credit is also due to another
regiment whose name did not appear in brigade orders, and whose
very existence is in danger of being forgotten.



THE DRUMS OF THE FORE AND AFT

In the Army List they still stand as "The Fore and Fit Princess
Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen-Anspach's Merther-Tydfilshire Own Royal
Loyal Light Infantry, Regimental District 329A," but the Army
through all its barracks and canteens knows them now as the "Fore
and Aft." They may in time do something that shall make their new
title honourable, but at present they are bitterly ashamed, and
the man who calls them "Fore and Aft" does so at the risk of the
head which is on his shoulders.

Two words breathed into the stables of a certain Cavalry Regiment
will bring the men out into the streets with belts and mops and
bad language; but a whisper of "Fore and Aft" will bring out this
regiment with rifles.

Their one excuse is that they came again and did their best to
finish the job in style. But for a time all their world knows that
they were openly beaten, whipped, dumb-cowed, shaking and afraid.
The men know it; their officers know it; the Horse Guards know it,
and when the next war comes the enemy will know it also. There are
two or three regiments of the Line that have a black mark against
their names which they will then wipe out; and it will be
excessively inconvenient for the troops upon whom they do their
wiping.

The courage of the British soldier is officially supposed to be
above proof, and, as a general rule, it is so. The exceptions are
decently shovelled out of sight, only to be referred to in the
freshest of unguarded talk that occasionally swamps a Mess-table
at midnight. Then one hears strange and horrible stories of men
not following their officers, of orders being given by those who
had no right to give them, and of disgrace that, but for the
standing luck of the British Army, might have ended in brilliant
disaster. These are unpleasant stories to listen to, and the
Messes tell them under their breath, sitting by the big wood
fires, and the young officer bows his head and thinks to himself,
please God, his men shall never behave unhandily.

The British soldier is not altogether to be blamed for occasional
lapses; but this verdict he should not know. A moderately
intelligent General will waste six months in mastering the craft
of the particular war that he may be waging; a Colonel may utterly
misunderstand the capacity of his regiment for three months after
it has taken the field, and even a Company Commander may err and
be deceived as to the temper and temperament of his own handful:
wherefore the soldier, and the soldier of to-day more
particularly, should not be blamed for fa1ling back. He should be
shot or hanged afterwards - to encourage the others; but he should
not be vilified in newspapers, for that is want of tact and waste
of space.

He has, let us say, been in the service of the Empress for,
perhaps, four years. He will leave in another two years. He has no
inherited morals, and four years are not sufficient to drive
toughness into his fibre, or to teach him how holy a thing is his
Regiment. He wants to drink, he wants to enjoy himself - in India
he wants to save money - and he does not in the least like getting
hurt. He has received just sufficient education to make him
understand half the purport of the orders he receives, and to
speculate on the nature of clean, incised, and shattering wounds.
Thus, if he is told to deploy under fire preparatory to an attack,
he knows that he runs a very great risk of being killed while he
is deploying, and suspects that he is being thrown away to gain
ten minutes' time. He may either deploy with desperate swiftness,
or he may shuffle, or bunch, or break, according to the discipline
under which he has lain for four years.

Armed with imperfect knowledge, cursed with the rudiments of an
imagination, hampered by the intense selfishness of the lower
classes, and unsupported by any regimental associations, this
young man is suddenly introduced to an enemy
who in eastern lands is always ugly, generally tall and hairy, and
frequently noisy. If he looks to the right and the left and sees
old soldiers - men of twelve years' service, who, he knows, know
what they are about - taking a charge, rush, or demonstration
without embarrassment, he is consoled and applies his shoulder to
the butt of his rifle with a stout heart. His peace is the greater
if he hears a senior, who has taught him his soldiering and broken
his head on occasion, whispering: "They'll shout and carry on like
this for five minutes. Then they'll rush in, and then we've got
'em by the short hairs!"

But, on the other hand, if he sees only men of his own term of
service, turning white and playing with their triggers and saying:
"What the Hell's up now?" while the Company Commanders are
sweating into their sword-hilts and shouting: "Front rank, fix
bayonets. Steady there - steady! Sight for three hundred - no, for
five! Lie down, all! Steady! Front rank kneel!" and so forth, he
becomes unhappy, and grows acutely miserable when he hears a
comrade turn over with the rattle of fire-irons falling into the
fender, and the grunt of a pole-axed ox. If he can be moved about
a little and allowed to watch the effect of his own fire on the
enemy he feels merrier, and may be then worked up to the blind
passion of fighting, which is, contrary to general belief,
controlled by a chilly Devil and shakes men like ague. If he is
not moved about, and begins to feel cold at the pit of the
stomach, and in that crisis is badly mauled and hears orders that
were never given, he will break, and he will break badly, and of
all things under the light of the Sun there is nothing more
terrible than a broken British regiment. When the worst comes to
the worst and the panic is really epidemic, the men must be e'en
let go, and the Company Commanders had better escape to the enemy
and stay there for safety's sake. If they can be made to come
again they are not pleasant men to meet; because they will not
break twice.

About thirty years from this date, when we have succeeded in half-
educating everything that wears trousers, our Army will be a
beautifully unreliable machine. It will know too much and it will
do too little. Later still, when all men are at the mental level
of the officer of to-day, it will sweep the earth. Speaking
roughly, you must employ either blackguards or gentlemen, or, best
of all, blackguards commanded by gentlemen, to do butcher's work
with efficiency and despatch. The ideal soldier should, of course,
think for himself - the "Pocket-book" says so. Unfortunately, to
attain this virtue, he has to pass through the phase of thinking
of himself, and that is misdirected genius. A blackguard may be
slow to think for himself, but he is genuinely anxious to kill,
and a little punishment teaches him how to guard his own skin and
perforate another's. A powerfully prayerful Highland Regiment,
officered by rank Presbyterians, is, perhaps, one degree more
terrible in action than a hard-bitten thousand of irresponsible
Irish ruffians led by most improper young unbelievers. But these
things prove the rule - which is that the midway men are not to be
trusted alone. They have ideas about the value of life and an
upbringing that has not taught them to go on and take the chances.
They are carefully unprovided with a backing of comrades who have
been shot over, and until that backing is re-introduced, as a
great many Regimental Commanders intend it shall be, they are more
liable to disgrace themselves than the size of the Empire or the
dignity of the Army allows. Their officers are as good as good can
be, because their training begins early, and God has arranged that
a clean-run youth of the British middle classes shall, in the
matter of backbone, brains, and bowels, surpass all other youths.
For this reason a child of eighteen will stand up, doing nothing,
with a tin sword in his hand and joy in his heart until he is
dropped. If he dies, he dies like a gentleman. If he lives, he
writes Home that he has been "potted," "sniped," "chipped," or
"cut over," and sits down to besiege Government for a wound-
gratuity until the next little war breaks out, when he perjures
himself before a Medical Board, blarneys his Colonel, burns
incense round his Adjutant, and is allowed to go to the Front once
more.

Which homily brings me directly to a brace of the most finished
little fiends that ever banged drum or tootled fife in the Band of
a British Regiment. They ended their sinful career by open and
flagrant mutiny and were shot for it. Their names were Jakin and
Lew - Piggy Lew and they were bold, bad drummer-boys, both of them
frequently birched by the Drum-Major of the Fore and Aft.
-
Jakin was a stunted child of fourteen, and Lew was about the same
age. When not looked after, they smoked and drank. They swore
habitually after the manner of the Barrack-room, which is cold
swearing and comes from between clenched teeth, and they fought
religiously once a week. Jakin had sprung from some London gutter,
and may or may not have passed through Dr. Barnardo's hands ere he
arrived at the dignity of drummer-boy. Lew could remember nothing
except the Regiment and the delight of listening to the Band from
his earliest years. He hid somewhere in his grimy little soul a
genuine love for music, and was most mistakenly furnished with the
head of a cherub: insomuch that beautiful ladies who watched the
Regiment in church were wont to speak of him as a "darling." They
never heard his vitriolic comments on their manners and morals, as
he walked back to barracks with the Band and matured fresh causes
of offence against Jakin.

The other drummer-boys hated both lads on account of their
illogical conduct. Jakin might be pounding Lew, or Lew might be
rubbing Jakin's head in the dirt, but any attempt at aggression on
the part of an outsider was met by the combined forces of Lew and
Jakin; and the consequences were painful. The boys were the
Ishmaels of the corps, but wealthy Ishmaels, for they sold battles
in alternate weeks for the sport of the barracks when they were
not pitted against other boys; and thus amassed money.

On this particular day there was dissension in the camp. They had
just been convicted afresh of smoking, which is bad for little
boys who use plug-tobacco, and Lew's contention was that Jakin had
"stunk so 'orrid bad from keepin' the pipe in pocket," that he and
he alone was responsible for the birching they were both tingling
under.

"I tell you I 'id the pipe back o' barracks," said Jakin
pacifically.

"You're a bloomin' liar," said Lew without heat.

"You're a bloomin' little barstard," said Jakin, strong in the
knowledge that his own ancestry was unknown.

Now there is one word in the extended vocabulary of barrack-room
abuse that cannot pass without comment. You may call a man a thief
and risk nothing. You may even call him a coward without finding
more than a boot whiz past your ear, but you must not call a man a
bastard unless you are prepared to prove it on his front teeth.

"You might ha' kep' that till I wasn't so sore," said Lew
sorrowfully, dodging round Jakin's guard.

"I'll make you sorer," said Jakin genially, and got home on Lew's
alabaster forehead. All would have gone well and this story, as
the books say, would never have been written, had not his evil
fate prompted the Bazar-Sergeant's son, a long, employless man of
five-and-twenty, to put in an appearance after the first round. He
was eternally in need of money, and knew that the boys had silver.

"Fighting again," said he. "I'll report you to my father, and
he'll report you to the Colour-Sergeant."

"What's that to you?" said Jakin with an unpleasant dilation of
the nostrils.

"Oh! nothing to me. You'll get into trouble, and you've been up
too often to afford that."

"What the Hell do you know about what we've done?" asked Lew the
Seraph. "You aren't in the Army, you lousy, cadging civilian."

He closed in on the man's left flank.

"Jes' 'cause you find two gentlemen settlin' their diff'rences
with their fistes you stick in your ugly nose where you aren't
wanted. Run 'ome to your 'arf-caste slut of a Ma - or we'll give
you what-for," said Jakin.

The man attempted reprisals by knocking the boys' heads together.
The scheme would have succeeded had not Jakin punched him
vehemently in the stomach, or had Lew refrained from kicking his
shins. They fought together, bleeding and breathless, for half an
hour, and, after heavy punishment, triumphantly pulled down their
opponent as terriers pull down a jackal.

"Now," gasped Jakin, "I'll give you what-for." He proceeded to
pound the man's features while Lew stamped on the outlying
portions of his anatomy. Chivalry is not a strong point in the
composition of the average drummer-boy. He fights, as do his
betters, to make his mark.

Ghastly was the ruin that escaped, and awful was the wrath of the
Bazar-Sergeant. Awful too was the scene in Orderly-room when the
two reprobates appeared to answer the charge of half-murdering a
"civilian." The Bazar-Sergeant thirsted for a criminal action, and
his son lied. The boys stood to attention while the black clouds
of evidence accumulated.

"You little devils are more trouble than the rest of the Regiment
put together," said the Colonel angrily. "One might as well
admonish thistledown, and I can't well put you in cells or under
stoppages. You must be birched again."

"Beg y' pardon, Sir. Can't we say nothin' in our own defence,
Sir?" shrilled Jakin.

"Hey! What? Are you going to argue with me?" said the Colonel.

"No, Sir," said Lew. "But if a man come to you, Sir, and said he
was going to report you, Sir, for 'aving a bit of a turn-up with a
friend, Sir, an' wanted to get money out o' you, Sir-"

The Orderly-room exploded in a roar of laughter. "Well?" said the
Colonel.

"That was what that measly jarnwar there did, Sir, and 'e'd 'a'
done it, Sir, if we 'adn't prevented 'im. We didn't 'it 'im much,
Sir. 'E 'adn't no manner o' right to interfere with us, Sir. I
don't mind bein' birched by the Drum-Major, Sir, nor yet reported
by any Corp'ral, but I'm - but I don't think it's fair, Sir, for a
civilian to come an' talk over a man in the Army."

A second shout of laughter shook the Orderly-room, but the Colonel
was grave.

"What sort of characters have these boys?" he asked of the
Regimental Sergeant-Major.

"Accordin' to the Bandmaster, Sir," returned that revered official
- the only soul in the Regiment whom the boys feared - "they do
everything but lie, Sir."

"Is it like we'd go for that man for fun, Sir?" said Lew, pointing
to the plaintiff.

"Oh, admonished - admonished!" said the Colonel testily, and when
the boys had gone he read the Bazar-Sergeant's son a lecture on
the sin of unprofitable meddling, and gave orders that the
Bandmaster should keep the Drums in better discipline.

"If either of you come to practice again with so much as a scratch
on your two ugly little faces," thundered the Bandmaster, "I'll
tell the Drum-Major to take the skin off your backs. Understand
that, you young devils."

Then he repented of his speech for just the length of time that
Lew, looking like a seraph in red worsted embellishments, took the
place of one of the trumpets - in hospital - and rendered the echo
of a battle-piece. Lew certainly was a musician, and had often in
his more exalted moments expressed a yearning to master every
instrument of the Band.

"There's nothing to prevent your becoming a Bandmaster, Lew," said
the Bandmaster, who had composed waltzes of his own, and worked
day and night in the interests of the Band.

"What did he say?" demanded Jakin after practice.

"Said I might be a bloomin' Bandmaster, an' be asked in to 'ave a
glass o' sherry wine on Mess-nights."

"Ho! 'Said you might be a bloomin' noncombatant, did 'e! That's
just about wot 'e would say. When I've put in my boy's service
it's a bloomin' shame that doesn't count for pension - I'll take
on as a privit. Then I'll be a Lance in a year - knowin' what I
know about the ins an' outs o' things. In three years I'll be a
bloomin' Sergeant. I won't marry then, not I! I'll 'old on and
learn the orf'cers' ways an' apply for exchange into a reg'ment
that doesn't know all about me. Then I'll be a bloomin' orf'cer.
Then I'll ask you to 'ave a glass o' sherry wine, Mister Lew, an'
you'll bloomin' well 'ave to stay in the hanty-room while the
Mess-Sergeant brings it to your dirty 'ands."
-
"S'pose I'm going to be a Bandmaster? Not I, quite. I'll be a
orf'cer too. There's nothin' like takin' to a thing an' stickin'
to it, the Schoolmaster says. The Reg'ment don't go 'ome for
another seven years. I'll be a Lance then or near to."

Thus the boys discussed their futures, and conducted themselves
piously for a week. That is to say, Lew started a flirtation with
the Colour-Sergeant's daughter, aged thirteen - "not," as he
explained to Jakin, "with any intention o' matrimony, but by way
o' keep in' my 'and in." And the black-haired Cris Delighan
enjoyed that flirtation more than previous ones, and the other
drummer-boys raged furiously together, and Jakin preached sermons
on the dangers of      bein' tangled along o' petticoats."

But neither love nor virtue would have held Lew long in the paths
of propriety had not the rumour gone abroad that the Regiment was
to be sent on active service, to take part in a war which, for the
sake of brevity, we will call "The War of the Lost Tribes."

The barracks had the rumour almost before the Mess-room, and of
all the nine hundred men in barracks, not ten had seen a shot
fired in anger. The Colonel had, twenty years ago, assisted at a
Frontier expedition; one of the Majors had seen service at the
Cape; a confirmed deserter in E Company had helped to clear
streets in Ireland; but that was all. The Regiment had been put by
for many years. The overwhelming mass of its rank and file had
from three to four years' service; the non-commissioned officers
were under thirty years old; and men and sergeants alike had
forgotten to speak of the stories written in brief upon the
Colours - the New Colours that had been formally blessed by an
Archbishop in England ere the Regiment came away. They wanted to
go to the Front - they were enthusiastically anxious to go - but
they had no knowledge of what war meant, and there was none to
tell them. They were an educated regiment, the percentage of
school-certificates in their ranks was high, and most of the men
could do more than read and write. They had been recruited in
loyal observance of the territorial idea; but they themselves had
no notion of that idea. They were made up of drafts from an over-
populated manufacturing district. The system had put flesh and
muscle upon their small bones, but it could not put heart into the
sons of those who for generations had done overmuch work for
overscanty pay, had sweated in drying-rooms, stooped over looms,
coughed among white-lead, and shivered on lime-barges. The men had
found food and rest in the Army, and now they were going to fight
"niggers" - people who ran away if you shook a stick at them.
Wherefore they cheered lustily when the rumour ran, and the
shrewd, clerkly non-commissioned officers speculated on the
chances of batta and of saving their pay. At Headquarters men
said: "The Fore and Fit have never been under fire within the last
generation. Let us, therefore, break them in easily by setting
them to guard lines of communication." And this would have been
done but for the fact that British Regiments were wanted - badly
wanted - at the Front, and there were doubtful Native Regiments
that could fill the minor duties. "Brigade 'em with two strong
Regiments," said Headquarters. "They may be knocked about a bit,
but they'll learn their business before they come through. Nothing
like a night-alarm and a little cutting-up of stragglers to make a
Regiment smart in the field. Wait till they've had half a dozen
sentries' throats cut."

The Colonel wrote with delight that the temper of his men was
excellent, that the Regiment was all that could be wished, and as
sound as a bell. The Majors smiled with a sober joy, and the
subalterns waltzed in pairs down the Mess-room after dinner, and
nearly shot themselves at revolver-practice. But there was
consternation in the hearts of Jakin and Lew. What was to be done
with the Drums? Would the Band go to the Front? How many of the
Drums would accompany the Regiment?

They took counsel together, sitting in a tree and smoking.

"It's more than a bloomin' toss-up they'll leave us be'ind at the
Depot with the women. You'll like that," said Jakin sarcastically.

"Cause o' Cris, y' mean? Wot's a woman, or a 'ole bloomin' depot
o' women, 'longside o' the chanst of field-service? You know I'm
as keen on goin' as you," said Lew.

"Wish I was a bloomin' bugler," said Jakin sadly. "They'll take
Tom Kidd along, that I can plaster a wall with, an' like as not
they won't take us."

"Then let's go an' make Tom Kidd so bloomin' sick 'e can't bugle
no more. You 'old 'is 'ands an' I'll kick him," said Lew,
wriggling on the branch.

"That ain't no good neither. We ain't the sort o' characters to
presoom on our rep'tations - they're bad. If they have the Band at
the Depot we don't go, and no error there. If they take the Band
we may get cast for medical unfitness. Are you medical fit,
Piggy?" said Jakin, digging Lew in the ribs with force.

"Yus," said Lew with an oath. "The Doctor says your 'eart's weak
through smokin' on an empty stummick. Throw a chest an' I'll try
yer."

Jakin threw out his chest, which Lew smote with all his might.
Jakin turned very pale, gasped, crowed, screwed up his eyes, and
said - "That's all right."

"You'll do," said Lew. "I've 'eard o' men dying when you 'it 'em
fair on the breastbone."

"Don't bring us no nearer goin', though," said Jakin. "Do you know
where we're ordered?"

"Gawd knows, an' 'E won't split on a pal. Somewheres up to the
Front to kill Paythans - hairy big beggars that turn you inside
out if they get 'old o' you. They say their women are good-
looking, too."

"Any loot?" asked the abandoned Jakin.

"Not a bloomin' anna, they say, unless you dig up the ground an'
see what the niggers 'ave 'id. They're a poor lot." Jakin stood
upright on the branch and gazed across the plain.

"Lew," said he, "there's the Colonel coming. 'Colonel's a good old
beggar. Let's go an' talk to 'im."

Lew nearly fell out of the tree at the audacity of the suggestion.
Like Jakin he feared not God, neither regarded he Man, but there
are limits even to the audacity of a drummer-boy, and to speak to
a Colonel was -

But Jakin had slid down the trunk and doubled in the direction of
the Colonel. That officer was walking wrapped in thought and
visions of a C. B. yes, even a K. C. B., for had he not at command
one of the best Regiments of the Line - the Fore and Fit? And he
was aware of two small boys charging down upon him. Once before it
had been solemnly reported to him that "the Drums were in a state
of mutiny," Jakin and Lew being the ringleaders. This looked like
an organised conspiracy.
-
The boys halted at twenty yards, walked to the regulation four
paces, and saluted together, each as well set-up as a ramrod and
little taller.

The Colonel was in a genial mood; the boys appeared very forlorn
and unprotected on the desolate plain, and one of them was
handsome.

"Well!" said the Colonel, recognising them. "Are you going to pull
me down in the open? I'm sure I never interfere with you, even
though" - he sniffed suspiciously - "you have been smoking."

It was time to strike while the iron was hot. Their hearts beat
tumultuously.

"Beg y' pardon, Sir," began Jakin. "The Reg'ment's ordered on
active service, Sir?"

"So I believe," said the Colonel courteously.

"Is the Band goin', Sir?" said both together. Then, without pause,
"We're     goin', Sir, ain't we?"

"You!" said the Colonel, stepping back the more fully to take in
the two small figures. "You! You'd die in the first march."

"No, we wouldn't, Sir. We can march with the Reg'ment anywheres -
p'rade an' anywhere else," said Jakin.

"If Tom Kidd goes 'e'll shut up like a clasp-knife," said Lew.
"Tom 'as very-close veins in both 'is legs, Sir."

"Very how much?"

"Very-close veins, Sir. That's why they swells after long p'rade,
Sir. If 'e can go, we can go, Sir."

Again the Colonel looked at them long and intently.

"Yes, the Band is going," he said as gravely as though he had been
addressing a brother officer. "Have you any parents, either of you
two?"

"No, Sir," rejoicingly from Lew and Jakin. "We're both orphans,
Sir. There's no one to be considered of on our account, Sir."

"You poor little sprats, and you want to go up to the Front with
the Regiment, do you? Why?"

"I've wore the Queen's Uniform for two years," said Jakin. "It's
very 'ard, Sir, that a man don't get no recompense for doin' of
'is dooty, Sir."

"An'- an' if I don't go, Sir," interrupted Lew, "the Bandmaster 'e
says 'e'll catch an' make a bloo - a blessed musician o' me, Sir.
Before I've seen any service, Sir."

The Colonel made no answer for a long time. Then he said quietly:
"If you're passed by the Doctor I dare say you can go. I shouldn't
smoke if I were you."

The boys saluted and disappeared. The Colonel walked home and told
the story to his wife, who nearly cried over it. The Colonel was
well pleased. If that was the temper of the children, what would
not the men do?

Jakin and Lew entered the boys' barrack-room with great
stateliness, and refused to hold any conversation with their
comrades for at least ten minutes. Then, bursting with pride,
Jakin drawled: "I've bin intervooin' the Colonel. Good old beggar
is the Colonel. Says I to 'im, 'Colonel,' says I, 'let me go to
the Front, along o' the Reg'ment. - 'To the Front you shall go,'
says 'e, 'an' I only wish there was more like you among the dirty
little devils that bang the bloomin' drums.' Kidd, if you throw
your 'courtrements at me for tellin' you the truth to your own
advantage, your legs'll swell."

None the less there was a Battle-Royal in the barrack-room, for
the boys were consumed with envy and hate, and neither Jakin nor
Lew behaved in conciliatory wise.

"I'm goin' out to say adoo to my girl," said Lew, to cap the
climax. "Don't none o' you touch my kit because it's wanted for
active service; me bein' specially invited to go by the Colonel."

He strolled forth and whistled in the clump of trees at the back
of the Married Quarters till Cris came to him, and, the
preliminary kisses being given and taken, Lew began to explain the
situation.

"I'm goin' to the Front with the Reg'ment," he said valiantly.

"Piggy, you're a little liar," said Cris, but her heart misgave
her, for Lew was not in the habit of lying.

"Liar yourself, Cris," said Lew, slipping an arm round her. "I'm
goin'. When the Reg'ment marches out you'll see me with 'em, all
galliant and gay. Give us another kiss, Cris, on the strength of
it."

"If you'd on'y a-stayed at the Depot - where you ought to ha' bin
- you could get as many of 'em as - as you dam please," whimpered
Cris, putting up her mouth.

"It's 'ard, Cris. I grant you it's 'ard, But what's a man to do?
If I'd a-stayed at the Depot, you wouldn't think anything of me."

"Like as not, but I'd 'ave you with me, Piggy. An' all the
thinkin' in the world isn't like kissin'."

"An' all the kissin' in the world isn't like 'avin' a medal to
wear on the front o' your coat."

"You won't get no medal."

"Oh, yus, I shall though. Me an' Jakin are the only acting-
drummers that'll be took along. All the rest is full men, an'
we'll get our medals with them."

"They might ha' taken anybody but you, Piggy. You'll get killed -
you're so venturesome. Stay with me, Piggy darlin', down at the
Depot, an' I'll love you true, for ever."

"Ain't you goin' to do that now, Cris? You said you was."

"0' course I am, but th' other's more comfortable. Wait till
you've growed a bit, Piggy. You aren't no taller than me now."

"I've bin in the Army for two years, an' I'm not goin' to get out
of a chanst o' seein' service, an' don't you try to make me do so.
I'll come back, Cris, an' when I take on as a man I'll marry you -
marry you when I'm a Lance."

"Promise, Piggy."

Lew reflected on the future as arranged by Jakin a short time
previously, but Cris's mouth was very near to his own.

"I promise, s'elp me Gawd!" said he.

Cris slid an arm round his neck.

"I won't 'old you back no more, Piggy. Go away an' get your medal,
an' I'll make you a new button-bag as nice as I know how," she
whispered.

"Put some o' your 'air into it, Cris, an' I'll keep it in my
pocket so long's I'm alive."

Then Cris wept anew, and the interview ended. Public feeling among
the drummer-boys rose to fever pitch, and the lives of Jakin and
Lew became unenviable. Not only had they been permitted to enlist
two years before the regulation boy's age - fourteen - but, by
virtue, it seemed, of their extreme youth, they were allowed to go
to the Front - which thing had not happened to acting-drummers
within the knowledge of boy. The Band which was to accompany the
Regiment had been cut down to the regulation twenty men, the
surplus returning to the ranks. Jakin and Lew were attached to the
Band as supernumeraries, though they would much have preferred
being company buglers.

"Don't matter much," said Jakin after the medical inspection. "Be
thankful that we're 'lowed to go at all. The Doctor 'e said that
if we could stand what we took from the Bazar-Sergeant's son we'd
stand pretty nigh anything."

"Which we will," said Lew, looking tenderly at the ragged and ill-
made housewife that Cris had given him, with a lock of her hair
worked into a sprawling "L" upon the cover.

"It was the best I could," she sobbed. "I wouldn't let mother nor
the Sergeant's tailor 'elp me. Keep it always, Piggy, an' remember
I love you true."

They marched to the railway station, nine hundred and sixty
strong, and every soul in cantonments turned out to see them go.
The drummers gnashed their teeth at Jakin and Lew marching with
the Band, the married women wept upon the platform, and the
Regiment cheered its noble self black in the face.

"A nice level lot," said the Colonel to the Second-in-Command as
they watched the first four companies entraining.

"Fit to do anything," said the Second-in-Command enthusiastically.
"But it seems to me they're a thought too young and tender for the
work in hand. It's bitter cold up at the Front now."

"They're sound enough," said the Colonel. "We must take our chance
of sick casualties."

So they went northward, ever northward, past droves and droves of
camels, armies of camp-followers, and legions of laden mules, the
throng thickening day by day, till with a shriek the train pulled
up at a hopelessly congested junction where six lines of temporary
track accommodated six forty-waggon trains; where whistles blew,
Babus sweated, and Commissariat officers swore from dawn till far
into the night, amid the wind-driven chaff of the fodder-bales and
the lowing of a thousand steers.

"Hurry up - you're badly wanted at the Front," was the message
that greeted the Fore and Aft, and the occupants of the Red Cross
carriages told the same tale.

"Tisn't so much the bloomin' fightin'," gasped a headbound trooper
of Hussars to a knot of admiring Fore and Afts. "Tisn't so much
the bloomin' fightin', though there's enough o' that. It's the
bloomin' food an' the bloomin' climate. Frost all night 'cept when
it hails, and b'iling sun all day, and the water stinks fit to
knock you down. I got my 'ead chipped like a egg; I've got
pneumonia too, an' my guts is all out o' order. 'Tain't no
bloomin' picnic in those parts, I can tell you."

"Wot are the niggers like?" demanded a private.

"There's some prisoners in that train yonder. Go an' look at 'em.
They're the aristocracy o' the country. The common folk are a
dashed sight uglier. If you want to know what they fight with,
reach under my seat an' pull out the
long knife that's there."

They dragged out and beheld for the first time the grim, bone-
handled, triangular Afghan knife. It was almost as long as Lew.

"That's the thing to j'int ye," said the trooper feebly. "It can
take off a man's arm at the shoulder as easy as slicing butter. I
halved the beggar that used that un, but there's more of his likes
up above. They don't understand thrustin', but they're devils to
slice."

The men strolled across the tracks to inspect the Afghan
prisoners. They were unlike any "niggers" that the Fore and Aft
had ever met - these huge, black-haired, scowling sons of the
Beni-Israel. As the men stared the Afghans spat freely and
muttered one to another with lowered eyes.

"My eyes! Wot awful swine!" said Jakin, who was in the rear of the
procession. "Say, ole man, how you got puckrowed, eh? Kiswasti you
wasn't hanged for your ugly face, hey?"

The tallest of the company turned, his leg-irons clanking at the
movement, and stared at the boy. "See!" he cried to his fellows in
Pushto. "They send children against us. What a people, and what
fools!"

"Hya." said Jakin, nodding his head cheerily. "You go down-
country. Khana get, peenikapanee get - live like a bloomin' Raja
ke marfik. That's a better bandobust than baynit get it in your
innards. Good-bye, ole man. Take care o' your beautiful figure-
'ead, an' try to look kushy."

The men laughed and fell in for their first march, when they began
to realise that a soldier's life is not all beer and skittles.
They were much impressed with the size and bestial ferocity of the
niggers whom they had now learned to call "Paythans," and more
with the exceeding discomfort of their own surroundings. Twenty
old soldiers in the corps would have taught them how to make
themselves moderately snug at night, but they had no old soldiers,
and, as the troops on the line of march said, "they lived like
pigs." They learned the heart-breaking cussedness of camp-kitchens
and camels and the depravity of an E. P. tent and a wither-wrung
mule. They studied animalculae in water, and developed a few cases
of dysentery in their study.

At the end of their third march they were disagreeably surprised
by the arrival in their camp of a hammered iron slug which, fired
from a steady rest at seven hundred yards, flicked out the brains
of a private seated by the fire. This robbed them of their peace
for a night, and was the beginning of a long-range fire carefully
calculated to that end. In the daytime they saw nothing except an
unpleasant puff of smoke from a crag above the line of march. At
night there were distant spurts of flame and occasional
casualties, which set the whole camp blazing into the gloom and,
occasionally, into opposite tents. Then they swore vehemently and
vowed that this was magnificent but not war.

Indeed it was not. The Regiment could not halt for reprisals
against the sharpshooters of the country-side. Its duty was to go
forward and make connectioon with the Scotch and Goorkha troops
with which it was brigaded. The Afghans knew this, and knew too,
after their first tentative shots, that they were dealing with a
raw regiment Thereafter they devoted themselves to the task of
keeping the Fore and Aft on the strain. Not for anything would
they have taken equal liberties with a seasoned corps - with the
wicked little Goorkhas, whose delight it was to lie out in the
open on a dark night and stalk their stalkers - with the terrible
big men dressed in women's clothes, who could be heard praying to
their God in the night-watches, and whose peace of mind no amount
of "sniping" could shake - or with those vile Sikhs, who marched
so ostentatiously unprepared and who dealt out such grim reward to
those who tried to profit by that unpreparedness. This white
regiment was different - quite different. It slept like a hog,
and, like a hog, charged in every direction when it was roused.
Its sentries walked with a footfall that could be heard for a
quarter of a mile; would fire at anything that moved - even a
driven donkey - and when they had once fired, could be
scientifically "rushed " and laid out a horror and an offence
against the morning sun. Then there were camp-followers who
straggled and could be cut up without fear. Their shrieks would
disturb the white boys, and the loss of their services would
inconvenience them sorely.

Thus, at every march, the hidden enemy became bolder and the
Regiment writhed and twisted under attacks it could not avenge.
The crowning triumph was a sudden night-rush ending in the cutting
of many tent-ropes, the collapse of the sodden canvas, and a
glorious knifing of the men who struggled and kicked below. It was
a great deed, neatly carried out, and it shook the already shaken
nerves of the Fore and Aft. All the courage that they had been
required to exercise up to this point was the "two o'clock in the
morning courage"; and, so far, they had only succeeded in shooting
their comrades and losing their sleep.

Sullen, discontented, cold, savage, sick, with their uniforms
dulled and unclean, the Fore and Aft joined their Brigade.

"I hear you had a tough time of it coming up," said the Brigadier.
But when he saw the hospital-sheets his face fell.

"This is bad," said he to himself. "They're as rotten as sheep."
And aloud to the Colonel - "I'm afraid we can't spare you just
yet. We want all we have, else I should have given you ten days to
recover in."

The Colonel winced. "On my honour, Sir," he returned, "there is
not the least necessity to think of sparing us. My men have been
rather mauled and upset without a fair return. They only want to
go in somewhere where they can see what's before them."

"Can't say I think much of the Fore and Fit," said the Brigadier
in confidence to his Brigade-Major. "They've lost all their
soldiering, and, by the trim of them, might have marched through
the country from the other side. A more fagged-out set of men I
never put eyes on."

"Oh, they'll improve as the work goes on. The parade gloss has
been rubbed off a little, but they'll put on field polish before
long," said the Brigade-Major. "They've been mauled, and they
don't quite understand it."

They did not. All the hitting was on one side, and it was cruelly
hard hitting with accessories that made them sick. There was also
the real sickness that laid hold of a strong man and dragged him
howling to the grave. Worst of all, their officers knew just as
little of the country as the men themselves, and looked as if they
did. The Fore and Aft were in a thoroughly unsatisfactory
condition, but they believed that all would be well if they could
once get a fair go-in at the enemy. Pot-shots up and down the
valleys were unsatisfactory, and the bayonet never seemed to get a
chance. Perhaps it was as well, for a long-limbed Afghan with a
knife had a reach of eight feet, and could carry away lead that
would disable three Englishmen.

The Fore and Aft would like some rifle-practice at the enemy - all
seven hundred rifles blazing together. That wish showed the mood
of the men.

The Goorkhas walked into their camp, and in broken, barrack-room
English strove to fraternise with them: offered them pipes of
tobacco and stood them treat at the canteen. But the Fore and Aft,
not knowing much of the nature of the Goorkhas, treated them as
they would treat any other "niggers," and the little men in green
trotted back to their firm friends the Highlanders, and with many
grins confided to them: "That dam white regiment no dam use. Sulky
- ugh! Dirty - ugh! Hya, any tot for Johnny?" Whereat the
Highlanders smote the Goorkhas as to the head, and told them not
to vilify a British Regiment, and the Goorkhas grinned
cavernously, for the Highlanders were their elder brothers and
entitled to the privileges of kinship. The common soldier who
touches a Goorkha is more than likely to have his head sliced
open.

Three days later the Brigadier arranged a battle according to the
rules of war and the peculiarity of the Afghan temperament. The
enemy were massing in inconvenient strength among the hills, and
the moving of many green standards warned him that the tribes were
"up" in aid of the Afghan regular troops. A squadron and a half of
Bengal Lancers represented the available Cavalry, and two screw-
guns, borrowed from a column thirty miles away, the Artillery at
the General's disposal.

"If they stand, as I've a very strong notion that they will, I
fancy we shall see an infantry fight that will be worth watching,"
said the Brigadier. "We'll do it in style. Each regiment shall be
played into action by its Band, and we'll hold the Cavalry in
reserve."

"For all the reserve?" somebody asked.

"For all the reserve; because we're going to crumple them up,"
said the Brigadier, who was an extraordinary Brigadier, and did
not believe in the value of a reserve when dealing with Asiatics.
Indeed, when you come to think of it, had the British Army
consistently waited for reserves in all its little affairs, the
boundaries of Our Empire would have stopped at Brighton beach.

The battle was to be a glorious battle.

The three regiments debouching from three separate gorges, after
duly crowning the heights above, were to converge from the centre,
left, and right upon what we will call the Afghan army, then
stationed towards the lower extremity of a flat-bottomed valley.
Thus it will be seen that three sides of the valley practically
belonged to the English, while the fourth was strictly Afghan
property. In the event of defeat the Afghans had the rocky hills
to fly to, where the fire from the guerrilla tribes in aid would
cover their retreat. In the event of victory these same tribes
would rush down and lend their weight to the rout of the British.

The screw-guns were to shell the head of each Afghan rush that was
made in close formation, and the Cavalry, held in reserve in the
right valley, were to gently stimulate the break-up which would
follow on the combined attack. The Brigadier, sitting upon a rock
overlooking the valley, would watch the battle unrolled at his
feet. The Fore and Aft would debouch from the central gorge, the
Goorkhas from the left, and the Highlanders from the right, for
the reason that the left flank of the enemy seemed as though it
required the most hammering. It was not every day that an Afghan
force would take ground in the open, and the Brigadier was
resolved to make the most of it.

"If we only had a few more men," he said plaintively, "we could
surround the creatures and crumple 'em up thoroughly. As it is,
I'm afraid we can only cut them up as they run. It's a great
pity."

The Fore and Aft had enjoyed unbroken peace for five days, and
were beginning, in spite of dysentery, to recover their nerve. But
they were not happy, for they did not know the work in hand, and
had they known, would not have known how to do it. Throughout
those five days in which old soldiers might have taught them the
craft of the game, they discussed together their misadventures in
the past - how such an one was alive at dawn and dead ere the
dusk, and with what shrieks and struggles such another had given
up his soul under the Afghan knife. Death was a new and horrible
thing to the sons of mechanics who were used to die decently of
zymotic disease; and their careful conservation in barracks had
done nothing to make them look upon it with less dread.

Very early in the dawn the bugles began to blow, and the Fore and
Aft, filled with a misguided enthusiasm, turned out without
waiting for a cup of coffee and a biscuit; and were rewarded by
being kept under arms in the cold while the other regiments
leisurely prepared for the fray. All the world knows that it is
ill taking the breeks off a Highlander. It is much iller to try to
make him stir unless he is convinced of the necessity for haste.
507
The Fore and Aft waited, leaning upon their rifles and listening
to the protests of their empty stomachs. The Colonel did his best
to remedy the default of lining as soon as it was borne in upon
him that the affair would not begin at once, and so well did he
succeed that the coffee was just ready when - the men moved off,
their Band leading. Even then there had been a mistake in time,
and the Fore and Aft came out into the valley ten minutes before
the proper hour. Their Band wheeled to the right after reaching
the open, and retired behind a little rocky knoll still playing
while the Regiment went past.

It was not a pleasant sight that opened on the uninstructed view,
for the lower end of the valley appeared to be filled by an army
in position - real and actual regiments attired in red coats, and
- of this there was no doubt - firing Martini-Henry bullets which
cut up the ground a hundred yards in front of the leading company.
Over that pock-marked ground the Regiment had to pass, and it
opened the ball with a general and profound courtesy to the piping
pickets; ducking in perfect time, as though it had been brazed on
a rod. Being half capable of thinking for itself, it fired a
volley by the simple process of pitching its rifle into its
shoulder and pulling the trigger. The bullets may have accounted
for some of the watchers on the hill side, but they certainly did
not affect the mass of enemy in front, while the noise of the
rifles drowned any orders that might have been given.

"Good God!" said the Brigadier, sitting on the rock high above
all. "That Regiment has spoilt the whole show. Hurry up the
others, and let the screw-guns get off."

But the screw-guns, in working round the heights, had stumbled
upon a wasp's nest of a small mud fort which they incontinently
shelled at eight hundred yards, to the huge discomfort of the
occupants, who were unaccustomed to weapons of such devilish
precision.

The Fore and Aft continued to go forward, but with shortened
stride. Where were the other regiments, and why did these niggers
use Martinis? They took open order instinctively, lying down and
firing at random, rushing a few paces forward and lying down
again, according to the regulations. Once in this formation, each
man felt himself desperately alone, and edged in towards his
fellow for comfort's sake.

Then the crack of his neighbor's rifle at his ear led him to fire
as rapidly as he could - again for the sake of the comfort of the
noise. The reward was not long delayed. Five volleys plunged the
files in banked smoke impenetrable to the eye, and the bullets
began to take ground twenty or thirty yards in front of the
firers, as the weight of the bayonet dragged down and to the right
arms wearied with holding the kick of the leaping Martini. The
Company Commanders peered helplessly through the smoke, the more
nervous mechanically trying to fan it away with their helmets.

"High and to the left!" bawled a Captain till he was hoarse. "No
good! Cease firing, and let it drift away a bit."

Three and four times the bugles shrieked the order, and when it
was obeyed the Fore and Aft looked that their foe should be lying
before them in mown swaths of men. A light wind drove the smoke to
leeward, and showed the enemy still in position and apparently
unaffected. A quarter of a ton of lead had been buried a furlong
in front of them, as the ragged earth attested.

That was not demoralizing to the Afghans, who have not European
nerves. They were waiting for the mad riot to die down, and were
firing quietly into the heart of the smoke. A private of the Fore
and Aft spun up his company shrieking with agony, another was
kicking the earth and gasping, and a third, ripped through the
lower intestines by a jagged bullet, was calling aloud on his
comrades to put him out of his pain. These were the casualties,
and they were not soothing to hear or see. The smoke cleared to a
dull haze.

Then the foe began to shout with a great shouting, and a mass - a
black mass - detached itself from the main body, and rolled over
the ground at horrid speed. It was composed of, perhaps, three
hundred men, who would shout and fire and slash if the rush of
their fifty comrades who were determined to die carried home. The
fifty were Ghazis, half maddened with drugs and wholly mad with
religious fanaticism. When they rushed the British fire ceased,
and in the lull the order was given to close ranks and meet them
with the bayonet.

Any one who knew the business could have told the Fore and Aft
that the only way of dealing with a Ghazi rush is by volleys at
long ranges; because a man who means to die, who desires to die,
who will gain heaven by dying, must, in nine cases out of ten,
kill a man who has a lingering prejudice in favour of life. Where
they should have closed and gone forward, the Fore and Aft opened
out and skirmished, and where they should have opened out and
fired, they closed and waited.

A man dragged from his blankets half awake and unfed is never in a
pleasant frame of mind. Nor does his happiness increase when he
watches the whites of the eyes of three hundred six-foot fiends
upon whose beards the foam is lying, upon
whose tongues is a roar of wrath, and in whose hands are yard-long
knives.

The Fore and Aft heard the Goorkha bugles bringing that regiment
forward at the double, while the neighing of the Highland pipes
came from the left. They strove to stay where they were, though
the bayonets wavered down the line like the oars of a ragged boat.
Then they felt body to body the amazing physical strength of their
foes; a shriek of pain ended the rush, and the knives fell amid
scenes not to be told. The men clubbed together and smote blindly
- as often as not at their own fellows. Their front crumpled like
paper, and the fifty Ghazis passed on; their backers, now drunk
with success, fighting as madly as they.

Then the rear ranks were bidden to close up, and the subalterns
dashed into the stew - alone. For the rear-ranks had heard the
clamour in front, the yells and the howls of pain, and had seen
the dark stale blood that makes afraid. They were not going to
stay. It was the rushing of the camps over again. Let their
officers go to Hell, if they chose; they would get away from the
knives.

"Come on!" shrieked the subalterns, and their men, cursing them,
drew back, each closing in to his neighbour and wheeling round.

Charteris and Devlin, subalterns of the last company, faced their
death alone in the belief that their men would follow.

"You've killed me, you cowards," sobbed Devlin and dropped, cut
from the shoulder-strap to the centre of the chest; and a fresh
detachment of his men retreating, always retreating, trampled him
under foot as they made for the pass whence they had emerged.

I kissed her in the kitchen and I kissed her in the hall
Child'un, child'un, follow me!
Oh Golly, said the cook, is he gwine to kiss us all?
Halla - Halla - Halla - Hallelujah!

The Goorkhas were pouring through the left gorge and over the
heights at the double to the invitation of their Regimental Quick-
step. The black rocks were crowned with dark green spiders as the
bugles gave tongue jubilantly: -

In the morning! In the morning by the bright light!
When Gabriel blows his trumpet in the morning!

The Goorkha rear companies tripped and blundered over loose
stones. The front files halted for a moment to take stock of the
valley and to settle stray boot-laces. Then a happy little sigh of
contentment soughed down the ranks, and it was as though the land
smiled, for behold there below was the enemy, and it was to meet
them that the Goorkhas had doubled so hastily. There was much
enemy. There would be amusement. The little men hitched their
kukris well to hand, and gaped expectantly at their officers as
terriers grin ere the stone is cast for them to fetch. The
Goorkhas' ground sloped downward to the valley, and they enjoyed a
fair view of the proceedings. They sat upon the boulders to watch,
for their officers were not going to waste their wind in assisting
to repulse a Ghazi rush more than half a mile away. Let the white
men look to their own front.

"Hi! yi !" said the Subadar-Major, who was sweating profusely.
"Dam fools yonder, stand close order! This is no time for close
order, it is the time for volleys. Ugh!"

Horrified, amused, and indignant, the Goorkhas beheld the
retirement of the Fore and Aft with a running chorus of oaths and
commentaries.

"They run! The white men run! Colonel Sahib, may we also do a
little running?" murmured Runbir Thappa, the Senior Jemadar.

But the Colonel would have none of it. "Let the beggars be cut up
a little," said he wrathfully. "Serves 'em right. They'll be
prodded into facing round in a minute." He looked through his
field-glasses, and caught the glint of an officer's sword.

"Beating 'em with the flat - damned conscripts! How the Ghazis are
walking into them!" said he.

The Fore and Aft, heading back, bore with them their officers. The
narrowness of the pass forced the mob into solid formation, and
the rear ranks delivered some sort of a wavering volley. The
Ghazis drew off, for they did not know what reserve the gorge
might hide. Moreover, it was never wise to chase white men too
far. They returned as wolves return to cover, satisfied with the
slaughter that they had done, and only stopping to slash at the
wounded on the ground. A quarter of a mile had the Fore and Aft
retreated, and now, jammed in the pass, was quivering with pain,
shaken and demoralised with fear, while the officers, maddened
beyond control, smote the men with the hilts and the flats of
their swords.

"Get back! Get back, you cowards - you women! Right about face -
column of companies, form - you hounds!" shouted the Colonel, and
the subalterns swore aloud. But the Regiment wanted to go - to go
anywhere out of the range of those merciless knives. It swayed to
and fro irresolutely with shouts and outcries, while from the
right the Goorkhas dropped volley after volley of cripple-stopper
Snider bullets at long range into the mob of the Ghazis returning
to their own troops.

The Fore and Aft Band, though protected from direct fire by the
rocky knoll under which it had sat down, fled at the first rush.
Jakin and Lew would have fled also, but their short legs left them
fifty yards in the rear, and by the time the Band had mixed with
the Regiment, they were painfully aware that they would have to
close in alone and unsupported.

"Get back to that rock," gasped Jakin. "They won't see us there."

And they returned to the scattered instruments of the Band, their
hearts nearly bursting their ribs.

"Here's a nice show for us," said Jakin, throwing himself full
length on the ground. "A bloomin' fine show for British Infantry!
Oh, the devils! They've gone and left us alone here! Wot'll we
do?"

Lew took possession of a cast-off water-bottle, which naturally
was full of canteen rum, and drank till he coughed again.

"Drink," said he shortly. "They'll come back in a minute or two -
you see."

Jakin drank, but there was no sign of the Regiment's return. They
could hear a dull clamour from the head of the valley of retreat,
and saw the Ghazis slink back, quickening their pace as the
Goorkhas fired at them.

"We're all that's left of the Band, an' we'll be cut up as sure as
death," said Jakin.

"I'll die game, then," said Lew thickly, fumbling with his tiny
drummer's sword. The drink was working on his brain as it was on
Jakin's.

"'Old on! I know something better than fightin'," said Jakin,
stung by the splendour of a sudden thought due chiefly to rum.
"Tip our bloomin' cowards yonder the word to come back. The
Paythan beggars are well away. Come on,
Lew! We won't get hurt. Take the fife an' give me the drum. The
Old Step for all your bloomin' guts are worth! There's a few of
our men coming back now. Stand up, ye drunken little defaulter. By
your right - quick march!"

He slipped the drum-sling over his shoulder, thrust the fife into
Lew's hand, and the two boys marched out of the cover of the rock
into the open, making a hideous hash of the first bars of the
"British Grenadiers."

As Lew had said, a few of the Fore and Aft were coming back
sullenly and shamefacedly under the stimulus of blows and abuse;
their red coats shone at the head of the valley, and behind them
were wavering bayonets. But between this shattered line and the
enemy, who with Afghan suspicion feared that the hasty retreat
meant an ambush, and had not moved therefore, lay half a mile of
level ground dotted only by the wounded.

The tune settled into full swing and the boys kept shoulder to
shoulder, Jakin banging the drum as one possessed. The one fife
made a thin and pitiful squeaking, but the tune carried far, even
to the Goorkhas.

"Come on, you dogs!" muttered Jakin to himself. "Are we to play
forhever?" Lew was staring straight in front of him and marching
more stiffly than ever he had done on parade.

And in bitter mockery of the distant mob, the old tune of the Old
Line shrilled and rattled: -
Some talk of Alexander,
And some of Hercules;
Of Hector and Lysander,
And such great names as these!

There was a far-off clapping of hands from the Goorkhas, and a
roar from the Highlanders in the distance, but never a shot was
fired by British or Afghan. The two little red dots moved forward
in the open parallel to the enemy's front.

But of all the world's great heroes
There's none that can compare,
With a tow-row-row-row-row-row,
To the British Grenadier!

The men of the Fore and Aft were gathering thick at the entrance
into the plain. The Brigadier on the heights far above was
speechless with rage. Still no movement from the enemy. The day
stayed to watch the children.

Jakin halted and beat the long roll of the Assembly, while the
fife squealed despairingly.

"Right about face! Hold up, Lew, you're drunk," said Jakin. They
wheeled and marched back: -

hose heroes of antiquity
Ne'er saw a cannon-ball,
Nor knew the force o' powder,

"Here they come!" said Jakin. "Go on, Lew": -

To scare their foes withal!

The Fore and Aft were pouring out of the valley. What officers had
said to men in that time of shame and humiliation will never be
known; for neither officers nor men speak of it now.

"They are coming anew!" shouted a priest among the Afghans. "Do
not kill the boys! Take them alive, and they shall be of our
faith."

But the first volley had been fired, and Lew dropped on his face.
Jakin stood for a minute, spun round and collapsed, as the Fore
and Aft came forward, the curses of their officers in their ears,
and in their hearts the shame of open shame.

	Half the men had seen the drummers die, and they made no
sign. They did not even shout. They doubled out straight across
the plain in open order, and they did not fire.

"This," said the Colonel of Goorkhas, softly, "is the real attack,
as it should have been delivered. Come on, my children."

"Ulu-lu-lu-lu!" squealed the Goorkhas, and came down with a joyful
clicking of kukris - those vicious Goorkha knives.

On the right there was no rush. The Highlanders, cannily
commending their souls to God (for it matters as much to a dead
man whether he has been shot in a Border scuffle or at Waterloo),
opened out and fired according to their custom, that is to say
without heat and without intervals, while the screw-guns, having
disposed of the impertinent mud fort aforementioned, dropped shell
after shell into the clusters round the flickering green standards
on the heights.

"Charrging is an unfortunate necessity," murmured the Colour-
Sergeant of the right company of the Highlanders. "It makes the
men sweer so, but I am thinkin' that it will come to a charrge if
these black devils stand much longer. Stewarrt, man, you're firing
into the eye of the sun, and he'll not take any harm for
Government ammuneetion. A foot lower and a great deal slower! What
are the English doing? They're very quiet, there in the center.
Running again?"

The English were not running. They were hacking and hewing and
stabbing, for though one white man is seldom physically a match
for an Afghan in a sheepskin or wadded coat, yet, through the
pressure of many white men behind, and a certain thirst for
revenge in his heart, he becomes capable of doing much with both
ends of his rifle. The Fore and Aft held their fire till one
bullet could drive through five or six men, and the front of the
Afghan force gave on the volley. They then selected their men, and
slew them with deep gasps and short hacking coughs, and groanings
of leather belts against strained bodies, and realised for the
first time that an Afghan attacked is far less formidable than an
Afghan attacking; which fact old soldiers might have told them.

But they had no old soldiers in their ranks.

The Goorkhas' stall at the bazar was the noisiest, for the men
were engaged - to a nasty noise as of beef being cut on the block
- with the kukri, which they preferred to the bayonet; well
knowing how the Afghan hates the half-moon blade.

As the Afghans wavered, the green standards on the mountain moved
down to assist them in a last rally. This was unwise. The Lancers,
chafing in the right gorge, had thrice despatched their only
subaltern as galloper to report on the progress of affairs. On the
third occasion he returned, with a bullet-graze on his knee,
swearing strange oaths in Hindustani, and saying that all things
were ready. So that squadron swung round the right of the
Highlanders with a wicked whistling of wind in the pennons of its
lances, and fell upon the remnant just when, according to all the
rules of war, it should have waited for the foe to show more signs
of wavering.

But it was a dainty charge, deftly delivered, and it ended by the
Cavalry finding itself at the head of the pass by which the
Afghans intended to retreat; and down the track that the lances
had made streamed two companies of the Highlanders, which was
never intended by the Brigadier. The new development was
successful. It detached the enemy from his base as a sponge is
torn from a rock, and left him ringed about with fire in that
pitiless plain. And as a sponge is chased round the bath-tub by
the hand of the bather, so were the Afghans chased till they broke
into little detachments much more difficult to dispose of than
large masses.

"See!" quoth the Brigadier. "Everything has come as I arranged.
We've cut their base, and now we'll bucket 'em to pieces."

A direct hammering was all that the Brigadier had dared to hope
for, considering the size of the force at his disposal; but men
who stand or fall by the errors of their opponents may be forgiven
for turning Chance into Design. The bucketing went forward
merrily. The Afghan forces were upon the run - the run of wearied
wolves who snarl and bite over their shoulders. The red lances
dipped by twos and threes, and, with a shriek, uprose the lance-
butt, like a spar on a stormy sea, as the trooper cantering
forward cleared his point. The Lancers kept between their prey and
the steep hills, for all who could were trying to escape from the
valley of death. The Highlanders gave the fugitives two hundred
yards' law, and then brought them down, gasping and choking ere
they could reach the protection of the boulders above. The
Goorkhas followed suit; but the Fore and Aft were killing on their
own account, for they had penned a mass of men between their
bayonets and a wall of rock, and the flash of the rifles was
lighting the wadded coats.

"We cannot hold them, Captain Sahib!" panted a Ressaidar of
Lancers. "Let us try the carbine. The lance is good, but it wastes
time."

They tried the carbine, and still the enemy melted away - fled up
the hills by hundreds when there were only twenty bullets to stop
them. On the heights the screw-guns ceased firing - they had run
out of ammunition - and the Brigadier groaned, for the musketry
fire could not sufficiently smash the retreat. Long before the
last volleys were fired, the doolies were out in force looking for
the wounded. The battle was over, and, but for want of fresh
troops, the Afghans would have been wiped off the earth. As it
was, they counted their dead by hundreds, and nowhere were the
dead thicker than in the track of the Fore and Aft.

But the Regiment did not cheer with the Highlanders, nor did they
dance uncouth dances with the Goorkhas among the dead. They looked
under their brows at the Colonel as they leaned upon their rifles
and panted.

"Get back to camp, you. Haven't you disgraced yourself enough for
one day! Go and look to the wounded. It's all you're fit for,"
said the Colonel. Yet for the past hour the Fore and Aft had been
doing all that mortal commander could expect. They had lost
heavily because they did not know how to set about their business
with proper skill, but they had borne themselves gallantly, and
this was their reward.

A young and sprightly Colour-Sergeant, who had begun to imagine
himself a hero, offered his water-bottle to a Highlander whose
tongue was black with thirst. "I drink with no cowards," answered
the youngster huskily, and, turning to a Goorkha, said, "Hya,
Johnny! Drink water got it?" The Goorkha grinned and passed his
bottle. The Fore and Aft said no word.

They went back to camp when the field of strife had been a little
mopped up and made presentable, and the Brigadier, who saw himself
a Knight in three months, was the only soul who was complimentary
to them. The Colonel was heartbroken, and the officers were savage
and sullen.

"Well," said the Brigadier, "they are young troops, of course, and
it was not unnatural that they should retire in disorder for a
bit."

"Oh, my only Aunt Maria ! " murmured a junior Staff Officer.
"Retire in disorder! It was a bally run!"

"But they came again, as we all know," cooed the Brigadier, the
Colonel's ashy-white face before him, "and they behaved as well as
could possibly be expected. Behaved beautifully, indeed. I was
watching them. It's not a matter to take to heart, Colonel. As
some German General said of his men, they wanted to be shooted
over a little, that was all." To himself he said - "Now they're
blooded I can give 'em responsible work. It's as well that they
got what they did. 'Teach 'em more than half a dozen rifle
flirtations, that will - later - run alone and bite. Poor old
Colonel, though."

All that afternoon the heliograph winked and flickered on the
hills, striving to tell the good news to a mountain forty miles
away And in the evening there arrived, dusty, sweating, and sore,
a misguided Correspondent who had gone out to assist at a trumpery
village-burning, and who had read off the message from afar,
cursing his luck the while.

"Let's have the details somehow - as full as ever you can, please.
It's the first time I've ever been left this campaign," said the
Correspondent to the Brigadier; and the Brigadier, nothing loth,
told him how an Army of Communication had been crumpled up,
destroyed, and all but annihilated by the craft, strategy, wisdom,
and foresight of the Brigadier.

But some say, and among these be the Goorkhas who watched on the
hillside, that that battle was won by Jakin and Lew, whose little
bodies were borne up just in time to fit two gaps at the head of
the big ditch-grave for the dead under the heights of Jagai.



JUDSON AND THE EMPIRE

Gloriana! The Don may attack us
Whenever his stomach be fain;
He must reach us before he can rack us . . .
And where are the galleons of Spain?

Dobson.


One of the many beauties of a democracy is its almost superhuman
skill in developing troubles with other countries and finding its
honour abraded in the process. A true democracy has a large
contempt for all other lands that are governed by Kings and Queens
and Emperors, and knows little and thinks less of their internal
affairs. All it regards is its own dignity, which is its King,
Queen, and Knave. So, sooner or later, an international difference
ends in the common people, who have no dignity, shouting the
common abuse of the street, which also has no dignity, across the
seas in order to vindicate their own dignity. The consequences may
or may not be war, but the chances do not favour peace.

An advantage in living in a civilised land which is really
governed lies in the fact that all the Kings and Queens and
Emperors of the continent are closely related by blood or marriage
- are, in fact, one large family. A wise head of them knows that
what appears to be a studied insult may be no more than some man's
indigestion or woman's indisposition to be treated as such, and
explained in quiet talk. Again, a popular demonstration, headed by
King and Court, may mean nothing more than that so-and-so's people
are out of hand for the minute. When a horse falls to kicking in a
hunt-crowd at a gate, the rider does not dismount, but puts his
open hand behind him, and the others draw aside. It is so with the
rulers of men. In the old days they cured their own and their
people's bad temper with fire and slaughter; but now that the fire
is so long of range and the slaughter so large, they do other
things, and few among their people guess how much they owe in mere
life and money to what the slang of the minute calls "puppets" and
"luxuries."

Once upon a time there was a little Power, the half-bankrupt wreck
of a once great empire, that lost its temper with England, the
whipping-boy of all the world, and behaved, as every one knows,
most scandalously. But it is not generally known that that Power
fought a pitched battle with England and won a glorious victory.
The trouble began with the people. Their own misfortunes had been
many, and for private rage it is always refreshing to find a vent
in public swearing. Their national vanity had been deeply injured,
and they thought of their ancient glories and the days when their
fleets had first rounded the Cape of Storms, and their own
newspapers called upon Camoens and urged them to extravagances. It
was the gross, smooth, sleek, lying England that was checking
their career of colonial expansion. They assumed at once that
their ruler was in league with that country, and consequently
they, his people, would forthwith become a Republic and colonially
expand themselves as a free people should. This made plain, the
people threw stones at the English Consuls and spat at English
ladies, and cut off drunken sailors of our fleet in their ports
and hammered them with oars, and made things very unpleasant for
tourists at their customs, and threatened awful deaths to the
consumptive invalids at Madeira, while the junior officers of the
Army drank fruit-extracts and entered into blood-curdling
conspiracies against their monarch, all with the object of being a
Republic. Now the history of all the South American Republics
shows that it is not good that Southern Europeans should be also
Republicans. They glide too quickly into military despotism; and
the propping of men against walls and shooting them in detachments
can be arranged much more economically and with less effect on the
death-rate by a hide-bound monarchy. Still the performances of the
Power as represented by its people were extremely inconvenient. It
was the kicking horse in the crowd, and probably the rider
explained that he could not check it. The people enjoyed all the
glory of war with none of the risks, and the tourists who were
stoned in their travels returned stolidly to England and told the
"Times" that the police arrangements of foreign towns were
defective.

This then was the state of affairs north of the Line. South it was
more strained, for there the Powers were at direct issue: England,
unable to go back because of the pressure of adventurous children
behind her, and the actions of far-away adventurers who would not
come to heel, but offering to buy out her rival; and the other
Power, lacking men or money, stiff in the conviction that three
hundred years of slave-holding and intermingling with the nearest
natives gave an inalienable right to hold slaves and issue half-
castes to all eternity. They had built no roads. Their towns were
rotting under their hands; they had no trade worth the freight of
a crazy steamer, and their sovereignty ran almost one musket-shot
inland when things were peaceful. For these very reasons they
raged all the more, and the things that they said and wrote about
the manners and customs of the English would have driven a younger
nation to the guns with a long red bill for wounded honour.

It was then that Fate sent down in a twin-screw shallow-draft
gunboat, designed for the defence of rivers, of some two hundred
and seventy tons' displacement, Lieutenant Harrison Edward Judson,
to be known for the future as Bai-Jove-Judson. His type of craft
looked exactly like a flat-iron with a match stuck up in the
middle; it drew five feet of water or less, carried a four-inch
gun forward, which was trained by the ship, and, on account of its
persistent rolling, was to live in three degrees worse than a
torpedo-boat. When Judson was appointed to take charge of the
thing on her little trip of six or seven thousand miles southward,
his first remark as he went to look her over in dock was, "Bai
Jove, that topmast wants staying forward!" The topmast was a stick
about as thick as a clothes-prop, but the flat-iron was Judson's
first command, and he would not have exchanged his position for
second post on the "Anson" or the "Howe". He navigated her, under
convoy, tenderly and lovingly to the Cape (the story of the
topmast came with him), and he was so absurdly in love with his
wallowing wash-tub when he reported himself, that the Admiral of
the station thought it would be a pity to kill a new man on her,
and allowed Judson to continue in his unenvied rule.

The Admiral visited her once in Simon's Bay, and she was bad, even
for a flat-iron gunboat strictly designed for river and harbour
defence. She sweated clammy drops of dew between decks in spite of
a preparation of powdered cork that was sprinkled over her inside
paint. She rolled in the long Cape swell like a buoy; her foc's'le
was a dog-kennel; Judson's cabin was practically under the water-
line; not one of her dead-bights could ever be opened; and her
compasses, thanks to the influence of the four-inch gun, were a
curiosity even among Admiralty compasses. But Bai-Jove-Judson was
radiant and enthusiastic. He had even contrived to fill Mr.
Davies, the second-class engine-room artificer, who was his chief
engineer, with the glow of his passion. The Admiral, who
remembered his own first command, when pride forbade him to
slacken off a single rope on a dewy night, and he had racked his
rigging to pieces in consequence, looked at the flat-iron keenly.
Her fenders were done all over with white sennit which was truly
white; her big gun was varnished with a better composition than
the Admiralty allowed; the spare sights were cased as carefully as
the chronometers; the chocks for spare spars, two of them, were
made of four-inch Burma teak carved with dragons' heads that was
one result of Bai-Jove-Judson's experiences with the Naval Brigade
in the Burmese war; the bow-anchor was varnished instead of being
painted, and there were charts more than the Admiralty scale
supplied. The Admiral was well pleased, for he loved a ship's
husband - a man who had a little money of his own and was willing
to spend it on his command. Judson looked at him hopefully. He was
only a Junior Navigating Lieutenant under eight years' standing.
He might be kept in Simon's Bay for six months, and his ship at
sea was his delight. The dream of his heart was to enliven her
dismal official gray with a line of gold-leaf and perhaps a little
scroll-work
at her blunt barge-like bows.

"There's nothing like a first command, is there?" said the
Admiral, reading his thoughts. "You seem to have rather queer
compasses, though. Better get them adjusted."

"It's no use, sir," said Judson. "The gun would throw out the Pole
itself. But - but I've got the hang of most of their weaknesses."

"Will you be good enough to lay that gun over thirty degrees,
please?" The gun was put over. Round and round and round went the
needle merrily, and the Admiral whistled.

"You must have kept close to your convoy?"

"Saw her twice between here and Madeira, sir," said Judson with a
flush, for he resented the slur on his seamanship. " It's - it's a
little out of hand, now, but she'll settle down after a while."

The Admiral went over the side, according to the rules of the
Service, but the Staff-Captain must have told the other men of the
squadron in Simon's Bay, for they one and all made light of the
flat-iron for many days. "What can you shake out of her, Judson?"
said the Lieutenant of the "Mongoose", a real white-painted, ram-
bow gunboat with quick-firing guns, as he came into the upper
verandah of the little naval Club overlooking the dockyard one hot
afternoon. It is in that Club as the captains come and go that you
hear all the gossip of all the Seven Seas.

"Ten point four," said Bai-Jove-Judson.

"Ah! That was on her trial trip. She's too deep by the head now. I
told you staying that topmast would throw her out of trim."

"You leave my top-hamper alone," said Judson, for the joke was
beginning to pall on him.

"Oh, my soul! Listen to him. Juddy's top-hamper! Keate, have you
heard of the flat-iron's top-hamper? You're to leave it alone.
Commodore Judson's feelings are hurt."

Keate was the Torpedo Lieutenant of the big "Vortigern", and he
despised small things. "His top-hamper," said he slowly. "Oh, ah
yes, of course. Juddy, there's a shoal of mullet in the bay, and I
think they're foul of your screws. Better go down, or they'll
carry away something."

"I don't let things carry away as a rule. You see I've no Torpedo
Lieutenant on board, thank God!"

Keate within the past week had so managed to bungle the slinging
in of a small torpedo-boat on the "Vortigern", that the boat had
broken the crutches in which she rested, and was herself being
repaired in the dockyard under the Club windows.

"One for you, Keate. Never mind, Juddy; you're hereby appointed
dockyard-tender for the next three years, and if you're very good
and there's no sea on, you shall take me round the harbour.
Waitabeechee, Commodore. What'll you take? Vanderhum for the 'Cook
and the captain bold, And the mate o' the Nancy brig, And the
bo'sun tight' (Juddy, put that cue down or I'll put you under
arrest for insulting the lieutenant of the real ship) 'And the
midshipmite, And the crew of the captain's gig."

By this time Judson had pinned him in a corner, and was prodding
him with the half-butt. The Admiral's Secretary entered, and saw
the scuffle from afar.

"Ouch! Juddy, I apologise. Take that - er topmast of yours away!
Here's the man with the bow-string. I wish I were a staff-captain
instead of a bloody lootenant. Sperril sleeps below every night.
That's what makes Sperril tumble home from the waist uppards.
Sperril, I defy you to touch me. I'm under orders for Zanzibar.
Probably I shall annex it!"

"Judson, the Admiral wants to see you!" said the Staff-Captain,
disregarding the scoffer of the "Mongoose".

"I told you you'd be a dockyard-tender yet, Juddy. A side of fresh
beef to-morrow and three dozen snapper on ice. On ice, you
understand, Juddy?"

Bai-Jove-Judson and the Staff-Captain went out together.

"Now, what does the Admiral want with Judson?" said Keate from the
bar.

"Don't know. Juddy's a damned good fellow, though. I wish to
goodness he was on the Mongoose with us."

The Lieutenant of the "Mongoose" dropped into a chair and read the
mail papers for an hour. Then he saw Bai-Jove-Judson in the street
and shouted to him. Judson's eyes were very bright, and his figure
was held very straight, and he moved joyously. Except for the
Lieutenant of the "Mongoose", the Club was empty.

"Juddy, there will be a beautiful row," said that young man when
he had heard the news delivered in an undertone. "You'll probably
have to fight, and yet I can't see what the Admiral's thinking of
to -"

"My orders are not to fight under any circumstances," said Judson.

"Go-look-see? That all? When do you go?"

"To-night if I can. I must go down and see about things. I say, I
may want a few men for the day."

"Anything on the "Mongoose" is at your service. There's my gig
come in now. I know that coast, dead, drunk, or asleep, and you'll
need all the knowledge you can get. If it had only been us two
together! Come over with me!"

For one whole hour Judson remained closeted in the stern cabin of
the "Mongoose", listening, poring over chart upon chart and taking
notes, and for an hour the marine at the door heard nothing but
things like these: "Now you'll have to put in here if there's any
sea on. That current is ridiculously under-estimated, and it sets
west at this season of the year, remember. Their boats never come
south of this, see? So it's no good looking out for them." And so
on and so forth, while Judson lay at length on the locker by the
three-pounder, and smoked and absorbed it all.

Next morning there was no flat-iron in Simon's Bay, only a little
smudge of smoke off Cape Hangklip to show that Mr. Davies, the
second-class engine-room artificer, was giving her all she could
carry. At the Admiral's house, the ancient and retired bo'sun, who
had seen many Admirals come and go, brought out his paint and
brushes and gave a new coat of pure raw pea-green to the two big
cannon-balls that stood one on each side of the Admiral's
entrance-gate. He felt dimly that great events were stirring.

And the flat-iron, constructed, as has been before said, solely
for the defense of rivers, met the great roll off Cape Agulhas and
was swept from end to end and sat upon her twin-screws and leaped
as gracefully as a cow in a bog from one sea to another, till Mr.
Davies began to fear for the safety of his engines, and the Kroo
boys that made the majority of the crew were deathly sick. She ran
along a very badly-lighted coast, past bays that were no bays,
where ugly flat-topped rocks lay almost level with the water, and
very many extraordinary things happened that have nothing to do
with the story, but they were all duly logged by Bai-Jove-Judson.

At last the coast changed and grew green and low and exceedingly
muddy, and there were broad rivers whose bars were little islands
standing three or four miles out at sea, and Bai-Jove-Judson
hugged the shore more closely than ever, remembering what the
Lieutenant of the "Mongoose" had told him. Then he found a river
full of the smell of fever and mud, with green stuff growing far
into its waters, and a current that made the flatiron gasp and
grunt.

"We will turn up here," said Bai-Jove-Judson, and they turned up
accordingly; Mr. Davies wondering what in the world it all meant,
and the Kroo boys grinning. Bai-Jove-Judson went forward to the
bows and meditated, staring through the muddy waters. After six
hours of rooting through this desolation at an average rate of
five miles an hour, his eyes were cheered by the sight of one
white buoy in the coffee-hued mid-stream. The flat-iron crept up
to it cautiously, and a leadsman took soundings all around it from
a dinghy, while Bai-Jove-Judson smoked and thought, with his head
on one side.

"About seven feet, isn't there?" said he. "That must be the tail
end of the shoal. There's four fathom in the fairway. Knock that
buoy down with axes. I don't think it's picturesque somehow." The
Kroo men hacked the wooden sides to pieces in three minutes, and
the mooring-chain sank with the lasst splinters of wood. Bai-Jove
Judson laid the flat-iron carefully over the site, while Mr.
Davies watched, biting his nails nervously.

"Can you back her against this current?" said Bai-Jove-Judson. Mr.
Davies could, inch by inch, but only inch by inch, and Bai-Jove-
Judson sat in the bows and gazed at various things on the bank as
they came into line or opened out. The flatiron dropped down over
the tail of the shoal, exactly where the buoy had been, and backed
once before Bai-Jove-Judson was satisfied. Then they went up
stream for half an hour, put into shoal water by the bank and
waited, with a slip-rope on the anchor.

"Seems to me," said Mr. Davies deferentially, "like as if I heard
some one a-firing off at intervals, so to say."

There was beyond doubt a dull mutter in the air. "Seems to me,"
said Bai-Jove-Judson, "as if I heard a screw. Stand by to slip her
moorings."

Another ten minutes passed and the beat of engines grew plainer.
Then round the bend of the river came a remarkably prettily built
white-painted gunboat with a blue and white flag bearing a red
boss in the centre.

"Unshackle abaft the windlass! Stream both buoys! Easy, astern.
Let go, all!" The slip-rope flew out, the two buoys bobbed in the
water to mark where anchor and cable had been left, and the flat-
iron waddled out into midstream with the white ensign at her one
mast-head.

"Give her all you can. That thing has the legs of us," said
Judson. "And down we go!"

"It's war - bloody war. He's going to fire," said Mr. Davies,
looking up through the engine-room hatch.

The white gunboat without a word of explanation fired three guns
at the flat-iron, cutting the trees on the banks into green chips.
Bai-Jove-Judson was at the wheel, and Mr. Davies and the current
helped the boat to an almost respectable degree of speed.

It was an exciting chase, but it did not last for more than five
minutes. The white gunboat fired again, and Mr. Davies in his
engine-room gave a wild shout.

"What's the matter? Hit?" said Bai-Jove-Judson.

"No, I've just seized of your roos-de-gare. Beg y' pardon, sir."

"Right 0! Just the half a fraction of a point more." The wheel
turned under the steady hand, as Bai-Jove-Judson watched his marks
on the bank coming in line swiftly as troops anxious to aid. The
flat-iron smelt the shoal water under her,
checked for an instant, and went on. "Now we're over. Come along,
you thieves, there!"

The white gunboat, too hurried even to fire, was storming in the
wake of the flat-iron, steering as she steered. This was
unfortunate, because the lighter craft was dead over the missing
buoy.

"What you do here?" shouted a voice from the bows.

"I'm going on. Hold tight. Now you're arranged for!"

There was a crash and a clatter as the white gunboat's nose took
the shoal, and the brown mud boiled up in oozy circles under her
forefoot. Then the current caught her stem by the starboard side
and drove her broadside on to the shoal, slowly and gracefully.
There she heeled at an undignified angle, and her crew yelled
aloud.

"Neat! Oh, damn neat!" quoth Mr. Davies, dancing on the engine-
room plates, while the Kroo stokers grinned.

The flat-iron turned up-stream again, and passed under the hove-up
starboard side of the white gunboat, to be received with howls and
imprecations in a strange tongue. The stranded boat, exposed even
to her lower strakes, was as defence-less as a turtle on its back,
without the advantage of the turtle's plating. And the one big
blunt gun in the bows of the flat-iron was unpleasantly near.

But the captain was valiant and swore mightily. Bai-Jove-Judson
took no sort of notice. His business was to go up the river.

"We will come in a flotilla of boats and ecrazer your vile
tricks," said the captain with language that need not be
published.

Then said Bai-Jove-Judson, who was a linguist: "You stay o where
you are o, or I'll leave a hole-o in your bottom o that will make
you much os perforatados."

There was a great deal of mixed language in reply, but Bai-Jove-
Judson was out of hearing in a few minutes, and Mr. Davies,
himself a man of few words, confided to one of his subordinates
that Lieutenant Judson was "a most remarkable prompt officer in a
way of putting it."

For two hours the flat-iron pawed madly through the muddy water,
and that which had been at first a mutter became a distinct
rumble.

"Was war declared?" said Mr. Davies, and Bai-Jove-Judson laughed.
"Then, damn his eyes, he might have spoilt my pretty little
engines. There's war up there, though."

The next bend brought them full in sight of a small but lively
village, built round a whitewashed mud house of some pretensions.
There were scores and scores of saddle-coloured soldiery on duty,
white uniforms running to and fro and
shouting round a man in a litter, and on a gentle slope that ran
inland for four or five miles something like a brisk battle was
raging round a rude stockade. A smell of unburied carcasses
floated through the air and vexed the sensitive nose of Mr.
Davies, who spat over the side.

"I want to get this gun on that house," said Bai-Jove-Judson,
indicating the superior dwelling over whose flat roof floated the
blue and white flag. The little twin screws kicked up the water
exactly as a hen's legs kick in the dust before she settles down
to a bath. The little boat moved un easily from left to right,
backed, yawed again, went ahead, and at last the gray blunt gun's
nose
was held as straight as a rifle-barrel on the mark indicated. Then
Mr. Davies allowed the whistle to speak as it is not allowed to
speak in Her Majesty's service on account of waste of steam. The
soldiery of the village gathered into knots and groups and
bunches, and the firing up the hill ceased, and every one except
the crew of the flatiron yelled aloud. Something like an English
cheer came down wind.

"Our chaps in mischief for sure, probably," said Mr. Davies. "They
must have declared war weeks ago, in a kind of way, seems to me."

"Hold her steady, you son of a soldier!" shouted Bai-Jove-Judson,
as the muzzle fell off the white house.

Something rang as loudly as a ship's bell on the forward plates of
the flat-iron, something spluttered in the water, and another
thing cut a groove in the deck planking an inch in front of Bai-
Jove-Judson's left foot. The saddle-coloured soldiery were firing
as the mood took them, and the man in the litter waved a shining
sword. The muzzle of the big gun kicked down a fraction as it was
laid on the mud wall at the bottom of the house garden. Ten pounds
of gunpowder shut up in a hundred pounds of metal was its charge.
Three or four yards of the mud wall jumped up a little, as a man
jumps when he is caught in the small of the back with a knee-cap,
and then fell forward, spreading fan-wise in the fall. The
soldiery fired no more that day, and Judson saw an old black woman
climb to the flat roof of the house. She fumbled for a time with
the flag halliards, then finding that they were jammed, took off
her one garment, which happened to be an Isabella-coloured
petticoat, and waved it impatiently. The man in the litter
flourished a white handkerchief, and Bai-Jove-Judson grinned. "Now
we'll give 'em one up the hill. Round with her, Mr. Davies. Curse
the man who invented those floating gun platforms. Where can I
pitch in a notice without slaying one of those little devils?"

The side of the slope was speckled with men returning in a
disorderly fashion to the river front. Behind them marched a small
but very compact body of men who had filed out of the stockade.
These last dragged quick-firing guns with them.

"Bai Jove, it's a regular army. I wonder whose," said Bai-Jove-
Judson, and he waited developments. The descending troops met and
mixed with the troops in the village, and, with the litter in the
centre, crowded down to the river, till the men with the quick-
firing guns came up behind them. Then they divided left and right
and the detachment marched through.

"Heave these damned things over!" said the leader of the party,
and one after another ten little gatlings splashed into the muddy
water. The flatiron lay close to the bank.

"When you're quite done," said Bai-Jove-Judson politely, "would
you mind telling me what's the matter? I'm in charge here."

"We're the Pioneers of the General Development Company," said the
leader. "These little bounders have been hammering us in lager for
twelve hours, and we're getting rid of their gatlings. Had to
climb out and take them; but they've snaffled the lock-actions.
Glad to see you."

"Any one hurt?"

"No one killed exactly, but we're very dry."

"Can you hold your men?"

The man turned round and looked at his command with a grin. There
were seventy of them, all dusty and unkempt.

"We sha'n't sack this ash-bin, if that's what you mean. We're
mostly gentlemen here, though we don't look it."

"All right. Send the head of this post, or fort, or village, or
whatever it is, aboard, and make what arrangements you can for
your men."

"We'll find some barrack accommodation somewhere. Hullo! You in
the litter there, go aboard the gunboat." The command wheeled
round, pushed through the dislocated soldiery, and began to search
through the village for spare huts.

The little man in the litter came aboard smiling nervously. He was
in the fullest of full uniform, with many yards of gold lace and
dangling chains. Also he wore very large spurs; the nearest horse
being not more than four hundred miles away. "My children," said
he, facing the silent soldiery, "lay aside your arms."

Most of the men had dropped them already and were sitting down to
smoke. "Let nothing," he added in his own tongue, "tempt you to
kill these who have sought your protection."

"Now," said Bai-Jove-Judson, on whom the last remark was lost,
"will you have the goodness to explain what the deuce you mean by
all this nonsense?"

"It was of a necessitate," said the little man. "The operations of
war are unconformible. I am the Governor and I operate Captain.
Be'old my little sword."

"Confound your little sword, sir. I don't want it. You've fired on
our flag. You've been firing at our people here for a week, and
I've been fired at coming up the river."

"Ah! The 'Guadala'. She have misconstrued you for a slaver
possibly. How are the 'Guadala'?"

"Mistook a ship of Her Majesty's navy for a slaver! You mistake
any craft for a slaver! Bai Jove, sir, I've a good mind to hang
you at the yard-arm!"

There was nothing nearer that terrible spar than the walking-stick
in the rack of Judson's cabin. The Governor looked at the one mast
and smiled a deprecating smile.

"The position is embarrassment," he said. "Captain, do you think
those illustrious traders burn my capital? My people will give
them beer."

"Never mind the traders, I want an explanation."

"Hum! There are popular uprising in Europe, Captain - in my
country." His eye wandered aimlessly round the horizon.

"What has that to do with -"

"Captain, you are very young. There is still uproariment. But I" -
here he slapped his chest till his epaulets jingled -" I am
loyalist to pits of all my stomachs."

"Go on," said Judson, and his mouth quivered.

"An order arrive to me to establish a custom-houses here, and to
collect of the taximent from the traders when she are come here
necessarily. That was on account of political understandings with
your country and mine. But on that arrangement there was no money
also. Not one damn little cowrie. I desire damnably to extend all
commercial things, and why? I am loyalist and there is rebellion -
yes, I tell you - Republics in my country for to just begin. You
do not believe? See some time how it exist. I cannot make this
custom-houses and pay the so high-paid officials. The people too
in my country they say the king she has no regardance into Honour
of her nation. He throw away everything - Gladstone her all, you
say, pay?"

"Yes, that's what we say," said Judson with a grin.

"Therefore they say, let us be Republics on hot cakes. But I - I
am loyalist to all my hands' ends. Captain, once I was attaché at
Mexico. I say the Republics are no good. The peoples have her
stomach high. They desire - they desire - a course for the bills."

"What on earth is that?"

"The cock-fight for pay at the gate. You give something, pay for
see bloody row. Do I make its comprehension?"

"A run for their money - is that what you mean? Gad, you're
sporting, Governor."

"So I say. I am loyalist, too." He smiled more easily. "Now how
can anything do herself for the customs-houses; but when the
Company's mens she arrives, then a cock-fight for pay at gate that
is quite correct. My army he says it will Republic and shoot me
off upon walls if I have not give her blood. An army, Captain, are
terrible in her angries - especialment when she are not paid. I
know, too," here he laid his hand on Judson's shoulder, "I know
too we are old friends. Yes! Badajos, Almeida, Fuentes d'Onor -
time ever since; and a little, little cock-fight for pay at gate
that is good for my king. More sit her tight on throne behind, you
see? Now," he waved his hand round the decayed village, "I say to
my armies, Fight! Fight the Company's men when she come, but fight
not so very strong that you are any deads. It is all in the
raporta that I send. But you understand, Captain, we are good
friends all the time. Ah! Ciudad Rodrigo, you remember? No?
Perhaps your father, then? So you see no one are deads, and we
fight a fight, and it is all in the raporta, to please the people
in our country, and my armies they do not put me against the
walls. You see?"

"Yes; but the 'Guadala'. She fired on us. Was that part of your
game, my joker?"

"The 'Guadala'. Ah! No, I think not. Her captain he is too big
fool. But I think she have gone down the coast. Those your
gunboats poke her nose and shove her oar in every place. How is
'Guadala'?"

"On a shoal. Stuck till I take her off."
"There are any deads?"

"No."

The Governor drew a breath of deep relief. "There are no deads
here. So you see none are deads anywhere, and nothing is done.
Captain, you talk to the Company's mens. I think they are not
pleased."

"Naturally."

"They have no sense. I thought to go backwards again they would. I
leave her stockade alone all night to let them out, but they stay
and come facewards to me, not backwards. They did not know we must
conquer much in all these battles, or the king, he is kicked off
her throne. Now we have won this battle - this great battle," he
waved his arms abroad, "and I think you will say so that we have
won, Captain. You are loyalist also. You would not disturb to the
peaceful Europe? Captain, I tell you this. Your Queen she know
too. She would not fight her cousins. It is a - a hand-up thing."

"What?"

"Hand-up thing. Jobe you put. How you say?"

"Put-up job?"

"Yes. Put-up job. Who is hurt? We win. You lose. All righta?"

Bai-Jove-Judson had been exploding at intervals for the last five
minutes. Here he broke down completely and roared aloud.

"But look here, Governor," he said at last, "I've got to think of
other things than your riots in Europe. You've fired on our flag."

"Captain, if you are me, you would have done how? And also, and
also," he drew himself up to his full height, "we are both brave
men of bravest countries. Our honour is the honour of our King,"
here he uncovered, "and of our Queen," here he bowed low. "Now,
Captain, you shall shell my palace and I shall be your prisoner."

"Skittles!" said Bai-Jove-Judson. "I can't shell that old
hencoop."

"Then come to dinner. Madeira, she are still to us, and I have of
the best she manufac."

He skipped over the side beaming, and Bai-Jove-Judson went into
the cabin to laugh his laugh out. When he had recovered a little
he sent Mr. Davies to the head of the Pioneers, the dusty man with
the gatlings, and the troops who had abandoned the pursuit of arms
watched the disgraceful spectacle of two men reeling with laughter
on the quarter-deck of a gunboat.

"I'll put my men to build him a custom-house," said the head of
the Pioneers, gasping. "We'll make him one decent road at least.
That Governor ought to be knighted. I'm glad now that we didn't
fight 'em in the open, or we'd have killed some of them. So he's
won great battles, has he? Give him the compliments of the
victims, and tell him I'm coming to dinner. You haven't such a
thing as a dress-suit, have you? I haven't seen one for six
months."

That evening there was a dinner in the village - a general and
enthusiastic dinner, whose head was in the Governor's house, and
whose tail threshed at large throughout all the streets. The
Madeira was everything that the Governor had said, and more, and
it was tested against two or three bottles of Bai-Jove-Judson's
best Vanderhum, which is Cape brandy ten years in the bottle,
flavoured with orange-peel and spices. Before the coffee was
removed (by the lady who had made the flag of truce) the Governor
had sold the whole of his governorship and its appurtenances, once
to Bai-Jove-Judson for services rendered by Judson's grandfather
in the Peninsular War, and once to the head of the Pioneers, in
consideration of that gentleman's good friendship. After the
negotiation he retreated for a while into an inner apartment, and
there evolved a true and complete account of the defeat of the
British arms, which he read with his cocked hat over one eye to
Judson and his companion. It was Judson who suggested the sinking
of the flat-iron with all hands, and the head of the Pioneers who
supplied the list of killed and wounded (not more than two
hundred) in his command.

"Gentlemen," said the Governor from under his cocked hat, "the
peace of Europe are saved by this raporta. You shall all be
Knights of the Golden Hide. She shall go by the 'Guadala'."

"Great Heavens!" said Bai-Jove Judson, flushed but composed, "that
reminds me I've left that boat stuck on her broadside down the
river. I must go down and soothe the commandante. He'll be blue
with rage. Governor, let us go a sail on the river to cool our
heads. A picnic, you understand."

"Ya - as, everything I understand. Ho! A picnica! You are all my
prisoner, but I am good gaoler. We shall picnic on the river, and
we shall take all the girls. Come on, my prisoners."

"I do hope," said the head of the Pioneers, staring from the
verandah into the roaring village, "that my chaps won't set the
town alight by accident. Hullo! Hullo! A guard of honour for His
Excellency the most illustrious Governor!"

Some thirty men answered the call, made a swaying line upon a more
swaying course, and bore the Governor most swayingly of all high
in the arms as they staggered down to the river. And the song that
they sang bade them, "Swing, swing together their body between
their knees"; and they obeyed the words of the song faithfully,
except that they were anything but "steady from stroke to bow."
His Excellency the Governor slept on his uneasy litter, and did
not wake when the chorus dropped him on the deck of the flat-iron.

"Good-night and good-bye," said the head of the Pioneers to
Judson; "I'd give you my card if I had it, but I'm so damned drunk
I hardly know my own club. Oh, yes! It's the Travellers. If ever
we meet in Town, remember me. I must stay here and look after my
fellows. We're all right in the open, now. I s'pose you'll return
the Governor some time. This is a political crisis. Good-night."

The flat-iron went down stream through the dark. The Governor
slept on deck, and Judson took the wheel, but how he steered, and
why he did not run into each bank many times, that officer does
not remember. Mr. Davies did not note anything unusual, for there
are two ways of taking too much, and Judson was only ward-room,
not foc's'le drunk. As the night grew colder the Governor woke up,
and expressed a desire for whiskey and soda. When that came they
were nearly abreast of the stranded "Guadala", and His Excellency
saluted the flag that he could not see with loyal and patriotic
strains.

"They do not see. They do not hear," he cried. "Ten thousand
saints! They sleep, and I have won battles! Ha!"

He started forward to the gun, which, very naturally, was loaded,
pulled the lanyard, and woke the dead night with the roar of the
full charge behind a common shell. That shell mercifully just
missed the stern of the "Guadala", and burst on the bank. "Now you
shall salute your Governor," said he, as he heard feet running in
all directions within the iron skin. "Why you demand so base a
quarter? I am here with all my prisoners."

In the hurly-burly and the general shriek for mercy his
reassurances were not heard.

"Captain," said a grave voice from the ship, "we have surrendered.
Is it the custom of the English to fire on a helpless ship'?"

Surrendered! Holy Virgin! I go to cut off all their heads. You
shall be ate by wild ants -flogged and drowned. Throw me a
balcony. It is I, the Governor! You shall never surrender. Judson
of my soul, ascend her insides, and send me a bed, for I am
sleepy; but, oh, I will multiple time kill that captain!"

"Oh!" said the voice in the darkness, "I begin to comprehend." And
a rope-ladder was thrown, up which the Governor scrambled, with
Judson at his heels.

"Now we will enjoy executions," said the Governor on the deck.
"All these Republicans shall be shot. Little Judson, if I am not
drunk, why are so sloping the boards which do not support?"

The deck, as I have said, was at a very stiff cant. His Excellency
sat down, slid to leeward, and was asleep again.

The captain of the "Guadala" bit his moustache furiously, and
muttered in his own tongue: "This land is the father of great
villains and the stepfather of honest men. You see our material,
Captain. It is so everywhere with us. You have killed some of the
rats, I hope?"

"Not a rat," said Judson genially.

"That is a pity. If they were dead, our country might send us men;
but our country is dead too, and I am dishonoured on a mud-bank
through your English treachery."

"Well, it seems to me that firing on a little tub of our size
without a word of warning, when you know that the countries were
at peace, is treachery enough in a small way."

"If one of my guns had touched you, you would have gone to the
bottom, all of you. I would have taken the risk with my
Government. By that time it would have been -"

"A Republic? So you really did mean fighting on your own hook?
You're rather a dangerous officer to cut loose in a navy like
yours. Well, what are you going to do now?"

"Stay here. Go away in boats. What does it matter? That drunken
cat" - he pointed to the shadow in which the Governor slept -" is
here. I must take him back to his hole."

"Very good. I'll tow you off at daylight if you get steam ready."

"Captain, I warn you that as soon as she floats again I will fight
you."

"Humbug! You'll have lunch with me, and then you'll take the
Governor up the river."

The captain was silent for some time. Then he said: "Let us drink.
What must be, must be; and after all we have not forgotten the
Peninsula. You will admit, Captain, that it is bad to be run upon
a shoal like a mud-dredger?"

"Oh, we'll pull you off before you can say knife. Take care of His
Excellency. I shall try to get a little sleep now."

They slept on both ships till the morning, and then the work of
towing off the "Guadala" began. With the help of her own engines,
and the tugging and puffing of the flat-iron, she slid off the
mud-bank sideways into the deep water, the flatiron immediately
under her stern, and the big eye of the four-inch gun almost
peering through the window of the captain's cabin.

Remorse in the shape of a violent headache had overtaken the
Governor. He was uneasily conscious that he might, perhaps, have
exceeded his powers; and the captain of the "Guadala", in spite of
all his patriotic sentiments, remembered distinctly that no war
had been declared between the two countries. He did not need the
Governor's repeated reminders that war, serious war, meant a
Republic at home, possible supersession in his command, and much
shooting of living men against dead walls.

"We have satisfied our honour," said the Governor in confidence.
"Our army is appeased, and the raporta that you take home will
show that we were loyal and brave. That other captain? Bah! he is
a boy. He will call this a - a-. Judson of my soul, how you say
this is - all this affairs which have transpirated between us?"

Judson was watching the last hawser slipping through the fairlead.
"Call it? Oh, I should call it rather a lark. Now your boat's all
right, Captain. When will you come to lunch?"

"I told you," said the Governor, "it would be a larque to him."

"Mother of the Saints! then what is his seriousness?" said the
captain. "We shall be happy to come when you please. Indeed, we
have no other choice," he added bitterly.

"Not at all," said Judson, and as he looked at the three or four
shot-blisters on the bows of his boat a brilliant idea took him.
"It is we who are at your mercy. See how His Excellency's guns
knocked us about."

"Senior Captain," said the Governor pityingly, "that is very sad.
You are most injured, and your deck too, it is all shot over. We
shall not be too severe on a beat man, shall we, Captain?"

"You couldn't spare us a little paint, could you? I'd like to
patch up a little after the - action," said Judson meditatively,
fingering his upper lip to hide a smile.

"Our store-room is at your disposition," said the captain of the
"Guadala", and his eye brightened; for a few lead splashes on gray
paint make a big show.

"Mr. Davies, go aboard and see what they have to spare - to spare,
remember. Their spar-colour with a little working up should be
just our freeboard tint."

"Oh, yes. I'll spare them," said Mr. Davies savagely. "I don't
understand this how-d'you-do and damn-your-eyes business coming
one atop of the other in a manner o' speaking. By all rights,
they're our lawful prize."

The Governor and the captain came to lunch in the absence of Mr.
Davies. Bai-Jove-Judson had not much to offer, but what he had was
given as by a beaten foeman to a generous conqueror. When they
were a little warmed - the Governor genial and the captain almost
effusive - he explained, quite casually, over the opening of a
bottle that it would not be to his interest to report the affair
seriously, and it was in the highest degree improbable that the
Admiral would treat it in any grave fashion.

"When my decks are cut up" (there was one groove across four
planks), "and my plates buckled" (there were five lead patches on
three plates), "and I meet such a boat as the 'Guadala', and a
mere accident saves me from being blown out of the water -"

"Yes. A mere accident, Captain. The shoal-buoy has been lost,"
said the captain of the 'Guadala'.

"Ah? I do not know this river. That was very sad. But as I was
saying, when an accident saves me from being sunk, what can I do
but go away - if that is possible? But I fear that I have no coal
for the sea voyage. It is very sad." Judson had compromised on
what he knew of the French tongue as a working language.

"It is enough," said the Governor, waving a generous hand. "Judson
of my soul, the coal is yours, and you shall be repaired - yes,
repaired all over of your battle's wounds. You shall go with all
the honours of all the wars. Your flag shall fly. Your drum shall
beat. Your, ah! - jolly boys shall spoke their bayonets. Is it not
so, Captain?"

"As you say, Excellency. But the traders in the town. What of
them?"

The Governor looked puzzled for an instant. He could not quite
remember what had happened to those jovial men who had cheered him
over night. Judson interrupted swiftly: "His Excellency has set
them to forced works on barracks and magazines, and, I think, a
custom-house. When that is done they will be released, I hope,
Excellency."

"Yes, they shall be released for your sake, little Judson of my
heart." Then they drank the health of their respective sovereigns,
while Mr. Davies superintended the removal of the scarred plank
and the shot-marks on the deck and the bow-plates.

"Oh, this is too bad," said Judson when they went on deck. "That
idiot has exceeded his instructions, but - but yow must let me pay
for this!"

Mr. Davies, his legs in the water as he sat on a staging slung
over the bows, was acutely conscious that he was being blamed in a
foreign tongue. He smiled uneasily, and went on with his work.

"What is it?" said the Governor.

"That thick-head has thought that we needed some gold-leaf, and he
has borrowed that from your storeroom, but I must make it good."
Then in English, "Stand up, Mr. Davies. What the - in - do you
mean by taking their gold-leaf? My -, are we a set of pirates to
scrape the guts out of a Levantine bumboat? Look contrite, you
butt-ended, broad-breeched, bottle-bellied, swivel-eyed son of a
tinker, you! My Soul alive, can't I maintain discipline in my own
ship without a blacksmith of a boiler-riveter putting me to shame
before a yellow-nosed picaroon. Get off the staging, Mr. Davies,
and go to the engine-room. Put down that leaf first, though, and
leave the books where they are. I'll send for you in a minute. Go
aft!"

Now, only the upper half of Mr. Davies's round face was above the
bulwarks when this torrent of abuse descended upon him; and it
rose inch by inch as the shower continued: blank amazement,
bewilderment, rage, and injured pride chasing each other across it
till he saw his superior officer's left eyelid flutter on the
cheek twice. Then he fled to the engine-room, and wiping his brow
with a handful of cotton-waste, sat down to overtake
circumstances.

"I am desolated," said Judson to his companions, "but you see the
material that you give us. This leaves me more in your debt than
before. The stuff I can replace" (gold-leaf is never carried on
floating gun-platforms), "but for the insolence of that man how
shall I apologise?"

Mr. Davies's mind moved slowly, but after a while he transferred
the cotton-waste from his forehead to his mouth and bit on it to
prevent laughter. He began a second dance on the engine-room
plates. "Neat! Oh, damned neat!" he chuckled. "I've served with a
good few, but there never was one so neat as him. And I thought he
was the new kind that don't know how to put a few words, as it
were!"

"Mr. Davies, you can continue your work," said Judson down the
engine-room hatch. "These officers have been good enough to speak
in your favour. Make a thorough job of it while you are about it.
Slap on every man you have. Where did you get hold of it?"

"Their storeroom is a regular theatre, sir. You couldn't miss it.
There's enough for two first-rates, and I've scoffed the best half
of it."

"Look sharp, then. We shall be coaling from her this afternoon.
You'll have to cover it all."

"Neat! Oh, damned neat!" said Mr. Davies under his breath, as he
gathered his subordinates together, and set about accomplishing
the long-deferred wish of Judson's heart.

It was the "Martin Frobisher", the flag-ship, a great war-boat
when she was new, in the days when men built for sail as well as
for steam. She could turn twelve knots under full sail, and it was
under that that she stood up the mouth of the river, a pyramid of
silver beneath the moon. The Admiral, fearing that he had given
Judson a task beyond his strength, was coming to look for him, and
incidentally to do a little diplomatic work along the coast. There
was hardly wind enough to move the "Frobisher" a couple of knots
an hour, and the silence of the land closed about her as she
entered the fairway. Her yards sighed a little from time to time,
and the ripple under her bows answered the sigh. The full moon
rose over the steaming swamps, and the Admiral, gazing upon it,
thought less of Judson and more of the softer emotions. In answer
to the very mood of his mind, there floated across the silver
levels of the water, mellowed by distance to a most poignant
sweetness, the throb of a mandolin, and the voice of one who
called upon a genteel Julia - upon Julia, and upon love. The song
ceased, and the sighing of the yards was all that broke the
silence of the big ship.

Again the mandolin began, and the commander on the lee side of the
quarter-deck grinned a grin that was reflected in the face of the
signal-midshipman. Not a word of the song was lost, and the voice
of the singer was the voice of Judson.

"Last week down our alley came a toff,
Nice old geyser with a nasty cough,
Sees my missus, takes his topper off,
Quite in a gentlemanly way " -

and so on to the end of the verse. The chorus was borne by several
voices, and the signal-midshipman's foot began to tap the deck
furtively.

"'What cheer!' all the neighbours cried.
''Oo are you going to meet, Bill?
'Ave you bought the street, Bill?'
Laugh? - I thought I should ha' died
When I knocked 'em in the old Kent Road."


It was the Admiral's gig, rowing softly, that came into the midst
of that merry little smoking-concert. It was Judson, the
beribboned mandolin round his neck, who received the Admiral as he
came up the side of the "Guadala", and it may or may not have been
the Admiral who stayed till two in the morning and delighted the
hearts of the Captain and the Governor. He had come as an unbidden
guest, and he departed as an honoured one, but strictly unofficial
throughout. Judson told his tale next day in the Admiral's cabin
as well as he could in the face of the Admiral's gales of
laughter, but the most amazing tale was that told by Mr. Davies to
his friends in the dockyard at Simon's Town from the point of view
of a second-class engine-room artificer, all unversed in
diplomacy.

And if there be no truth either in my tale, which is Judson's
tale, or the tale of Mr. Davies, you will not find in harbour at
Simon's Town to-day a flat-bottomed twin-screw gunboat, designed
solely for the defence of rivers, about two hundred and seventy
tons' displacement and five feet draught, wearing in open defiance
of the rules of the Service a gold line on her gray paint. It
follows also that you will be compelled to credit that version of
the fray which, signed by His Excellency the Governor and
despatched in the "Guadala", satisfied the self-love of a great
and glorious people, and saved a monarchy from the ill-considered
despotism which is called a Republic.


A CONFERENCE OF THE POWERS
Life liveth but in life, and doth not roam
To other lands if all be well at home:
"Solid as ocean foam," quoth ocean foam.

The room was blue with the smoke of three pipes and a cigar. The
leave-season had opened in India, and the first-fruits on this
side of the water were "Tick" Boileau, of the 45th Bengal Cavalry,
who called on me, after three years' absence, to discuss old
things which had happened. Fate, who always does her work
handsomely, sent up the same staircase within the same hour The
Infant, fresh from Upper Burma, and he and Boileau looking out of
my window saw walking in the street one Nevin, late in a Goorkha
regiment which had been through the Black Mountain Expedition.
They yelled to him to come up, and the whole Street was aware that
they desired him to come up, and he came up, and there followed
Pandemonium in my room because we had foregathered from the ends
of the earth, and three of us were on a holiday, and none of us
were twenty-five, and all the delights of all London lay waiting
our pleasure.

Boileau took the only other chair, The Infant, by right of his
bulk, the sofa; and Nevin, being a little man, sat cross-legged on
the top of the revolving bookcase, and we all said, "Who'd ha'
thought it!" and "What are you doing here?" till speculation was
exhausted and the talk went over to inevitable "shop." Boileau was
full of a great scheme for winning a military attaché-ship at St.
Petersburg; Nevin had hopes of the Staff College, and The Infant
had been moving heaven and earth and the Horse Guards for a
commission in the Egyptian army.

"What's the use o' that?" said Nevin, twirling round on the
bookcase.

"Oh, heaps! 'Course if you get stuck with a Fellaheen regiment,
you're sold; but if you are appointed to a Soudanese lot, you're
in clover. They are first-class fighting-men - and just think of
the eligible central position of Egypt in the next row!"

This was putting the match to a magazine. We all began to explain
the Central Asian question off-hand, flinging army corps from the
Helmund to Kashmir with more than Russian recklessness. Each of
the boys made for himself a war to his own liking, and when we had
settled all the details of Armageddon, killed all our senior
officers, handled a division apiece, and nearly torn the atlas in
two in attempts to explain our theories, Boileau needs must lift
up his voice above the clamour, and cry, "Anyhow it'll be the hell
of a row!" in tones that carried conviction far down the
staircase.

Entered, unperceived in the smoke, William the Silent. "Gen'elman
to see you, sir," said he, and disappeared, leaving in his stead
none other than Mr. Eustace Cleever. William would have introduced
the Dragon of Wantley with equal disregard of present company.

"I - I beg your pardon. I didn't know that there was anybody -
with you. -"

But it was not seemly to allow Mr. Cleever to depart; he was a
great man. The boys remained where they were, for any movement
would have choked up the little room. Only when they saw his gray
hairs they stood on their feet, and when The Infant caught the
name, he said:

"Are you - did you write that book called 'As it was in the
Beginning'?"

Mr. Cleever admitted that he had written the book.

"Then - then I don't know how to thank you, sir," said The Infant,
flushing pink. "I was brought up in the country you wrote about -
all my people live there; and I read the book in camp on the
Hlinedatalone, and I knew every stick and stone, and the dialect
too; and, by Jove! it was just like being at home and hearing the
country people talk. Nevin, you know 'As it was in the Beginning'?
So does Ti - Boileau."

Mr. Cleever has tasted as much praise, public and private, as one
man may safely swallow; but it seemed to me that the outspoken
admiration in The Infant's eyes and the little stir in the little
company came home to him very nearly indeed.

"Won't you take the sofa?" said The Infant. "I'll sit on Boileau's
chair, and -" here he looked at me to spur me to my duties as a
host; but I was watching the novelist's face. Cleever had not the
least intention of going away, but settled himself on the sofa.

Following the first great law of the Army, which says "all
property is common except money, and you've only got to ask the
next man for that," The Infant offered tobacco and drink. It was
the least he could do; but not the most lavish praise in the world
held half as much appreciation and reverence as The Infant's
simple "Say when, sir," above the long glass.

Cleever said "when," and more thereto, for he was a golden talker,
and he sat in the midst of hero-worship devoid of all taint of
self-interest. The boys asked him of the birth of his book, and
whether it was hard to write, and how his notions came to him; and
he answered with the same absolute simplicity as he was
questioned. His big eyes twinkled, he dug his long thin hands into
his gray beard and tugged it as he grew animated. He dropped
little by little from the peculiar pinching of the broader vowels
- the indefinable "euh," that runs through the speech of the
pundit caste - and the elaborate choice of words, to freely-
mouthed "ows" and "ois," and, for him at least, unfettered
colloquialisms. He could not altogether understand the boys, who
hung upon his
words so reverently. The line of the chin-strap, that still showed
white and untanned on cheekbone and jaw, the steadfast young eyes
puckered at the corners of the lids with much staring through red-
hot sunshine, the slow, untroubled breathing, and the curious,
crisp, curt speech seemed to puzzle him equally. He could create
men and women, and send them to the uttermost ends of the earth,
to help, delight, and comfort; he knew every mood of the fields,
and could interpret them to the cities, and he knew the hearts of
many in city and country, but he had hardly, in forty years, come
into contact with the thing which is called a Subaltern of the
Line. He told the boys this in his own way.

"Well, how should you?" said The Infant. "You - you're quite
different, y' see, sir."

The Infant expressed his ideas in his tone rather than his words,
but Cleever understood the compliment.

"We're only Subs," said Nevin, "and we aren't exactly the sort of
men you'd meet much in your life, I s'pose."

"That's true," said Cleever. "I live chiefly among men who write,
and paint, and sculp, and so forth. We have our own talk and our
own interests, and the outer world doesn't trouble us much."

"That must be awfully jolly," said Boileau, at a venture. "We have
our own shop, too, but 'tisn't half as interesting as yours, of
course. You know all the men who've ever done anything; and we
only knock about from place to place, and we do nothing."

"The Army's a very lazy profession if you choose to make it so,"
said Nevin. "When there's nothing going on, there is nothing going
on, and you lie up."

"Or try to get a billet somewhere, to be ready for the next show,"
said The Infant with a chuckle.

"To me," said Cleever softly, "the whole idea of warfare seems so
foreign and unnatural, so essentially vulgar, if I may say so,
that I can hardly appreciate your sensations. Of course, though,
any change from idling in garrison towns must be a godsend to
you."

Like many home-staying Englishmen, Cleever believed that the
newspaper phrase he quoted covered the whole duty of the Army
whose toils enabled him to enjoy his many-sided life in peace. The
remark was not a happy one, for Boileau had just come off the
Frontier, The Infant had been on the warpath for nearly eighteen
months, and the little red man Nevin two months before had been
sleeping under the stars at the peril of his life. But none of
them tried to explain, till I ventured to point out that they had
all seen service and were not used to idling. Cleever took in the
idea slowly.

"Seen service?" said he. Then, as a child might ask, "Tell me.
Tell me everything about everything."

"How do you mean?" said The Infant, delighted at being directly
appealed to by the great man.

"Good Heavens! How am I to make you understand, if you can't see.
In the first place, what is your age?"

"Twenty-three next July," said The Infant promptly.

Cleever questioned the others with his eyes.

"I'm twenty-four," said Nevin.

"And I'm twenty-two," said Boileau.

"And you've all seen service?"

"We've all knocked about a little bit, sir, but The Infant's the
war-worn veteran. He's had two years' work in Upper Burma," said
Nevin.

"When you say work, what do you mean, you extraordinary
creatures?"

"Explain it, Infant," said Nevin.

"Oh, keeping things in order generally, and running about after
little dakus - that's dacoits -and so on. There's nothing to
explain."

"Make that young Leviathan speak," said Cleever impatiently, above
his glass.

"How can he speak?" said I. "He's done the work. The two don't go
together. But, Infant, you're ordered to bukb."

"What about? I'll try."

"Bukb about a daur. You've been on heaps of 'em," said Nevin.

"What in the world does that mean? Has the Army a language of its
own?"

The Infant turned very red. He was afraid he was being laughed at,
and he detested talking before outsiders; but it was the author of
"As it was in the Beginning" who waited.

"It's all so new to me," pleaded Cleever; "and - and you said you
liked my book."
-
This was a direct appeal that The Infant could understand, and he
began rather flurriedly, with much slang bred of nervousness -

"Pull me up, sir, if I say anything you don't follow. About six
months before I took my leave out of Burma, I was on the
Hlinedatalone, up near the Shan States, with sixty Tommies -
private soldiers, that is - and another subaltern, a year senior
to me. The Burmese business was a subaltern's war, and our forces
were split up into little detachments, all running about the
country and trying to keep the dacoits quiet. The dacoits were
having a first-class time, y' know -filling women up with kerosene
and setting 'em alight, and burning villages, and crucifying
people."

The wonder in Eustace Cleever's eyes deepened. He could not quite
realise that the cross still existed in any form.

"Have you ever seen a crucifixion?" said he.

"Of course not. 'Shouldn't have allowed it if I had; but I've seen
the corpses. The dacoits had a trick of sending a crucified corpse
down the river on a raft, just to show they were keeping their
tail up and enjoying themselves. Well, that was the kind of people
I had to deal with."

"Alone?" said Cleever. Solitude of the soul he could understand -
none better - but he had never in the body moved ten miles from
his fellows.

"I had my men, but the rest of it was pretty much alone. The
nearest post that could give me orders was fifteen miles away, and
we used to heliograph to them, and they used to give us orders
same way - too many orders."

"Who was your C. 0.?" said Boileau.

"Bounderby - Major. Pukka Bounderby; more Bounder than pukka. He
went out up Bhamo way. Shot, or cut down, last year," said The
Infant.

"What are these interludes in a strange tongue?" said Cleever to
me.

"Professional information - like the Mississippi pilots' talk,"
said I. "He did not approve of his major, who died a violent
death. Go on, Infant."

"Far too many orders. You couldn't take the Tommies out for a two
days' daur -that's expedition - without being blown up for not
asking leave. And the whole country was humming with dacoits. I
used to send out spies, and act on their information. As soon as a
man came in and told me of a gang in hiding, I'd take thirty men
with some grub, and go out and look for them, while the other
subaltern lay doggo in camp."

"Lay! Pardon me, but how did he lie?" said Cleever.

"Lay doggo - lay quiet, with the other thirty men. When I came
back, he'd take out his half of the men, and have a good time of
his own."

"Who was he?" said Boileau.

"Carter-Deecey, of the Aurungabadis. Good chap, but too
zubberdusty, and went bokhar four days out of seven. He's gone out
too. Don't interrupt a man."

Cleever looked helplessly at me.

"The other subaltern," I translated swiftly, "came from a native
regiment, and was overbearing in his demeanour. He suffered much
from the fever of the country, and is now dead. Go on, Infant."

"After a bit, we got into trouble for using the men on frivolous
occasions, and so I used to put my signaller under arrest to
prevent him reading the helio-orders. Then I'd go out and leave a
message to be sent an hour after I got clear of the camp,
something like this: 'Received important information; start in an
hour, unless countermanded.' If I was ordered back, it didn't much
matter. I swore the C. 0.'s watch was wrong, or something, when I
came back. The Tommies enjoyed the fun, and - Oh, yes, there was
one Tommy who was the bard of the detachment. He used to make up
verses on everything that happened."

"What sort of verses?" said Cleever.

"Lovely verses; and the Tommies used to sing 'em. There was one
song with a chorus, and it said something like this." The Infant
dropped into the true barrack-room twang:

"Theebaw, the Burma king, did a very foolish thing,
When 'e mustered 'ostile forces in ar-rai,
'E little thought that we, from far across the sea,
Would send our armies up to Mandalai!"

"0 gorgeous !" said Cleever. "And how magnificently direct! The
notion of a regimental bard is new to me, but of course it must be
so."

"He was awfly popular with the men," said The Infant. "He had them
all down in rhyme as soon as ever they had done anything. He was a
great bard. He was always ready with an elegy when we picked up a
Boh - that's a leader of dacoits."

"How did you pick him up?" said Cleever.

"Oh! shot him if he wouldn't surrender."

"You! Have you shot a man?"

There was a subdued chuckle from all three boys, and it dawned on
the questioner that one experience in life which was denied to
himself, and he weighed the souls of men in a balance, had been
shared by three very young gentlemen of engaging appearance. He
turned round on Nevin, who had climbed to the top of the bookcase
and was sitting cross-legged as before.

"And have you, too?"

"Think so," said Nevin, sweetly. "In the Black Mountain. He was
rolling cliffs on to my half-company, and spoiling our formation.
I took a rifle from a man, and brought him down at the second
shot."

"Good Heavens! And how did you feel afterwards?"

"Thirsty. I wanted a smoke, too."

Cleever looked at Boileau - the youngest. Surely his hands were
guiltless of blood.

Boileau shook his head and laughed. "Go on, Infant," said he.

"And you too?" said Cleever.

"Fancy so. It was a case of cut, cut or be cut, with me; so I cut
- one. I couldn't do any more, sir."

Cleever looked as though he would like to ask many questions, but
The Infant swept on in the full tide of his tale.

"Well, we were called insubordinate young whelps at last, and
strictly forbidden to take the Tommies out any more without
orders. I wasn't sorry, because Tommy is such an exacting sort of
creature. He wants to live as though he were in barracks all the
time. I was grubbing on fowls and boiled corn, but the Tommies
wanted their pound of fresh meat, and their half ounce of this,
and their two ounces of t'other thing, and they used to come to me
and badger me for plug tobacco when we were four days in jungle. I
said: 'I can get you Burma tobacco, but I don't keep a canteen up
my sleeve.' They couldn't see it. They wanted all the luxuries of
the season, confound 'em!"

"You were alone when you were dealing with these men?" said
Cleever, watching The Infant's face under the palm of his hand. He
was receiving new ideas, and they seemed to trouble him.

"Of course, unless you count the mosquitoes. They were nearly as
big as the men. After I had to lie doggo I began to look for
something to do, and I was great pals with a man called Hicksey in
the Police, the best man that ever stepped on earth; a first-class
man."

Cleever nodded applause. He knew how to appreciate enthusiasm.

"Hicksey and I were as thick as thieves. He had some Burma mounted
police - rummy chaps, armed with sword and Snider carbine. They
rode punchy Burma ponies, with string stirrups, red cloth saddles,
and red bell-rope headstalls. Hicksey used to lend me six or eight
of them when I asked him - nippy little devils, keen as mustard.
But they told their wives too much, and all my plans got known,
till I learned to give false marching orders overnight, and take
the men to quite a different village in the morning. Then we used
to catch the simple daku before breakfast, and made him very sick.
It's a ghastly country on the Hlinedatalone; all bamboo jungle,
with paths about four feet wide winding through it. The daku knew
all the paths, and potted at us as we came round a corner; but the
mounted police knew the paths as well as the daku, and we used to
go stalking 'em in and out. Once we flushed 'em, the men on the
ponies had the advantage of the men on foot. We held all the
country absolutely quiet for ten miles round, in about a month.
Then we took Boh Na-ghee, Hicksey and I and the civil officer.
That was a lark!"

"I think I am beginning to understand a little," said Cleever. "It
was a pleasure to you to administer and fight?"

"Rather! There's nothing nicer than a satisfactory little
expedition, when you find your plans fit together, and your
information's teek - correct, you know, and the whole sub-chiz - I
mean, when everything works out like formulae on a blackboard.
Hicksey had all the information about the Boh. He had been burning
villages and murdering people right and left, and cutting up
Government convoys, and all that. He was lying doggo in a village
about fifteen miles off, waiting to get a fresh gang together. So
we arranged to take thirty mounted police, and turn him out before
he could plunder into our newly-settled villages. At the last
minute, the civil officer in our part of the world thought he'd
assist at the performance."

"Who was he?" said Nevin.

"His name was Dennis," said The Infant slowly. "And we'll let it
stay so. He's a better man now than he was then."

"But how old was the civil power?" said Cleever. "The situation is
developing itself."

"He was about six-and-twenty, and he was awf'ly clever. He knew a
lot of things, but I don't think he was quite steady enough for
dacoit-hunting. We started overnight for Boh Na-ghee's village,
and we got there just before morning, without raising an alarm.
Dennis had turned out armed to his teeth - two revolvers, a
carbine, and all sorts of things. I was talking to Hicksey about
posting the men, and Dennis edged his pony in between us, and
said, 'What shall I do? What shall I do? Tell me what to do, you
fellows.' We didn't take much notice; but his pony tried to bite
me in the leg, and I said, 'Pull out a bit, old man, till we've
settled the attack.' He kept edging in, and fiddling with his
reins and his revolvers, and saying, 'Dear me! Dear me! Oh, dear
me! What do you think I'd better do?' The man was in a deadly
funk, and his teeth were chattering."

"I sympathise with the civil power," said Cleever. "Continue,
young Clive."

"The fun of it was, that he was supposed to be our superior
officer. Hicksey took a good look at him, and told him to attach
himself to my party. Beastly mean of Hicksey, that. The chap kept
on edging in and bothering, instead of asking for some men and
taking up his own position, till I got angry, and the carbines
began popping on the other side of the village. Then I said, 'For
God's sake be quiet, and sit down where you are! If you see
anybody come out of the village, shoot at him.' I knew he couldn't
hit a hayrick at a yard. Then I took my men over the garden wall -
over the palisades, y' know - somehow or other, and the fun began.
Hicksey had found the Boh in bed under a mosquito-curtain, and he
had taken a flying jump on to him."

"A flying jump!" said Cleever. "Is that also war?"

"Yes," said The Infant, now thoroughly warmed. "Don't you know how
you take a flying jump on to a fellow's head at school, when he
snores in the dormitory? The Boh was sleeping in a bedful of
swords and pistols, and Hicksey came down like Zazel through the
netting, and the net got mixed up with the pistols and the Boh and
Hicksey, and they all rolled on the floor together. I laughed till
I couldn't stand, and Hicksey was cursing me for not helping him;
so I left him to fight it out and went into the village. Our men
were slashing about and firing, and so were the dacoits, and in
the thick of the mess some ass set fire to a house, and we all had
to clear out. I froze on to the nearest daku and ran to the
palisade, shoving him in front of me. He wriggled loose and
bounded over the other side. I came after him; but when I had one
leg one side and one leg the other of the palisade, I saw that the
daku had fallen flat on Dennis's head. That man had never moved
from where I left him. They rolled on the ground together, and
Dennis's carbine went off and nearly shot me. The daku picked
himself up and ran, and Dennis buzzed his carbine after him, and
it caught him on the back of his head and knocked him silly. You
never saw anything so funny in your life. I doubled up on the top
of the palisade and hung there, yelling with laughter. But Dennis
began to weep like anything. 'Oh, I've killed a man,' he said.
'I've killed a man, and I shall never know another peaceful hour
in my life. Is he dead? Oh, is he dead? Good Lord, I've killed a
man!' I came down and said, 'Don't be a fool;' but he kept on
shouting, 'Is he dead?' till I could have kicked him. The daku was
only knocked out of time with the carbine. He came to after a bit,
and I said, 'Are you hurt much?' He groaned and said, 'No.' His
chest was all cut with scrambling over the palisade. 'The white
man's gun didn't do that,' he said; 'I did that, and I knocked the
white man over.' Just like a Burman, wasn't it? But Dennis
wouldn't be happy at any price. He said:
'Tie up his wounds. He'll bleed to death. Oh, he'll bleed to
death!' 'Tie 'em up yourself,' I said, 'if you're so anxious.' 'I
can't touch him,' said Dennis, 'but here's my shirt.' He took off
his shirt, and fixed the braces again over his bare shoulders. I
ripped the shirt up, and bandaged the dacoit quite professionally.
He was grinning at Dennis all the time; and Dennis's haversack was
lying on the ground, bursting full of sandwiches. Greedy hog! I
took some, and offered some to Dennis. 'How can I eat?' he said.
'How can you ask me to eat? His very blood is on your hands now,
and you're eating my sandwiches!' 'All right,' I said; 'I'll give
'em to the daku.' So I did, and the little chap was quite pleased,
and wolfed 'em down like one o'clock."

Cleever brought his hand down on the table with a thump that made
the empty glasses dance. "That's Art!" he said. "Flat, flagrant
mechanism! Don't tell me that happened on the spot!"

The pupils of The Infant's eyes contracted to two pin-points. "I
beg your pardon," he said slowly and stiffly, "but I am telling
this thing as it happened."

Cleever looked at him a moment. "My fault entirely," said he; "I
should have known. Please go on."

"Hicksey came out of what was left of the village with his
prisoners and captives, all neatly tied up. Boh Na-ghee was first,
and one of the villagers, as soon as he found the old ruffian
helpless, began kicking him quietly. The Boh stood it as long as
he could, and then groaned, and we saw what was going on. Hicksey
tied the villager up and gave him a half a dozen, good, with a
bamboo, to remind him to leave a prisoner alone. You should have
seen the old Boh grin. Oh! but Hicksey was in a furious rage with
everybody. He'd got a wipe over the elbow that had tickled up his
funny-bone, and he was rabid with me for not having helped him
with the Boh and the mosquito-net. I had to explain that I
couldn't do anything. If you'd seen 'em both tangled up together
on the floor in one kicking cocoon, you'd have laughed for a week.
Hicksey swore that the only decent man of his acquaintance was the
Boh, and all the way to camp Hicksey was talking to the Boh, and
the Boh was complaining about the soreness of his bones. When we
got back, and had had a bath, the Boh wanted to know when he was
going to be hanged. Hicksey said he couldn't oblige him on the
spot, but had to send him to Rangoon. The Boh went down on his
knees, and reeled off a catalogue of his crimes - he ought to have
been hanged seventeen times over, by his own confession - and
implored Hicksey to settle the business out of hand. 'If I'm sent
to Rangoon,' said he, 'they'll keep me in jail all my life, and
that is a death every time the sun gets up or the wind blows.' But
we had to send him to Rangoon, and, of course, he was let off down
there, and given penal servitude for life. When I came to Rangoon
I went over the jail - I had helped to fill it,
y' know - and the old Boh was there, and he spotted me at once. He
begged for some opium first, and I tried to get him some, but that
was against the rules. Then he asked me to have his Sentence
changed to death, because he was afraid of being sent to the
Andamans. I couldn't do that either, but I tried to cheer him, and
told him how things were going up-country, and the last thing he
said was - 'Give my compliments to the fat white man who jumped on
me. If I'd been awake I'd have killed him.' I wrote that to
Hicksey next mail, and - and that's all. I'm 'fraid I've been
gassing awf'ly, sir."

Cleever said nothing for a long time. The Infant looked
uncomfortable. He feared that, misled by enthusiasm, he had filled
up the novelist's time with unprofitable recital of trivial
anecdotes.

Then said Cleever, "I can't understand. Why should you have seen
and done all these things before you have cut your wisdom-teeth?"

"Don't know," said The Infant apologetically. "I haven't seen much
- only Burmese jungle."

"And dead men, and war, and power, and responsibility," said
Cleever, under his breath. "You won't have any sensations left at
thirty, if you go on as you have done. But I want to hear more
tales - more tales!" He seemed to forget that even subalterns
might have engagements of their own.

"We're thinking of dining out somewhere - the lot of us - and
going on to the Empire afterwards," said Nevin, with hesitation.
He did not like to ask Cleever to come too. The invitation might
be regarded as perilously near to "cheek."
And Cleever, anxious not to wag a gray beard unbidden among boys
at large, said nothing on his side.

Boileau solved the little difficulty by blurting out: "Won't you
come too, sir?"

Cleever almost shouted "Yes," and while he was being helped into
his coat continued to murmur "Good Heavens!" at intervals in a way
that the boys could not understand.

"I don't think I've been to the Empire in my life," said he; "but
- what is my life after all? Let us go."

They went out with Eustace Cleever, and I sulked at home because
they had come to see me, but had gone over to the better man;
which was humiliating. They packed him into a cab with utmost
reverence, for was he not the author of "As it was in the
Beginning," and a person in whose company it was an honour to go
abroad? From all I gathered later, he had taken less interest in
the performance before him than in their conversations, and they
protested with emphasis that he was "as good a man as they make;
knew what a man was driving at almost before he said it; and yet
he's so damned simple about things any man knows." That was one of
many comments.

At midnight they returned, announcing that they were "highly
respectable gondoliers," and that oysters and stout were what they
chiefly needed. The eminent novelist was still with them, and I
think he was calling them by their shorter names. I am certain
that he said he had been moving in worlds not realised, and that
they had shown him the Empire in a new light.

Still sore at recent neglect, I answered shortly, "Thank Heaven we
have within the land ten thousand as good as they," and when he
departed, asked him what he thought of things generally.

He replied with another quotation, to the effect that though
singing was a remarkably fine performance, I was to be quite sure
that few lips would be moved to song if they could find a
sufficiency of kissing.

Whereby I understood that Eustace Cleever, decorator and colourman
in words, was blaspheming his own Art, and would be sorry for this
in the morning.





