
THE
CHRONOLOGY
OF
ANCIENT KINGDOMS
AMENDED.

To which is Prefix'd,
_A _SHORT CHRONICLE_ from the First
Memory of Things in _Europe_, to the Conquest
of _Persia_ by _Alexander_ the Great._

       *       *       *       *       *

By Sir _ISAAC NEWTON_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_LONDON_:

Printed for J. TONSON in the _Strand_, and J. OSBORN
and T. LONGMAN in _Pater-noster Row_.

MDCCXXVIII.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO THE

QUEEN.

MADAM,

_As I could never hope to write any thing my self, worthy to be laid before
YOUR MAJESTY; I think it a very great happiness, that it should be my lot
to usher into the world, under Your Sacred Name, the last work of as great
a Genius as any Age ever produced: an Offering of such value in its self,
as to be in no danger of suffering from the meanness of the hand that
presents it._

_The impartial and universal encouragement which YOUR MAJESTY has always
given to Arts and Sciences, entitles You to the best returns the learned
world is able to make: And the many extraordinary Honours YOUR MAJESTY
vouchsafed the Author of the following sheets, give You a just right to his
Productions. These, above the rest, lay the most particular claim to Your
Royal Protection; For the _Chronology_ had never appeared in its present
Form without YOUR MAJESTY's Influence; and the _Short Chronicle_, which
precedes it, is entirely owing to the Commands with which You were pleased
to honour him, out of your singular Care for the education of the Royal
Issue, and earnest desire to form their minds betimes, and lead them early
into the knowledge of Truth._

_The Author has himself acquainted the Publick, that the following Treatise
was the fruit of his vacant hours, and the relief he sometimes had recourse
to, when tired with his other studies. What an Idea does it raise of His
abilities, to find that a Work of such labour and learning, as would have
been a sufficient employment and glory for the whole life of another, was
to him diversion only, and amusement! The Subject is in its nature
incapable of that demonstration upon which his other writings are founded,
but his usual accuracy and judiciousness are here no less observable; And
at the same time that he supports his suggestions, with all the authorities
and proofs that the whole compass of Science can furnish, he offers them
with the greatest caution; And by a Modesty, that was natural to Him and
always accompanies such superior talents, sets a becoming example to
others, not to be too presumptuous in matters so remote and dark. Tho' the
Subject be only _Chronology_, yet, as the mind of the Author abounded with
the most extensive variety of Knowledge, he frequently intersperses
Observations of a different kind; and occasionally instills principles of
Virtue and Humanity, which seem to have been always uppermost in his heart,
and, as they were the Constant Rule of his actions, appear Remarkably in
all his writings._

_Here YOUR MAJESTY will see _Astronomy_, and a just Observation on the
course of Nature, assisting other parts of Learning to illustrate
Antiquity; and a Penetration and Sagacity peculiar to the great Author,
dispelling that Mist, with which Fable and Error had darkened it; and will
with pleasure contemplate the first dawnings of Your favourite Arts and
Sciences, the noblest and most beneficial of which He alone carried farther
in a few years, than all the most Learned who went before him, had been
able to do in many Ages. Here too, MADAM, You will observe, that an
Abhorrence of Idolatry and Persecution (the very essence and foundation of
that Religion, which makes so bright a part of YOUR MAJESTY's character)
was one of the _earliest Laws_ of the Divine Legislator, the _Morality of
the first Ages, and the primitive Religion of both Jews and Christians_;
and, as the Author adds, _ought to be the standing Religion of all Nations;
it being for the honour of God, and good of Mankind_. Nor will YOUR MAJESTY
be displeased to find his sentiments so agreeable to Your own, whilst he
condemns _all oppression_; and every kind of _cruelty, even to brute
beasts_; and, with so much warmth, inculcates _Mercy_, _Charity_, and the
indispensable duty of _doing good_, and promoting the general _welfare of
mankind_: Those great ends, for which Government was first instituted, and
to which alone it is administred in this happy Nation, under a KING, who
distinguished himself early in opposition to the Tyranny which threatned
_Europe_, and chuses to reign in the hearts of his subjects; Who, by his
innate Benevolence, and Paternal Affection to his People, establishes and
confirms all their Liberties; and, by his Valour and Magnanimity, guards
and defends them._

_That Sincerity and Openness of mind, which is the darling quality of this
Nation, is become more conspicuous, by being placed upon the Throne; And we
see, with Pride, OUR SOVEREIGN the most eminent for a Virtue, by which our
country is so desirous to be distinguished. A Prince, whose views and heart
are above all the mean arts of Disguise, is far out of the reach of any
temptation to Introduce Blindness and Ignorance. And, as HIS MAJESTY is, by
his incessant personal cares, dispensing Happiness at home, and Peace
abroad; You, MADAM, lead us on by Your great Example to the most noble use
of that Quiet and Ease, which we enjoy under His Administration, whilst all
Your hours of leisure are employed in cultivating in Your Self That
Learning, which You so warmly patronize in Others._

_YOUR MAJESTY does not think the instructive Pursuit, an entertainment
below Your exalted Station; and are Your Self a proof, that the abstruser
parts of it are not beyond the reach of Your Sex. Nor does this Study end
in barren speculation; It discovers itself in a steady attachment to true
Religion; in Liberality, Beneficence, and all those amiable Virtues, which
increase and heighten the Felicities of a Throne, at the same time that
they bless All around it. Thus, MADAM, to enjoy, together with the highest
state of publick Splendor and Dignity all the retired Pleasures and
domestick Blessings of private life; is the perfection of human Wisdom, as
well as Happiness._

_The good Effects of this Love of knowledge, will not stop with the present
Age; It will diffuse its Influence with advantage to late Posterity: And
what may we not anticipate in our minds for the Generations to come under a
Royal Progeny, so descended, so educated, and formed by such Patterns!_

_The glorious Prospect gives us abundant reason to hope, that Liberty and
Learning will be perpetuated together; and that the bright Examples of
Virtue and Wisdom, set in this Reign by the Royal Patrons of Both, will be
transmitted with the Scepter to their Posterity, till this and the other
Works of Sir ISAAC NEWTON shall be forgot, and Time it self be no more:
Which is the most sincere and ardent wish of_

_MADAM,_

May it please YOUR MAJESTY,

YOUR MAJESTY's most obedient and most dutiful subject and servant,

_John Conduitt_.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CONTENTS.

_A Short Chronicle from the first Memory of Things in         page 1
_Europe_, to the Conquest of _Persia_ by _Alexander_ the
Great._

The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms amended.

Chap. I. _Of the Chronology of the First Ages of the_         p. 43
Greeks_._

Chap. II. _Of the Empire of_ Egypt_._                         p. 191

Chap. III. _Of the_ Assyrian _Empire._                        p. 265

Chap. IV. _Of the two Contemporary Empires of the             p. 294
_Babylonians_ and _Medes_._

Chap. V. _A Description of the Temple of _Solomon_._          p. 332

Chap. VI. _Of the Empire of the _Persians_._                  p. 347

       *       *       *       *       *

Advertisement.

_Tho' _The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms amended_, was writ by the Author
many years since; yet he lately revis'd it, and was actually preparing it
for the Press at the time of his death. But _The Short Chronicle_ was never
intended to be made public, and therefore was not so lately corrected by
him. To this the Reader must impute it, if he shall find any places where
_the Short Chronicle_ does not accurately agree with the Dates assigned in
the larger Piece. The Sixth Chapter was not copied out with the other Five,
which makes it doubtful whether he intended to print it: but being found
among his Papers, and evidently appearing to be a Continuation of the same
Work, and (as such) abridg'd in _the Short Chronicle_; it was thought
proper to be added._

_Had the _Great Author_ himself liv'd to publish this Work, there would
have been no occasion for this Advertisement; But as it is, the Reader is
desired to allow for such imperfections as are inseparable from Posthumous
Pieces; and, in so great a number of proper names, to excuse some errors of
the Press that have escaped._

       *       *       *       *       *

A SHORT

CHRONICLE

FROM THE
First Memory of Things in _Europe_,
TO THE
Conquest of _Persia_ by _Alexander_ the Great.

       *       *       *       *       *

The INTRODUCTION.

The _Greek_ Antiquities are full of Poetical Fictions, because the _Greeks_
wrote nothing in Prose, before the Conquest of _Asia_ by _Cyrus_ the
_Persian_. Then _Pherecydes Scyrius_ and _Cadmus Milesius_ introduced the
writing in Prose. _Pherecydes Atheniensis_, about the end of the Reign of
_Darius Hystaspis_, wrote of Antiquities, and digested his work by
Genealogies, and was reckoned one of the best Genealogers. _Epimenides_ the
Historian proceeded also by Genealogies; and _Hellanicus_, who was twelve
years older than _Herodotus_, digested his History by the Ages or
Successions of the Priestesses of _Juno Argiva_. Others digested theirs by
the Kings of the _Laced√¶monians_, or Archons of _Athens_. _Hippias_ the
_Elean_, about thirty years before the fall of the _Persian_ Empire,
published a breviary or list of the Olympic Victors; and about ten years
before the fall thereof, _Ephorus_ the disciple of _Isocrates_ formed a
Chronological History of _Greece_, beginning with the return of the
_Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_, and ending with the siege of _Perinthus_,
in the twentieth year of _Philip_ the father of _Alexander_ the great: But
he digested things by Generations, and the reckoning by Olympiads was not
yet in use, nor doth it appear that the Reigns of Kings were yet set down
by numbers of years. The _Arundelian_ marbles were composed sixty years
after the death of _Alexander_ the great (_An._ 4. _Olymp._ 128.) and yet
mention not the Olympiads: But in the next Olympiad, _Tim√¶us Siculus_
published an history in several books down to his own times, according to
the Olympiads, comparing the Ephori, the Kings of _Sparta_, the Archons of
_Athens_, and the Priestesses of _Argos_, with the Olympic Victors, so as
to make the Olympiads, and the Genealogies and Successions of Kings,
Archons, and Priestesses, and poetical histories suit with one another,
according to the best of his judgment. And where he left off, _Polybius_
began and carried on the history.

So then a little after the death of _Alexander_ the great, they began to
set down the Generations, Reigns and Successions, in numbers of years, and
by putting Reigns and Successions equipollent to Generations, and three
Generations to an hundred or an hundred and twenty years (as appears by
their Chronology) they have made the Antiquities of _Greece_ three or four
hundred years older than the truth. And this was the original of the
Technical Chronology of the _Greeks_. _Eratosthenes_ wrote about an hundred
years after the death of _Alexander_ the great: He was followed by
_Apollodorus_, and these two have been followed ever since by Chronologers.

But how uncertain their Chronology is, and how doubtful it was reputed by
the _Greeks_ of those times, may be understood by these passages of
_Plutarch_. _Some reckon_, saith he, [1] Lycurgus _contemporary to
_Iphitus_, and to have been his companion in ordering the Olympic
festivals: amongst whom was _Aristotle_ the Philosopher, arguing from the
Olympic Disc, which had the name of _Lycurgus_ upon it. Others supputing
the times by the succession of the Kings of the _Laced√¶monians_, as
_Eratosthenes_ and _Apollodorus_, affirm that he was not a few years older
than the first Olympiad._ First _Aristotle_ and some others made him as old
as the first Olympiad; then _Eratosthenes_, _Apollodorus_, and some others
made him above an hundred years older: and in another place _Plutarch_ [2]
tells us: _The congress of _Solon_ with _Croesus_, some think they can
confute by Chronology. But an history so illustrious, and verified by so
many witnesses, and (which is more) so agreeable to the manners of _Solon_,
and so worthy of the greatness of his mind and of his wisdom, I cannot
persuade my self to reject because of some Chronological Canons, as they
call them: which hundreds of authors correcting, have not yet been able to
constitute any thing certain, in which they could agree among themselves,
about repugnancies_. It seems the Chronologers had made the Legislature of
_Solon_ too ancient to consist with that Congress.

For reconciling such repugnancies, Chronologers have sometimes doubled the
persons of men. So when the Poets had changed _Io_ the daughter of
_Inachus_ into the _Egyptian Isis_, Chronologers made her husband _Osiris_
or _Bacchus_ and his mistress _Ariadne_ as old as _Io_, and so feigned that
there were two _Ariadnes_, one the mistress of _Bacchus_, and the other the
mistress of _Theseus_, and two _Minos's_ their fathers, and a younger _Io_
the daughter of _Jasus_, writing _Jasus_ corruptly for _Inachus_. And so
they have made two _Pandions_, and two _Erechtheus's_, giving the name of
_Erechthonius_ to the first; _Homer_ calls the first, _Erechtheus_: and by
such corruptions they have exceedingly perplexed Ancient History.

And as for the Chronology of the _Latines_, that is still more uncertain.
_Plutarch_ represents great uncertainties in the Originals of _Rome_: and
so doth _Servius_. The old records of the _Latines_ were burnt by the
_Gauls_, sixty and four years before the death of _Alexander_ the great;
and _Quintus Fabius Pictor_, the oldest historian of the _Latines_, lived
an hundred years later than that King.

In Sacred History, the _Assyrian_ Empire began with _Pul_ and
_Tiglathpilaser_, and lasted about 170 years. And accordingly _Herodotus_
hath made _Semiramis_ only five generations, or about 166 years older than
_Nitocris_, the mother of the last King of _Babylon_. But _Ctesias_ hath
made _Semiramis_ 1500 years older than _Nitocris_, and feigned a long
series of Kings of _Assyria_, whose names are not _Assyrian_, nor have any
affinity with the _Assyrian_ names in Scripture.

The Priests of _Egypt_ told _Herodotus_, that _Menes_ built _Memphis_ and
the sumptuous temple of _Vulcan_, in that City: and that _Rhampsinitus_,
_M≈ìris_, _Asychis_ and _Psammiticus_ added magnificent porticos to that
temple. And it is not likely that _Memphis_ could be famous, before
_Homer_'s days who doth not mention it, or that a temple could be above two
or three hundred years in building. The Reign of _Psammiticus_ began about
655 years before Christ, and I place the founding of this temple by _Menes_
about 257 years earlier: but the Priests of _Egypt_ had so magnified their
Antiquities before the days of _Herodotus_, as to tell him that from
_Menes_ to _M≈ìris_ (who reigned 200 years before _Psammiticus_) there were
330 Kings, whose Reigns took up as many Ages, that is eleven thousand
years, and had filled up the interval with feigned Kings, who had done
nothing. And before the days of _Diodorus Siculus_ they had raised their
Antiquities so much higher, as to place six, eight, or ten new Reigns of
Kings between those Kings, whom they had represented to _Herodotus_ to
succeed one another immediately.

In the Kingdom of _Sicyon_, Chronologers have split _Apis Epaphus_ or
_Epopeus_ into two Kings, whom they call _Apis_ and _Epopeus_, and between
them have inserted eleven or twelve feigned names of Kings who did nothing,
and thereby they have made its Founder _√Ügialeus_, three hundred years
older than his brother _Phoroneus_. Some have made the Kings of _Germany_
as old as the Flood: and yet before the use of letters, the names and
actions of men could scarce be remembred above eighty or an hundred years
after their deaths: and therefore I admit no Chronology of things done in
_Europe_, above eighty years before _Cadmus_ brought letters into _Europe_;
none, of things done in _Germany_, before the rise of the _Roman_ Empire.

Now since _Eratosthenes_ and _Apollodorus_ computed the times by the Reigns
of the Kings of _Sparta_, and (as appears by their Chronology still
followed) have made the seventeen Reigns of these Kings in both Races,
between the Return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_ and the Battel
of _Thermopyl√¶_, take up _622_ years, which is after the rate of 36¬Ω years
to a Reign, and yet a Race of seventeen Kings of that length is no where to
be met with in all true History, and Kings at a moderate reckoning Reign
but 18 or 20 years a-piece one with another: I have stated the time of the
return of the _Heraclides_ by the last way of reckoning, placing it about
340 years before the Battel of _Thermopyl√¶_. And making the Taking of
_Troy_ eighty years older than that Return, according to _Thucydides_, and
the _Argonautic_ Expedition a Generation older than the _Trojan_ War, and
the Wars of _Sesostris_ in _Thrace_ and death of _Ino_ the daughter of
_Cadmus_ a Generation older than that Expedition: I have drawn up the
following Chronological Table, so as to make Chronology suit with the
Course of Nature, with Astronomy, with Sacred History, with _Herodotus_ the
Father of History, and with it self; without the many repugnancies
complained of by _Plutarch_. I do not pretend to be exact to a year: there
may be Errors of five or ten years, and sometimes twenty, and not much
above.

       *       *       *       *       *

A SHORT

CHRONICLE

FROM THE
_First Memory of things in _Europe_ to
the Conquest of _Persia_ by _Alexander_
the great._

_The Times are set down in years before Christ._

The _Canaanites_ who fled from _Joshua_, retired in great numbers into
_Egypt_, and there conquered _Timaus_, _Thamus_, or _Thammuz_ King of the
lower _Egypt_, and reigned there under their Kings _Salatis_, _B≈ìon_,
_Apachnas_, _Apophis_, _Janias_, _Assis_, &c. untill the days of _Eli_ and
_Samuel_. They fed on flesh, and sacrificed men after the manner of the
_Ph≈ìnicians_, and were called Shepherds by the _Egyptians_, who lived only
on the fruits of the earth, and abominated flesh-eaters. The upper parts of
_Egypt_ were in those days under many Kings, Reigning at _Coptos_,
_Thebes_, _This_, _Elephantis_, and other Places, which by conquering one
another grew by degrees into one Kingdom, over which _Misphragmuthosis_
Reigned in the days of _Eli_.

In the year before Christ 1125 _Mephres_ Reigned over the upper _Egypt_
from _Syene_ to _Heliopolis_, and his Successor _Misphragmuthosis_ made a
lasting war upon the Shepherds soon after, and caused many of them to fly
into _Palestine_, _Idum√¶a_, _Syria_, and _Libya_; and under _Lelex_,
_√Üzeus_, _Inachus_, _Pelasgus_, _√Üolus_ the first, _Cecrops_, and other
Captains, into _Greece_. Before those days _Greece_ and all _Europe_ was
peopled by wandring _Cimmerians_, and _Scythians_ from the backside of the
_Euxine Sea_, who lived a rambling wild sort of life, like the _Tartars_ in
the northern parts of _Asia_. Of their Race was _Ogyges_, in whose days
these _Egyptian_ strangers came into _Greece_. The rest of the Shepherds
were shut up by _Misphragmuthosis_, in a part of the lower _Egypt_ called
_Abaris_ or _Pelusium_.

In the year 1100 the _Philistims_, strengthned by the access of the
Shepherds, conquer _Israel_, and take the Ark. _Samuel_ judges _Israel_.

1085. _H√¶mon_ the son of _Pelasgus_ Reigns in _Thessaly_.

1080. _Lycaon_ the son of _Pelasgus_ builds _Lycosura_; _Phoroneus_ the son
of _Inachus_, _Phoronicum_, afterwards called _Argos_; _√Ügialeus_ the
brother of _Phoroneus_ and son of _Inachus_, _√Ügialeum_, afterwards called
_Sicyon_: and these were the oldest towns in _Peloponnesus_. 'Till then
they built only single houses scattered up and down in the fields. About
the same time _Cecrops_ built _Cecropia_ in _Attica_, afterwards called
_Athens_; and _Eleusine_, the son of _Ogyges_, built _Eleusis_. And these
towns gave a beginning to the Kingdoms of the _Arcadians_, _Argives_,
_Sicyons_, _Athenians_, _Eleusinians_, &c. _Deucalion_ flourishes.

1070. _Amosis_, or _Tethmosis_, the successor of _Misphragmuthosis_,
abolishes the _Ph≈ìnician_ custom in _Heliopolis_ of sacrificing men, and
drives the Shepherds out of _Abaris_. By their access the _Philistims_
become so numerous, as to bring into the field against _Saul_ 30000
chariots, 6000 horsemen, and people as the sand on the sea shore for
multitude. _Abas_, the father of _Acrisius_ and _Pr≈ìtus_, comes from
_Egypt_.

1069. _Saul_ is made King of _Israel_, and by the hand of _Jonathan_ gets a
great victory over the _Philistims_. _Eurotas_ the son of _Lelex_, and
_Laced√¶mon_ who married _Sparta_ the daughter of _Eurotas_, Reign in
_Laconia_, and build _Sparta_.

1060. _Samuel_ dies.

1059. _David_ made King.

1048. The _Edomites_ are conquered and dispersed by _David_, and some of
them fly into _Egypt_ with their young King _Hadad_. Others fly to the
_Persian Gulph_ with their Commander _Oannes_; and others from the _Red
Sea_ to the coast of the _Mediterranean_, and fortify _Azoth_ against
_David_, and take _Zidon_; and the _Zidonians_ who fled from them build
_Tyre_ and _Aradus_, and make _Abibalus_ King of _Tyre_. These _Edomites_
carry to all places their Arts and Sciences; amongst which were their
Navigation, Astronomy, and Letters; for in _Idum√¶a_ they had Constellations
and Letters before the days of _Job_, who mentions them: and there _Moses_
learnt to write the Law in a book. These _Edomites_ who fled to the
_Mediterranean_, translating the word _Erythr√¶a_ into that of _Ph≈ìnicia_,
give the name of _Ph≈ìnicians_ to themselves, and that of _Ph≈ìnicia_ to all
the sea-coasts of _Palestine_ from _Azoth_ to _Zidon_. And hence came the
tradition of the _Persians_, and of the _Ph≈ìnicians_ themselves, mentioned
by _Herodotus_, that the _Ph≈ìnicians_ came originally from the _Red Sea_,
and presently undertook long voyages on the _Mediterranean_.

1047. _Acrisius_ marries _Eurydice_, the daughter of _Laced√¶mon_ and
_Sparta_. The _Ph≈ìnician_ mariners who fled from the _Red Sea_, being used
to long voyages for the sake of traffic, begin the like voyages on the
_Mediterranean_ from _Zidon_; and sailing as far as _Greece_, carry away
_Io_ the daughter of _Inachus_, who with other _Grecian_ women came to
their ships to buy their merchandize. The _Greek Seas_ begin to be infested
with Pyrates.

1046. The _Syrians_ of _Zobah_ and _Damascus_ are conquered by _David_.
_Nyctimus_, the son of _Lycaon_, reigns in _Arcadia_. _Deucalion_ still
alive.

1045. Many of the _Ph≈ìnicians_ and _Syrians_ fleeing from _Zidon_ and from
_David_, come under the conduct of _Cadmus_, _Cilix_, _Ph≈ìnix_,
_Membliarius_, _Nycteus_, _Thasus_, _Atymnus_, and other Captains, into
_Asia minor_, _Crete_, _Greece_, and _Libya_; and introduce Letters, Music,
Poetry, the _Octaeteris_, Metals and their Fabrication, and other Arts,
Sciences and Customs of the _Ph≈ìnicians_. At this time _Cranaus_ the
successor of _Cecrops_ Reigned in _Attica_, and in his Reign and the
beginning of the Reign of _Nyctimus_, the _Greeks_ place the flood of
_Deucalion_. This flood was succeeded by four Ages or Generations of men,
in the first of which _Chiron_ the son of _Saturn_ and _Philyra_ was born,
and the last of which according to _Hesiod_ ended with the _Trojan_ War;
and so places the Destruction of _Troy_ four Generations or about 140 years
later than that flood, and the coming of _Cadmus_, reckoning with the
ancients three Generations to an hundred years. With these _Ph≈ìnicians_
came a sort of men skilled in the Religious Mysteries, Arts, and Sciences
of _Ph≈ìnicia_, and settled in several places under the names of _Curetes_,
_Corybantes_, _Telchines_, and _Id√¶i Dactyli_.

1043. Hellen, the son of _Deucalion_, and father of _√Üolus_, _Xuthus_, and
_Dorus_, flourishes.

1035. _Erectheus_ Reigns in _Attica_. _√Üthlius_, the grandson of
_Deucalion_ and father of _Endymion_, builds _Elis_. The _Id√¶i Dactyli_
find out Iron in mount _Ida_ in _Crete_, and work it into armour and iron
tools, and thereby give a beginning to the trades of smiths and armourers
in _Europe_; and by singing and dancing in their armour, and keeping time
by striking upon one another's armour with their swords, they bring in
Music and Poetry; and at the same time they nurse up the _Cretan Jupiter_
in a cave of the same mountain, dancing about him in their armour.

1034. _Ammon_ Reigns in _Egypt_. He conquered _Libya_, and reduced that
people from a wandering savage life to a civil one, and taught them to lay
up the fruits of the earth; and from him _Libya_ and the desert above it
were anciently called _Ammonia_. He was the first that built long and tall
ships with sails, and had a fleet of such ships on the _Red Sea_, and
another on the _Mediterranean_ at _Irasa_ in _Libya_. 'Till then they used
small and round vessels of burden, invented on the _Red Sea_, and kept
within sight of the shore. For enabling them to cross the seas without
seeing the shore, the _Egyptians_ began in his days to observe the Stars:
and from this beginning Astronomy and Sailing had their rise. Hitherto the
Lunisolar year had been in use: but this year being of an uncertain length,
and so, unfit for Astronomy, in his days and in the days of his sons and
grandsons, by observing the Heliacal Risings and Setting of the Stars, they
found the length of the Solar year, and made it consist of five days more
than the twelve calendar months of the old Lunisolar year. _Creusa_ the
daughter of _Erechtheus_ marries _Xuthus_ the son of _Hellen_. _Erechtheus_
having first celebrated the _Panathen√¶a_ joins horses to a chariot.
_√Ügina_, the daughter of _Asopus_, and mother of _√Üacus_, born.

1030. _Ceres_ a woman of _Sicily_, in seeking her daughter who was stolen,
comes into _Attica_, and there teaches the _Greeks_ to sow corn; for which
Benefaction she was Deified after death. She first taught the Art to
_Triptolemus_ the young son of _Celeus_ King of _Eleusis_.

1028. _Oenotrus_ the youngest son of _Lycaon_, the _Janus_ of the
_Latines_, led the first Colony of _Greeks_ into _Italy_, and there taught
them to build houses. _Perseus_ born.

1020. _Arcas_, the son of _Callisto_ and grandson of _Lycaon_, and
_Eumelus_ the first King of _Achaia_, receive bread-corn from
_Triptolemus_.

1019. _Solomon_ Reigns, and marries the daughter of _Ammon_, and by means
of this affinity is supplied with horses from _Egypt_; and his merchants
also bring horses from thence for all the Kings of the _Hittites_ and
_Syrians_: for horses came originally from _Libya_; and thence _Neptune_
was called _Equestris_. _Tantalus_ King of _Phrygia_ steals _Ganimede_ the
son of _Tros_ King of _Troas_.

1017. _Solomon_ by the assistance of the _Tyrians_ and _Aradians_, who had
mariners among them acquainted with the _Red Sea_, sets out a fleet upon
that sea. Those assistants build new cities in the _Persian Gulph_, called
_Tyre_ and _Aradus_.

1015. The Temple of _Solomon_ is founded. _Minos_ Reigns in _Crete_
expelling his father _Asterius_, who flees into _Italy_, and becomes the
_Saturn_ of the _Latines_. _Ammon_ takes _Gezer_ from the _Canaanites_, and
gives it to his daughter, _Solomon's_ wife.

1014. _Ammon_ places _Cepheus_ at _Joppa_.

1010. _Sesac_ in the Reign of his father _Ammon_ invades _Arabia F≈ìlix_,
and sets up pillars at the mouth of the _Red Sea_. _Apis_, _Epaphus_ or
_Epopeus_, the son of _Phroroneus_, and _Nycteus_ King of _B≈ìotia_, slain.
_Lycus_ inherits the Kingdom of his brother _Nycteus_. _√Ütolus_ the son of
_Endymion_ flies into the Country of the _Curetes_ in _Achaia_, and calls
it _√Ütolia_; and of _Pronoe_ the daughter of _Phorbas_ begets _Pleuron_ and
_Calydon_, who built cities in _√Ütolia_ called by their own names.
_Antiopa_ the daughter of _Nycteus_ is sent home to _Lycus_ by _Lamedon_
the successor of _Apis_, and in the way brings forth _Amphion_ and
_Zethus_.

1008. _Sesac_, in the Reign of his father _Ammon_, invades _Afric_ and
_Spain_, and sets up pillars in all his conquests, and particularly at the
mouth of the _Mediterranean_, and returns home by the coast of _Gaul_ and
_Italy_.

1007. _Ceres_ being dead _Eumolpus_ institutes her Mysteries in _Eleusine_.
The Mysteries of _Rhea_ are instituted in _Phrygia_, in the city _Cybele_.
About this time Temples begin to be built in _Greece_. _Hyagnis_ the
_Phrygian_ invents the pipe. After the example of the common-council of the
five Lords of the _Philistims_, the _Greeks_ set up the _Amphictyonic_
Council, first at _Thermopyl√¶_, by the influence of _Amphictyon_ the son of
_Deucalion_; and a few years after at _Delphi_ by the influence of
_Acrisius_. Among the cites, whose deputies met at _Thermopyl√¶_, I do not
find _Athens_, and therefore doubt whether _Amphictyon_ was King of that
city. If he was the son of _Deucalion_ and brother of _Hellen_, he and
_Cranaus_ might Reign together in several parts of _Attica_. But I meet
with a later _Amphictyon_ who entertained the great _Bacchus_. This Council
worshipped _Ceres_, and therefore was instituted after her death.

1006. _Minos_ prepares a fleet, clears the _Greek_ seas of Pyrates, and
sends Colonies to the Islands of the _Greeks_, some of which were not
inhabited before. _Cecrops_ II. Reigns in _Attica_. _Caucon_ teaches the
Mysteries of _Ceres_ in _Messene_.

1005. _Andromeda_ carried away from _Joppa_ by _Perseus_. _Pandion_ the
brother of _Cecrops_ II. Reigns in _Attica_. _Car_, the son of _Phoroneus_,
builds a Temple to _Ceres_.

1002. _Sesac_ Reigns in _Egypt_ and adorns _Thebes_, dedicating it to his
father _Ammon_ by the name of _No-Ammon_ or _Ammon-No_, that is the people
or city of _Ammon_: whence the _Greeks_ called it _Diospolis_, the city of
_Jupiter_. _Sesac_ also erected Temples and Oracles to his father in
_Thebes_, _Ammonia_, and _Ethiopia_, and thereby caused his father to be
worshipped as a God in those countries, and I think also in _Arabia F≈ìlix_:
and this was the original of the worship of _Jupiter Ammon_, and the first
mention of Oracles that I meet with in Prophane History. War between
_Pandion_ and _Labdacus_ the grandson of _Cadmus_.

994. _√Ügeus_ Reigns in _Attica_.

993. _Pelops_ the son of _Tantalus_ comes into _Peloponnesus_, marries
_Hippodamia_ the granddaughter of _Acrisius_, takes _√Ütolia_ from _√Ütolus_
the son of _Endymion_, and by his riches grows potent.

990. _Amphion_ and _Zethus_ slay _Lycus_, put _Laius_ the son of _Labdacus_
to flight, and Reign in _Thebes_, and wall the city about.

989. _D√¶dalus_ and his nephew _Talus_ invent the saw, the turning-lath, the
wimble, the chip-ax, and other instruments of Carpenters and Joyners, and
thereby give a beginning to those Arts in _Europe_. _D√¶dalus_ also invented
the making of Statues with their feet asunder, as if they walked.

988. _Minos_ makes war upon the _Athenians_, for killing his son
_Androgeus_. _√Üacus_ flourishes.

987. _D√¶dalus_ kills his nephew _Talus_, and flies to _Minos_. A Priestess
of _Jupiter Ammon_, being brought by _Ph≈ìnician_ merchants into _Greece_,
sets up the Oracle of _Jupiter_ at _Dodona_. This gives a beginning to
Oracles in _Greece_: and by their dictates, the Worship of the Dead is
every where introduced.

983. _Sisyphus_, the son of _√Üolus_ and grandson of _Hellen_, Reigns in
_Corinth_, and some say that he built that city.

980. _Laius_ recovers the Kingdom of _Thebes_. _Athamas_, the brother of
_Sisyphus_ and father of _Phrixus_ and _Helle_, marries _Ino_ the daughter
of _Cadmus_.

979. _Rehoboam_ Reigns. _Thoas_ is sent from _Crete_ to _Lemnos_, Reigns
there in the city _Heph≈ìstia_, and works in copper and iron.

978. _Alcmena_ born of _Electryo_ the son of _Perseus_ and _Andromeda_, and
of _Lysidice_ the daughter of _Pelops_.

974. _Sesac_ spoils the Temple, and invades _Syria_ and _Persia_, setting
up pillars in many places. _Jeroboam_, becoming subject to _Sesac_, sets up
the worship of the _Egyptian_ Gods in _Israel_.

971. _Sesac_ invades _India_, and returns with triumph the next year but
one: whence _Trieterica Bacchi_. He sets up pillars on two mountains at the
mouth of the river _Ganges_.

968. _Theseus_ Reigns, having overcome the _Minotaur_, and soon after
unites the twelve cities of _Attica_ under one government. _Sesac_, having
carried on his victories to _Mount Caucasus_, leaves his nephew
_Prometheus_ there, and _√Üetes_ in _Colchis_.

967. _Sesac_, passing over the _Hellespont_ conquers _Thrace_, kills
_Lycurgus_ King thereof, and gives his Kingdom and one of his singing-women
to _Oeagrus_ the father of _Orpheus_. _Sesac_ had in his army _Ethiopians_
commanded by _Pan_, and _Libyan_ women commanded by _Myrina_ or _Minerva_.
It was the custom of the _Ethiopians_ to dance when they were entring into
a battel, and from their skipping they were painted with goats feet in the
form of Satyrs.

966. _Thoas_, being made King of _Cyprus_ by _Sesac_, goes thither with his
wife _Calycopis_, and leaves his daughter _Hypsipyle_ in _Lemnos_.

965. _Sesac_ is baffled by the _Greeks_ and _Scythians_, loses many of his
women with their Queen _Minerva_, composes the war, is received by
_Amphiction_ at a feast, buries _Ariadne_, goes back through _Asia_ and
_Syria_ into _Egypt_, with innumerable captives, among whom was _Tithonus_,
the son of _Laomedon_ King of _Troy_; and leaves his _Libyan Amazons_,
under _Marthesia_ and _Lampeto_, the successors of _Minerva_, at the river
_Thermodon_. He left also in _Colchos_ Geographical Tables of all his
conquests: And thence Geography had its rise. His singing-women were
celebrated in _Thrace_ by the name of the Muses. And the daughters of
_Pierus_ a _Thracian_, imitating them, were celebrated by the same name.

964. _Minos_, making war upon _Cocalus_ King of _Sicily_, is slain by him.
He was eminent for his Dominion, his Laws and his Justice: upon his
sepulchre visited by _Pythagoras_, was this inscription, Œ§ŒüŒ• ŒîŒôŒüŒ£ the
Sepulchre of _Jupiter_. _Danaus_ with his daughters flying from his brother
_Egyptus_ (that is from _Sesac_) comes into _Greece_. _Sesac_ using the
advice of his Secretary _Thoth_, distributes _Egypt_ into xxxvi _Nomes_,
and in every _Nome_ erects a Temple, and appoints the several Gods,
Festivals and Religions of the several _Nomes_. The Temples were the
sepulchres of his great men, where they were to be buried and worshipped
after death, each in his own Temple, with ceremonies and festivals
appointed by him; while He and his Queen, by the names of _Osiris_ and
_Isis_, were to be worshipped in all _Egypt_. These were the Temples seen
and described by _Lucian_ eleven hundred years after, to be of one and the
same age: and this was the original of the several _Nomes_ of _Egypt_, and
of the several Gods and several Religions of those _Nomes_. _Sesac_ divided
also the land of _Egypt_ by measure amongst his soldiers, and thence
_Geometry_ had its rise. _Hercules_ and _Eurystheus_ born.

963. _Amphictyon_ brings the twelve Gods of _Egypt_ into _Greece_, and
these are the _Dii magni majorum gentium_, to whom the Earth and Planets
and Elements are dedicated.

962. _Phryxus_ and _Helle_ fly from their stepmother _Ino_ the daughter of
_Cadmus_. _Helle_ is drowned in the _Hellespont_, so named from her, but
_Phryxus_ arrived at _Colchos_.

960. The war between the _Lapith√¶_ and the people of _Thessaly_ called
_Centaurs_.

958. _Oedipus_ kills his father _Laius_. _Sthenelus_ the son of _Perseus_
Reigns in _Mycene_.

956. _Sesac_ is slain by his brother _Japetus_, who after death was deified
in _Afric_ by the name of _Neptune_, and called _Typhon_ by the
_Egyptians_. _Orus_ Reigns and routs the _Libyans_, who under the conduct
of _Japetus_, and his Son _Ant√¶us_ or _Atlas_, invaded _Egypt_. _Sesac_
from his making the river _Nile_ useful, by cutting channels from it to all
the cities of _Egypt_, was called by its names, _Sihor_ or _Siris_, _Nilus_
and _Egyptus_. The _Greeks_ hearing the _Egyptians_ lament, _O Siris_ and
_Bou Siris_, called him _Osiris_ and _Busiris_. The _Arabians_ from his
great acts called him _Bacchus_, that is, the Great. The _Phrygians_ called
him _Ma-fors_ or _Mavors_, the valiant, and by contraction _Mars_. Because
he set up pillars in all his conquests, and his army in his father's Reign
fought against the _Africans_ with clubs, he is painted with pillars and a
club: and this is that _Hercules_ who, according to _Cicero_, was born upon
the _Nile_, and according to _Eudoxus_, was slain by _Typhon_; and
according to _Diodorus_, was an _Egyptian_, and went over a great part of
the world, and set up the pillars in _Afric_. He seems to be also the
_Belus_ who, according to _Diodorus_, led a Colony of _Egyptians_ to
_Babylon_, and there instituted Priests called _Chaldeans_, who were free
from taxes, and observed the stars, as in _Egypt_. Hitherto _Judah_ and
_Israel_ laboured under great vexations, but henceforward _Asa_ King of
_Judah_ had peace ten years.

947. The _Ethiopians_ invade _Egypt_, and drown _Orus_ in the _Nile_.
Thereupon _Bubaste_ the sister of _Orus_ kills herself, by falling from the
top of an house, and their mother _Isis_ or _Astr√¶a_ goes mad: and thus
ended the Reign of the Gods of _Egypt_.

946. _Zerah_ the _Ethiopian_ is overthrown by _Asa_. The people of the
lower _Egypt_ make _Osarsiphus_ their King, and call in two hundred
thousand _Jews_ and _Ph≈ìnicians_ against the _Ethiopians_. _Menes_ or
_Amenophis_ the young son of _Zerah_ and _Cissia_ Reigns.

944. The _Ethiopians_, under _Amenophis_, retire from the lower _Egypt_
and fortify _Memphis_ against _Osarsiphus_. And by these wars and the
_Argonautic_ expedition, the great Empire of _Egypt_ breaks in pieces.
_Eurystheus_ the son of _Sthenelus_ Reigns in _Mycen√¶_.

943. _Evander_ and his mother _Carmenta_ carry Letters into _Italy_.

942. _Orpheus_ Deifies the son of _Semele_ by the name of _Bacchus_, and
appoints his Ceremonies.

940. The great men of _Greece_, hearing of the civil wars and distractions
of _Egypt_, resolve to send an embassy to the nations, upon the _Euxine_
and _Mediterranean_ Seas, subject to that Empire, and for that end order
the building of the ship _Argo_.

939. The ship _Argo_ is built after the pattern of the long ship in which
_Danaus_ came into _Greece_: and this was the first long ship built by the
_Greeks_. _Chiron_, who was born in the Golden Age, forms the
Constellations for the use of the _Argonauts_; and places the Solstitial
and Equinoctial Points in the fifteenth degrees or middles of the
Constellations of _Cancer_, _Chel√¶_, _Capricorn_, and _Aries_. _Meton_ in
the year of _Nabonassar_ 316, observed the Summer Solstice in the eighth
degree of _Cancer_, and therefore the Solstice had then gone back seven
degrees. It goes back one degree in about seventytwo years, and seven
degrees in about 504 years. Count these years back from the year of
_Nabonassar_ 316, and they will place the _Argonautic_ expedition about 936
years before _Christ_. _Gingris_ the son of _Thoas_ slain, and Deified by
the name of _Adonis_.

938. _Theseus_, being fifty years old, steals _Helena_ then seven years
old. _Pirithous_ the son of _Ixion_, endeavouring to steal _Persephone_ the
daughter of _Orcus_ King of the _Molossians_, is slain by the Dog of
_Orcus_; and his companion _Theseus_ is taken and imprisoned. _Helena_ is
set at liberty by her brothers.

937. The _Argonautic_ expedition. _Prometheus_ leaves _Mount Caucasus_,
being set at liberty by _Hercules_. _Laomedon_ King of _Troy_ is slain by
_Hercules_. _Priam_ succeeds him. _Talus_ a brazen man, of the Brazen Age,
the son of _Minos_, is slain by the _Argonauts_. _√Üsculapius_ and
_Hercules_ were _Argonauts_, and _Hippocrates_ was the eighteenth from
_√Üsculapius_ by the father's side, and the nineteenth from _Hercules_ by
the mother's side; and because these generations, being noted in history,
were most probably by the chief of the family, and for the most part by the
eldest sons; we may reckon 28 or at the most 30 years to a generation: and
thus the seventeen intervals by the father's side and eighteen by the
mother's, will at a middle reckoning amount unto about 507 years; which
being counted backwards from the beginning of the _Peloponnesian_ war, at
which time _Hippocrates_ began to flourish, will reach up to the time where
we have placed the _Argonautic_ expedition.

936. _Theseus_ is set at liberty by _Hercules_.

934. The hunting of the _Calydonian_ boar slain by _Meleager_.

930. _Amenophis_, with an army out of _Ethiopia_ and _Thebais_, invades the
lower _Egypt_, conquers _Osarsiphus_, and drives out the _Jews_ and
_Canaanites_: and this is reckoned the second expulsion of the Shepherds.
_Calycopis_ dies, and is Deified by _Thoas_ with Temples at _Paphos_ and
_Amathus_ in _Cyprus_, and at _Byblus_ in _Syria_, and with Priests and
sacred Rites, and becomes the _Venus_ of the ancients, and the _Dea Cypria_
and _Dea Syria_. And from these and other places where Temples were erected
to her, she was also called _Paphia_, _Amathusia_, _Byblia_, _Cytherea_,
_Salaminia_, _Cnidia_, _Erycina_, _Idalia_, &c. And her three waiting-women
became the three Graces.

928. The war of the seven Captains against _Thebes_.

927. _Hercules_ and _√Üsculapius_ are Deified. _Eurystheus_ drives the
_Heraclides_ out of _Peloponnesus_. He is slain by _Hyllus_ the son of
_Hercules_. _Atreus_ the son of _Pelops_ succeeds him in the Kingdom of
_Mycen√¶_. _Menestheus_, the great grandson of _Erechtheus_, Reigns at
_Athens_.

925. _Theseus_ is slain, being cast down from a rock.

924. _Hyllus_ invading _Peloponnesus_ is slain by _Echemus_.

919. _Atreus_ dies. _Agamemnon_ Reigns. In the absence of _Menelaus_, who
went to look after what his father _Atreus_ had left to him, _Paris_ steals
_Helena_.

918. The second war against _Thebes_.

912. _Thoas_, King of _Cyprus_ and part of _Ph≈ìnicia_ dies; and for making
armour for the Kings of _Egypt_; is Deified with a sumptuous Temple at
_Memphis_ by the name of _Baal Canaan_, _Vulcan_. This Temple was said to
be built by _Menes_, the first King of _Egypt_ who reigned next after the
Gods, that is, by _Menoph_ or _Amenophis_ who reigned next after the death
of _Osiris_, _Isis_, _Orus_, _Bubaste_ and _Thoth_. The city, _Memphis_ was
also said to be built by _Menes_; he began to build it when he fortified it
against _Osarsiphus_. And from him it was called _Menoph_, _Moph_, _Noph_,
&c; and is to this day called _Menuf_ by the _Arabians_. And therefore
_Menes_ who built the city and temple Was _Menoph_ or _Amenophis_. The
Priests of _Egypt_ at length made this temple above a thousand years older
then _Amenophis_, and some of them five or ten thousand years older: but it
could not be above two or three hundred years older than the Reign of
_Psammiticus_ who finished it, and died 614 years before _Christ_. When
_Menoph_ or _Menes_ built the city, he built a bridge there over the
_Nile_: a work too great to be older than the Monarchy of _Egypt_.

909. _Amenophis_, called _Memnon_ by the _Greeks_, built the _Memnonia_ at
_Susa_, whilst _Egypt_ was under the government of _Proteus_ his Viceroy.

904. _Troy_ taken. _Amenophis_ was still at _Susa_; the _Greeks_ feigning
that he came from thence to the _Trojan_ war.

903. _Demophoon_, the son of _Theseus_ by _Ph≈ìdra_ the daughter of _Minos_,
Reigns at _Athens_.

901. _Amenophis_ builds small Pyramids in _Cochome_.

896. _Ulysses_ leaves _Calypso_ in the Island _Ogygie_ (perhaps _Cadis_ or
_Cales_.) She was the daughter of _Atlas_, according to _Homer_. The
ancients at length feigned that this Island, (which from _Atlas_ they
called _Atlantis_) had been as big as all _Europe_, _Africa_ and _Asia_,
but was sunk into the Sea.

895. _Teucer_ builds _Salamis_ in _Cyprus_. _Hadad_ or _Benhadad_ King of
_Syria_ dies, and is Deified at _Damascus_ with a Temple and Ceremonies.

887. _Amenophis_ dies, and is succeeded by his son _Ramesses_ or
_Rhampsinitus_, who builds the western Portico of the Temple of _Vulcan_.
The _Egyptians_ dedicated to _Osiris_, _Isis_, _Orus_ senior, _Typhon_, and
_Nephthe_ the sister and wife of _Typhon_, the five days added by the
_Egyptians_ to the twelve Calendar months of the old Luni-solar year, and
said that they were added when these five Princes were born. They were
therefore added in the Reign of _Ammon_ the father of these five Princes:
but this year was scarce brought into common use before the Reign of
_Amenophis_: for in his Temple or Sepulchre at _Abydus_, they placed a
Circle of 365 cubits in compass, covered on the upper side with a plate of
gold, and divided into 365 equal parts, to represent all the days of the
year; every part having the day of the year, and the Heliacal Risings and
Settings of the Stars on that day, noted upon it. And this Circle remained
there 'till _Cambyses_ spoiled the temples of _Egypt_: and from this
monument I collect that it was _Amenophis_ who established this year,
fixing the beginning thereof to one of the four Cardinal Points of the
heavens. For had not the beginning thereof been now fixed, the Heliacal
Risings and Settings of the Stars could not have been noted upon the days
thereof. The Priests of _Egypt_ therefore in the Reign of _Amenophis_
continued to observe the Heliacal Risings and Settings of the Stars upon
every day. And when by the Sun's Meridional Altitudes they had found the
Solstices and Equinoxes according to the Sun's mean motion, his Equation
being not yet known, they fixed the beginning of this year to the Vernal
Equinox, and in memory thereof erected this monument. Now this year being
carried into _Chald√¶a_, the _Chald√¶ans_ began their year of _Nabonassar_ on
the same _Thoth_ with the _Egyptians_, and made it of the same length. And
the _Thoth_ of the first year of _Nabonassar_ fell upon the 26th day of
_February_: which was 33 days and five hours before the Vernal Equinox,
according to the Sun's mean motion. And the _Thoth_ of this year moves
backwards 33 days and five hours in 137 years, and therefore fell upon the
Vernal Equinox 137 years before the _√Üra_ of _Nabonassar_ began; that is,
884 years before _Christ_. And if it began upon the day next after the
Vernal Equinox, it might begin three or four years earlier; and there we
may place the death of this King. The _Greeks_ feigned that he was the Son
of _Tithonus_, and therefore he was born after the return of _Sesac_ into
_Egypt_, with _Tithonus_ and other captives, and so might be about 70 or 75
years old at his death.

883. _Dido_ builds _Carthage_, and the _Ph≈ìnicians_ begin presently after
to sail as far as to the _Straights Mouth_, and beyond. _√Üneas_ was still
alive, according to _Virgil_.

870. _Hesiod_ flourishes. He hath told us himself that he lived in the age
next after the wars of _Thebes_ and _Troy_, and that this age should end
when the men then living grew hoary and dropt into the grave; and therefore
it was but of an ordinary length: and _Herodotus_ has told us that _Hesiod_
and _Homer_ were but 400 years older than himself. Whence it follows that
the destruction of _Troy_ was not older than we have represented it.

860. _M≈ìris_ Reigns in _Egypt_. He adorned _Memphis_, and translated the
seat of his Empire thither from _Thebes_. There he built the famous
Labyrinth, and the northern portico of the Temple of _Vulcan_, and dug the
great Lake called the Lake of _M≈ìris_, and upon the bottom of it built two
great Pyramids of brick: and these things being not mentioned by _Homer_ or
_Hesiod_, were unknown to them, and done after their days. _M≈ìris_ wrote
also a book of Geometry.

852. _Hazael_ the successor of _Hadad_ at _Damascus_ dies and is Deified,
as was _Hadad_ before: and these Gods, together with _Arathes_ the wife of
_Hadad_, were worshipt in their Sepulchres or Temples, 'till the days of
_Josephus_ the _Jew_; and the _Syrians_ boasted their antiquity, not
knowing, saith _Josephus_, that they were novel.

844. The _√Üolic_ Migration. _B≈ìotia_, formerly called _Cadmeis_, is seized
by the _B≈ìotians_.

838. _Cheops_ Reigns in _Egypt_. He built the greatest Pyramid for his
sepulchre, and forbad the worship of the former Kings; intending to have
been worshipped himself.

825. The _Heraclides_, after three Generations, or an hundred years,
reckoned from their former expedition, return into _Peloponnesus_.
Henceforward, to the end of the first _Messenian_ war, reigned ten Kings of
_Sparta_ by one Race, and nine by another; ten of _Messene_, and nine of
_Arcadia_: which, by reckoning (according to the ordinary course of nature)
about twenty years to a Reign, one Reign with another, will take up about
190 years. And the seven Reigns more in one of the two Races of the Kings
of _Sparta_, and eight in the other, to the battle at _Thermopyl√¶_; may
take up 150 years more: and so place the return of the _Heraclides_, about
820 years before _Christ_.

824. _Cephren_ Reigns in _Egypt_, and builds another great Pyramid.

808. _Mycerinus_ Reigns there, and begins the third great Pyramid. He shut
up the body of his daughter in a hollow ox, and caused her to be worshipped
daily with odours.

804. The war, between the _Athenians_ and _Spartans_, in which _Codrus_,
King of the _Athenians_, is slain.

801. _Nitocris_, the sister of _Mycerinus_, succeeds him, and finishes the
third great Pyramid.

794. The _Ionic_ Migration, under the conduct of the sons of _Codrus_.

790. _Pul_ founds the _Assyrian_ Empire.

788. _Asychis_ Reigns in _Egypt_, and builds the eastern Portico of the
Temple of _Vulcan_ very splendidly; and a large Pyramid of brick, made of
mud dug out of the Lake of _M≈ìris_. _Egypt_ breaks into several Kingdoms.
_Gnephactus_ and _Bocchoris_ Reign successively in the upper _Egypt_;
_Stephanathis_; _Necepsos_ and _Nechus_, at _Sais_; _Anysis_ or _Amosis_,
at _Anysis_ or _Hanes_; and _Tacellotis_, at _Bubaste_.

776. _Iphitus_ restores the Olympiads. And from this _√Üra_ the Olympiads
are now reckoned. _Gnephactus_ Reigns at _Memphis_.

772. _Necepsos_ and _Petosiris_ invent Astrology in _Egypt_.

760. _Semiramis_ begins to flourish; _Sanchoniatho_ writes.

751. _Sabacon_ the _Ethiopian_, invades _Egypt_, now divided into various
Kingdoms, burns _Bocchoris_, slays _Nechus_, and makes _Anysis_ fly.

747. _Pul_, King of _Assyria_, dies, and is succeeded at _Nineveh_ by
_Tiglathpilasser_, and at _Babylon_ by _Nabonassar_. The _Egyptians_, who
fled from _Sabacon_, carry their Astrology and Astronomy to _Babylon_, and
found the _√Üra_ of _Nabonassar_ in _Egyptian_ years.

740. _Tiglathpilasser_, King of _Assyria_, takes _Damascus_, and captivates
the _Syrians_.

729. _Tiglathpilasser_ is succeeded by _Salmanasser_.

721. _Salmanasser_, King of _Assyria_, carries the Ten Tribes into
captivity.

719. _Sennacherib_ Reigns over _Assyria_. _Archias_ the son of _Evagetus_,
of the stock of _Hercules_, leads a Colony from _Corinth_ into _Sicily_,
and builds _Syracuse_.

717. _Tirhakah_ Reigns in _Ethiopia_.

714. _Sennacherib_ is put to flight by the _Ethiopians_ and _Egyptians_,
with great slaughter.

711. The _Medes_ revolt from the _Assyrians_. _Sennacherib_ slain.
_Asserhadon_ succeeds him. This is that _Asserhadon-Pul_, or
_Sardanapalus_, the son of _Anacyndaraxis_, or _Sennacherib_, who built
_Tarsus_ and _Anchiale_ in one day.

710. _Lycurgus_, brings the poems of _Homer_ out of _Asia_ into _Greece_.

708. _Lycurgus_, becomes tutor to _Charillus_ or _Charilaus_, the young
King of _Sparta_. _Aristotle_ makes _Lycurgus_ as old as _Iphitus_, because
his name was upon the Olympic Disc. But the Disc was one of the five games
called the _Quinquertium_, and the _Quinquertium_ was first instituted upon
the eighteenth Olympiad. _Socrates_ and _Thucydides_ made the institutions
of _Lycurgus_ about 300 years older than the end of the _Peloponnesian_
war, that is, 705 years before _Christ_.

701. _Sabacon_, after a Reign of 50 years, relinquishes _Egypt_ to his son
_Sevechus_ or _Sethon_, who becomes Priest of _Vulcan_, and neglects
military affairs.

698. _Manasseh_ Reigns.

697. The _Corinthians_ begin first of any men to build ships with three
orders of oars, called _Triremes_. Hitherto the _Greeks_ had used long
vessels of fifty oars.

687. _Tirhakah_ Reigns in _Egypt_.

681. _Asserhadon_ invades _Babylon_.

673. The _Jews_ conquered by _Asserhadon_, and _Manasseh_ carried captive
to _Babylon_.

671. _Asserbadon_ invades _Egypt_. The government of _Egypt_ committed to
twelve princes.

668. The western nations of _Syria_, _Ph≈ìnicia_ and _Egypt_, revolt from
the _Assyrians_. _Asserhadon_ dies, and is succeeded by _Saosduchinus_.
_Manasseh_ returns from Captivity.

658. _Phraortes_ Reigns in _Media_. The _Prytanes_ Reign in _Corinth_,
expelling their Kings.

657. The _Corinthians_ overcome the _Corcyreans_ at sea: and this was the
oldest sea fight.

655. _Psammiticus_ becomes King of all _Egypt_, by conquering the other
eleven Kings with whom he had already reigned fifteen years: he reigned
about 39 years more. Henceforward the _Ionians_ had access into _Egypt_;
and thence came the _Ionian_ Philosophy, Astronomy and Geometry.

652. The first _Messenian_ war begins: it lasted twenty years.

647. _Charops_, the first decennial Archon of the _Athenians_. Some of
these Archons might dye before the end of the ten years, and the remainder
of the ten years be supplied by a new Archon. And hence the seven decennial
Archons might not take up above forty or fifty years. _Saosduchinus_ King
of _Assyria_ dies, and is succeeded by _Chyniladon_.

640. _Josiah_ Reigns in _Jud√¶a_.

636. _Phraortes_> King of the _Medes_, is slain in a war against the
_Assyrians_. _Astyages_ succeeds him.

635. The _Scythians_ invade the _Medes_ and _Assyrians_.

633. _Battus_ builds _Cyrene_, where _Irasa_, the city of _Ant√¶us_, had
stood.

627. _Rome_ is built.

625. _Nabopolassar_ revolts from the King of _Assyria_, and Reigns over
_Babylon_. _Phalantus_ leads the _Parthenians_ into _Italy_, and builds
_Tarentum._

617. _Psammiticus_ dies. _Nechaoh_ reigns in _Egypt_.

611. _Cyaxeres_ Reigns over the _Medes_.

610. The Princes of the _Scythians_ slain in a feast by _Cyaxeres_.

609. _Josiah_ slain. _Cyaxeres_ and _Nebuchadnezzar_ overthrow _Nineveh_,
and, by sharing the _Assyrian_ Empire, grow great.

607. _Creon_ the first annual Archon of the _Athenians_. The second
_Messenian_ war begins. _Cyaxeres_ makes the _Scythians_ retire beyond
_Colchos_ and _Iberia_, and seizes the _Assyrian_ Provinces of _Armenia_,
_Pontus_ and _Cappadocia_.

606. _Nebuchadnezzar_ invades _Syria_ and _Jud√¶a_.

604. _Nabopolassar_ dies, and is succeeded by his Son _Nebuchadnezzar_, who
had already Reigned two years with his father.

600. _Darius_ the _Mede_, the son of _Cyaxeres,_ is born.

599. _Cyrus_ is born of _Mandane_, the Sister of _Cyaxeres_, and daughter
of _Astyages_.

596. _Susiana_ and _Elam_ conquered by _Nebuchadnezzar_. _Caranus_ and
_Perdiccas_ fly from _Phidon_, and found the Kingdom of _Macedon_. _Phidon_
introduces Weights and Measures, and the Coining of Silver Money.

590. _Cyaxeres_ makes war upon _Alyattes_ King of _Lydia_.

588. The Temple of _Solomon_ is burnt by _Nebuchadnezzar_. The _Messenians_
being conquered, fly into _Sicily_, and build _Messana_.

585. In the sixth year of the _Lydian_ war, a total Eclipse of the Sun,
predicted by _Thales_, _May_ the 28th, puts an end to a Battel between the
_Medes_ and _Lydians_: Whereupon they make Peace, and ratify it by a
marriage between _Darius Medus_ the son of _Cyaxeres_, and _Ariene_ the
daughter of _Alyattes_.

584. _Phidon_ presides in the 49th Olympiad.

580. _Phidon_ is overthrown. Two men chosen by lot, out of the city _Elis_,
to preside in the Olympic Games.

572. _Draco_ is Archon of the _Athenians_, and makes laws for them.

568. The _Amphictions_ make war upon the _Cirrheans_, by the advice of
_Solon_, and take _Cirrha_. _Clisthenes_, _Alcm√¶on_ and _Eurolicus_
commanded the forces of the _Amphictions_, and were contemporary to
_Phidon_. For _Leocides_ the son of _Phidon_, and _Megacles_ the son of
_Alcm√¶on,_ at one and the same time, courted _Agarista_ the daughter of
_Clisthenes_.

569. _Nebuchadnezzar_ invades _Egypt_. _Darius_ the _Mede_ Reigns.

562. _Solon_, being Archon of the _Athenians_, makes laws for them.

557. _Periander_ dies, and _Corinth_ becomes free from Tyrants.

555. _Nabonadius_ Reigns at _Babylon_. His Mother _Nitocris_ adorns and
fortifies that City.

550. _Pisistratus_ becomes Tyrant at _Athens._ The Conference between
_Cr≈ìsus_ and _Solon_.

549. _Solon_ dies, _Hegestratus_ being Archon of _Athens_.

544. _Sardes_ is taken by _Cyrus_. _Darius_ the _Mede_ recoins the _Lydian_
money into _Darics_.

538. _Babylon_ is taken by _Cyrus_.

536. _Cyrus_ overcomes _Darius_ the _Mede_, and translates the Empire to
the _Persians_. The _Jews_ return from Captivity, and found the second
Temple.

529. _Cyrus_ dies. _Cambyses_ Reigns,

521. _Darius_ the son of _Hystaspes_ Reigns. The _Magi_ are slain. The
various Religions of the several Nations of _Persia_, which consisted in
the worship of their ancient Kings, are abolished; and by the influence of
_Hystaspes_ and _Zoroaster_, the worship of One God, at Altars, without
Temples is set up in all _Persia_.

520. The second Temple is built at _Jerusalem_ by the command of _Darius_.

515. The second Temple is finished and dedicated.

513. _Harmodius_ and _Aristogiton_, slay _Hipparchus_ the son of
_Pisistratus_, Tyrant of the _Athenians._

508. The Kings of the _Romans_ expelled, and Consuls erected.

491. The Battle of _Marathon_.

485. _Xerxes_ Reigns.

480. The Passage of _Xerxes_ over the _Hellespont_ into _Greece_, and
Battles of _Thermopyl√¶_ and _Salamis_.

464. _Artaxerxes Longimanus_ Reigns.

457. _Ezra_ returns into _Jud√¶a_. _Johanan_ the father of _Jaddua_ was now
grown up, having a chamber in the Temple.

444. _Nehemiah_ returns into _Jud√¶a_. _Herodotus_ writes.

431. The _Peloponnesian_ war begins.

428. _Nehemiah_ drives away _Manasseh_ the brother of _Jaddua_, because he
had married _Nicaso_ the daughter of _Sanballat_.

424. _Darius Nothus_ Reigns.

422. _Sanballat_ builds a Temple in _Mount Gerizim_ and makes his
son-in-law _Manasseh_ the first High-Priest thereof.

412. Hitherto the Priests and Levites were numbered, and written in the
Chronicles of the _Jews_, before the death of _Nehemiah_: at which time
either _Johanan_ or _Jaddua_ was High-Priest, And here Ends the Sacred
History of the _Jews_.

405. _Artaxerxes Mnemon_ Reigns. The end of the _Peloponnesian_ war.

359. _Artaxerxes Ochus_ Reigns.

338. _Arogus_ Reigns.

336. _Darius Codomannus_ Reigns.

332. The _Persian_ Empire conquered by _Alexander_ the great.

331. _Darius Codomannus_, the last King of _Persia_, slain.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE

CHRONOLOGY

OF ANCIENT KINGDOMS AMENDED.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. I.

_Of the Chronology of the First Ages of the _Greeks_._

All Nations, before they began to keep exact accounts of Time, have been
prone to raise their Antiquities; and this humour has been promoted, by the
Contentions between Nations about their Originals. _Herodotus_ [3] tells
us, that the Priests of _Egypt_ reckoned from the Reign of _Menes_ to that
of _Sethon_, who put _Sennacherib_ to flight, three hundred forty and one
Generations of men, and as many Priests of _Vulcan_, and as many Kings of
_Egypt_: and that three hundred Generations make ten thousand years; _for_,
saith he, _three Generations of men make an hundred years_: and the
remaining forty and one Generations make 1340 years: and so the whole time
from the Reign of _Menes_ to that of _Sethon_ was 11340 years. And by this
way of reckoning, and allotting longer Reigns to the Gods of _Egypt_ than
to the Kings which followed them, _Herodotus_ tells us from the Priests of
_Egypt_, that from _Pan_ to _Amosis_ were 15000 years, and from _Hercules_
to _Amosis_ 17000 years. So also the _Chald√¶ans_ boasted of their
Antiquity; for _Callisthenes_, the Disciple of _Aristotle_, sent
Astronomical Observations from _Babylon_ to _Greece_, said to be of 1903
years standing before the times of _Alexander_ the great. And the
_Chald√¶ans_ boasted further, that they had observed the Stars 473000 years;
and there were others who made the Kingdoms of _Assyria_, _Media_ and
_Damascus_, much older than the truth.

Some of the _Greeks_ called the times before the Reign of _Ogyges_,
Unknown, because they had No History of them; those between his flood and
the beginning of the Olympiads, Fabulous, because their History was much
mixed with Poetical Fables: and those after the beginning of the Olympiads,
Historical, because their History was free from such Fables. The fabulous
Ages wanted a good Chronology, and so also did the Historical, for the
first 60 or 70 Olympiads.

The _Europeans_, had no Chronology before the times of the _Persian_
Empire: and whatsoever Chronology they now have of ancienter times, hath
been framed since, by reasoning and conjecture. In the beginning of that
Monarchy, _Acusilaus_ made _Phoroneus_ as old as _Ogyges_ and his flood,
and that flood 1020 years older than the first Olympiad; which is above 680
years older than the truth: and to make out this reckoning his followers
have encreased the Reigns of Kings in length and number. _Plutarch_ [4]
tells us that the Philosophers anciently delivered their Opinions in Verse,
as _Orpheus_, _Hesiod_, _Parmenides_, _Xenophanes_, _Empedocles_, _Thales_;
but afterwards left off the use of Verses; and that _Aristarchus_,
_Timocharis_, _Aristillus_, _Hipparchus_, did not make Astronomy the more
contemptible by describing it in Prose; after _Eudoxus_, _Hesiod_, and
_Thales_ had wrote of it in Verse. _Solon_ wrote [5] in Verse, and all the
Seven Wise Men were addicted to Poetry, as _Anaximenes_ [6] affirmed. 'Till
those days the _Greeks_ wrote only in Verse, and while they did so there
could be no Chronology, nor any other History, than such as was mixed with
poetical fancies. _Pliny_, [7] in reckoning up the Inventors of things,
tells us, _that _Pherecydes Syrius_ taught to compose discourses in Prose
in the Reign of _Cyrus_, and _Cadmus Milesius_ to write History._ And in
[8] another place he saith _that _Cadmus Milesius_ was the first that wrote
in Prose_. _Josephus_ tells us [9] that _Cadmus Milesius_ and _Acusilaus_
were but a little before the expedition of the _Persians_ against the
_Greeks_: and _Suidas_ [10] calls _Acusilaus_ a most ancient Historian, and
saith that _he wrote Genealogies out of tables of brass, which his father,
as was reported, found in a corner of his house_. Who hid them there may be
doubted: For the _Greeks_ [11] had no publick table or inscription older
than the Laws of _Draco_. _Pherecydes Atheniensis_, in the Reign of _Darius
Hystaspis_, or soon after, wrote of the Antiquities and ancient Genealogies
of the _Athenians_, in ten books; and was one of the first _European_
writers of this kind, and one of the best; whence he had the name of
_Genealogus_; and by _Dionysius [12] Halicarnassensis_ is said to be second
to none of the Genealogers. _Epimenides_, not the Philosopher, but an
Historian, wrote also of the ancient Genealogies: and _Hellanicus_, who was
twelve years older than _Herodotus_, digested his History by the Ages or
Successions of the Priestesses of _Juno Argiva_. Others digested theirs by
those of the Archons of _Athens_, or Kings of the _Laced√¶monians_.
_Hippias_ the _Elean_ published a Breviary of the Olympiads, supported by
no certain arguments, as _Plutarch_ [13] tells us: he lived in the 105th
Olympiad, and was derided by _Plato_ for his Ignorance. This Breviary seems
to have contained nothing more than a short account of the Victors in every
Olympiad. Then [14] _Ephorus_, the disciple of _Isocrates_, formed a
Chronological History of _Greece_, beginning with the Return of the
_Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_, and ending with the Siege of _Perinthus_,
in the twentieth year of _Philip_ the father of _Alexander_ the great, that
is, eleven years before the fall of the _Persian_ Empire: but [15] he
digested things by Generations, and the reckoning by the Olympiads, or by
any other _√Üra_, was not yet in use among the _Greeks_. The _Arundelian_
Marbles were composed sixty years after the death of _Alexander_ the great
(_An._ 4. _Olymp._ 128.) and yet mention not the Olympiads, nor any other
standing _√Üra_, but reckon backwards from the time then present. But
Chronology was now reduced to a reckoning by Years; and in the next
Olympiad _Tim√¶us Siculus_ improved it: for he wrote a History in Several
books, down to his own times, according to the Olympiads; comparing the
_Ephori_, the Kings of _Sparta_, the Archons of _Athens_, and the
Priestesses of _Argos_ with the Olympic Victors, so as to make the
Olympiads, and the Genealogies and Successions of Kings and Priestesses,
and the Poetical Histories suit with one another, according to the best of
his judgment: and where he left off, _Polybius_ began, and carried on the
History. _Eratosthenes_ wrote above an hundred years after the death of
_Alexander_ the great: He was followed by _Apollodorus_; and these two have
been followed ever since by Chronologers.

But how uncertain their Chronology is, and how doubtful it was reputed by
the _Greeks_ of those times, may be understood by these passages of
_Plutarch_. _Some reckon _Lycurgus__, saith he, [16] _contemporary to
_Iphitus_, and to have been his companion in ordering the Olympic
festivals, amongst whom was _Aristotle_ the Philosopher; arguing from the
Olympic Disc, which had the name of _Lycurgus_ upon it. Others supputing
the times by the Kings of _Laced√¶mon_, as _Eratosthenes_ and _Apollodorus_,
affirm that he was not a few years older than the first Olympiad._ He began
to flourish in the 17th or 18th Olympiad, and at length _Aristotle_ made
him as old as the first Olympiad; and so did _Epaminondas_, as he is cited
by _√Ülian_ and _Plutarch_: and then _Eratosthenes_, _Apollodorus_, and
their followers, made him above an hundred years older.

And in another place _Plutarch_ [17] tells us: _The Congress of _Solon_
with _Cr≈ìsus_, some think they can confute by Chronology. But a History so
illustrious, and verified by so many witnesses, and which is more, so
agreeable to the manners of _Solon_, and worthy of the greatness of his
mind, and of his wisdom, I cannot persuade my self to reject because of
some Chronological Canons, as they call them, which hundreds of authors
correcting, have not yet been able to constitute any thing certain, in
which they could agree amongst themselves, about repugnancies._

As for the Chronology of the _Latines_, that is still more uncertain.
_Plutarch_ [18] represents great uncertainties in the Originals of _Rome_,
and so doth _Servius_ [19]. The old Records of the _Latines_ were burnt
[20] by the _Gauls_, an hundred and twenty years after the Regifuge, and
sixty-four years before the death of _Alexander_ the great: and _Quintus
Fabius Pictor_, [21] the oldest Historian of the _Latines_, lived an
hundred years later than that King, and took almost all things from
_Diocles Peparethius_, a _Greek_. The Chronologers of _Gallia_, _Spain_,
_Germany_, _Scythia_, _Swedeland_, _Britain_ and _Ireland_ are of a date
still later; for _Scythia_ beyond the _Danube_ had no letters, 'till
_Ulphilas_ their Bishop formed them; which was about six hundred years
after the death of _Alexander_ the great: and _Germany_ had none 'till it
received them, from the western Empire of the _Latines_, above seven
hundred years after the death of that King. The _Hunns_, had none in the
days of _Procopius_, who flourished 850 years after the death of that King:
and _Sweden_ and _Norway_ received them still later. And things said to be
done above one or two hundred years before the use of letters, are of
little credit.

_Diodorus_, [22] in the beginning of his History tells us, that he did not
define by any certain space the times preceding the _Trojan_ War, because
he had no certain foundation to rely upon: but from the _Trojan_ war,
according to the reckoning of _Apollodorus_, whom he followed, there were
eighty years to the Return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_; and
that from that Period to the first Olympiad, there were three hundred and
twenty eight years, computing the times from the Kings of the
_Laced√¶monians_. _Apollodorus_ followed _Eratosthenes_, and both of them
followed _Thucydides_, in reckoning eighty years from the _Trojan_ war to
the Return of the _Heraclides_: but in reckoning 328 years from that Return
to the first Olympiad, _Diodorus_ tells us, that the times were computed
from the Kings of the _Laced√¶monians_; and _Plutarch_ [23] tells us, that
_Apollodorus_, _Eratosthenes_ and others followed that computation: and
since this reckoning is still received by Chronologers, and was gathered by
computing the times from the Kings of the _Laced√¶monians_, that is from
their number, let us re-examin that Computation.

The _Egyptians_ reckoned the Reigns of Kings equipollent to Generations of
men, and three Generations to an hundred years, as above; and so did the
_Greeks_ and _Latines_: and accordingly they have made their Kings Reign
one with another thirty and three years a-piece, and above. For they make
the seven Kings of _Rome_ who preceded the Consuls to have Reigned 244
years, which is 35 years a-piece: and the first twelve Kings of _Sicyon_,
_√Ügialeus_, _Europs_, &c. to have Reigned 529 years, which is 44 years
a-piece: and the first eight Kings of _Argos_, _Inachus_, _Phoroneus_, &c.
to have Reigned 371 years, which is above 46 years a-piece: and between the
Return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_, and the end of the first
_Messenian_ war, the ten Kings of _Sparta_ in one Race; _Eurysthenes_,
_Agis_, _Echestratus_, _Labotas_, _Doryagus_, _Agesilaus_, _Archelaus_,
_Teleclus_, _Alcamenes_, and _Polydorus_: the nine in the other Race;
_Procles_, _Sous_, _Eurypon_, _Prytanis_, _Eunomus_, _Polydectes_,
_Charilaus_, _Nicander_, _Theopompus_: the ten Kings of _Messene_;
_Cresphontes_, _Epytus_, _Glaucus_, _Isthmius_, _Dotadas_, _Sibotas_,
_Phintas_, _Antiochus_, _Euphaes_, _Aristodemus_: and the nine of
_Arcadia_; _Cypselus_, _Ol√¶as_, _Buchalion_, _Phialus_, _Simus_, _Pompus_,
_√Ügineta_, _Polymnestor_, _√Üchmis_, according to Chronologers, took up 379
years: which is 38 years a-piece to the ten Kings, and 42 years a-piece to
the nine. And the five Kings of the Race of _Eurysthenes_, between the end
of the first _Messenian_ war, and the beginning of the Reign of _Darius
Hystaspis_; _Eurycrates_, _Anaxander_, _Eurycrates II_, _Leon_,
_Anaxandrides_, Reigned 202 years, which is above 40 years a-piece.

Thus the _Greek_ Chronologers, who follow _Tim√¶us_ and _Eratosthenes_, have
made the Kings of their several Cities, who lived before the times of the
_Persian_ Empire, to Reign about 35 or 40 years a-piece, one with another;
which is a length so much beyond the course of nature, as is not to be
credited. For by the ordinary course of nature Kings Reign, one with
another, about eighteen or twenty years a-piece: and if in some instances
they Reign, one with another, five or six years longer, in others they
Reign as much shorter: eighteen or twenty years is a medium. So the
eighteen Kings of _Judah_ who succeeded _Solomon_, Reigned 390 years, which
is one with another 22 years a-piece. The fifteen Kings of _Israel_ after
_Solomon_, Reigned 259 years, which is 17¬º years a-piece. The eighteen
Kings of _Babylon_, _Nabonassar_ &c. Reigned 209 years, which is 11‚Öî years
a-piece. The ten Kings of _Persia_; _Cyrus_, _Cambyses_, &c. Reigned 208
years, which is almost 21 years a piece. The sixteen Successors of
_Alexander_ the great, and of his brother and son in _Syria_; _Seleucus_,
_Antiochus Soter_, &c. Reigned 244 years, after the breaking of that
Monarchy into various Kingdoms, which is 15¬º years a-piece. The eleven
Kings of _Egypt_; _Ptolom√¶us Lagi_, &c. Reigned 277 years, counted from the
same Period, which is 25 years a-piece. The eight in _Macedonia_;
_Cassander_, &c. Reigned 138 years, which is 17¬º years a-piece. The thirty
Kings of _England_; _William_ the Conqueror, _William Rufus_, &c. Reigned
648 years, which is 21¬Ω years a-piece. The first twenty four Kings of
_France_; _Pharamundus_, &c. Reigned 458 years, which is 19 years a-piece:
the next twenty four Kings of _France_; _Ludovicus Balbus_, &c. 451 years,
which is 18¬æ years a-piece: the next fifteen, _Philip Valesius_, &c. 315
years, which is 21 years a-piece: and all the sixty three Kings of
_France_, 1224 years, which is 19¬Ω years a-piece. Generations from father
to son, may be reckoned one with another at about 33 or 34 years a-piece,
or about three Generations to an hundred years: but if the reckoning
proceed by the eldest sons, they are shorter, so that three of them may be
reckoned at about 75 or 80 years: and the Reigns of Kings are still
shorter, because Kings are succeeded not only by their eldest sons, but
sometimes by their brothers, and sometimes they are slain or deposed; and
succeeded by others of an equal or greater age, especially in elective or
turbulent Kingdoms. In the later Ages, since Chronology hath been exact,
there is scarce an instance to be found of ten Kings Reigning any where in
continual Succession above 260 years: but _Tim√¶us_ and his followers, and I
think also some of his Predecessors, after the example of the _Egyptians_,
have taken the Reigns of Kings for Generations, and reckoned three
Generations to an hundred, and sometimes to an hundred and twenty years;
and founded the Technical Chronology of the _Greeks_ upon this way of
reckoning. Let the reckoning be reduced to the course of nature, by putting
the Reigns of Kings one with another, at about eighteen or twenty years
a-piece: and the ten Kings of _Sparta_ by one Race, the nine by another
Race, the ten Kings of _Messene_, and the nine of _Arcadia_, above
mentioned, between the Return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_, and
the end of the first _Messenian_ war, will scarce take up above 180 or 190
years: whereas according to Chronologers they took up 379 years.

For confirming this reckoning, I may add another argument. _Euryleon_ the
son of _√Ügeus_, [24] commanded the main body of the _Messenians_ in the
fifth year of the first _Messenian_ war, and was in the fifth Generation
from _Oiolicus_ the son _Theras_, the brother-in-law of _Aristodemus_, and
tutor to his sons _Eurysthenes_ and _Procles_, as _Pausanias_ [25] relates:
and by consequence, from the return of the _Heraclides_, which was in the
days of _Theras_, to the battle which was in the fifth year of this war,
there were six Generations, which, as I conceive, being for the most part
by the eldest sons, will scarce exceed thirty years to a Generation; and so
may amount unto 170 or 180 years. That war lasted 19 or 20 years: add the
last 15 years, and there will be about 190 years to the end of that war:
whereas the followers of _Tim√¶us_ make it about 379 years, which is above
sixty years to a Generation.

By these arguments, Chronologers have lengthned the time, between the
return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_ and the first _Messenian_
war, adding to it about 190 years: and they have also lengthned the time,
between that war and the rise of the _Persian_ Empire. For in the Race of
the _Spartan_ Kings, descended from _Eurysthenes_; after _Polydorus_,
reigned [26] these Kings, _Eurycrates_, _Anaxander_, _Eurycratides_,
_Leon_, _Anaxandrides_, _Clomenes_, _Leonidas_, &c. And in the other Race
descended from _Procles_; after _Theopompus_, reigned [27] these,
_Anaxandrides_, _Archidemus_, _Anaxileus_, _Leutychides_, _Hippocratides_,
_Ariston_, _Demaratus_, _Leutychides_ II. &c. according to _Herodotus_.
These Kings reigned 'till the sixth year of _Xerxes_, in which _Leonidas_
was slain by the _Persians_ at _Thermopyl√¶_; and _Leutychides_ II. soon
after, flying from _Sparta_ to _Tegea_, died there. The seven Reigns of the
Kings of _Sparta_, which follow _Polydorus_, being added to the ten Reigns
above mentioned, which began with that of _Eurysthenes_; make up seventeen
Reigns of Kings, between the return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_
and the sixth year of _Xerxes_: and the eight Reigns following
_Theopompus_, being added to the nine Reigns above mentioned, which began
with that of _Procles_, make up also seventeen Reigns: and these seventeen
Reigns, at twenty years a-piece one with another, amount unto three hundred
and forty years. Count these 340 years upwards from the sixth year of
_Xerxes_, and one or two years more for the war of the _Heraclides_, and
Reign of _Aristodemus_, the father of _Eurysthenes_ and _Procles_; and they
will place the Return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_, 159 years
after the death of _Solomon_, and 46 years before the first Olympiad, in
which _Cor√¶bus_ was victor. But the followers of _Tim√¶us_ have placed this
Return two hundred and eighty years earlier. Now this being the computation
upon which the _Greeks_, as you have heard from _Diodorus_ and _Plutarch_,
have founded the Chronology of their Kingdoms, which were ancienter than
the _Persian_ Empire; that Chronology is to be rectified, by shortening the
times which preceded the death of _Cyrus_, in the proportion of almost two
to one; for the times which follow the death of _Cyrus_ are not much amiss.

The Artificial Chronologers, have made _Lycurgus_, the legislator, as old
as _Iphitus_, the restorer of the Olympiads; and _Iphitus_, an hundred and
twelve years, older than the first Olympiad: and, to help out the
Hypothesis, they have feigned twenty eight Olympiads older than the first
Olympiad, wherein _Cor√¶bus_ was victor. But these things were feigned,
after the days of _Thucydides_ and _Plato_: for _Socrates_ died three years
after the end of the _Peloponnesian_ war, and _Plato_ [28] introduceth him
saying, that _the institutions of _Lycurgus_ were but of three hundred
years standing, or not much more_. And [29] _Thucydides_, in the reading
followed by _Stephanus_, saith, that _the _Laced√¶monians_, had from ancient
times used good laws, and been free from tyranny; and that from the time
that they had used one and the same administration of their commonwealth,
to the end of the _Peloponnesian_ war, there were three hundred years and a
few more_. Count three hundred years back from the end of the
_Peloponnesian_ war, and they will place the Legislature of _Lycurgus_ upon
the 19th Olympiad. And, according to _Socrates_, it might be upon the 22d
or 23d. _Athen√¶us_ [30] tells us out of ancient authors (_Hellanicus_,
_Sosimus_ and _Hieronymus_) that _Lycurgus_ the Legislator, was
contemporary to _Terpander_ the Musician; and that _Terpander_ was the
first man who got the victory in the _Carnea_, in a solemnity of music
instituted in those festivals in the 26th Olympiad. He overcame four times
in those _Pythic_ games, and therefore lived at least 'till the 29th
Olympiad: and beginning to flourish in the days of _Lycurgus_, it is not
likely that _Lycurgus_ began to flourish, much before the 18th Olympiad.
The name of _Lycurgus_ being on the Olympic Disc, _Aristotle_ concluded
thence, that _Lycurgus_ was the companion of _Iphitus_, in restoring the
Olympic games: and this argument might be the ground of the opinion of
Chronologers, that _Lycurgus_ and _Iphitus_ were contemporary. But
_Iphitus_ did not restore all the Olympic games. He [31] restored indeed
the Racing in the first Olympiad, _Cor√¶bus_ being victor. In the 14th
Olympiad, the double _stadium_ was added, _Hyp√¶nus_ being victor. And in
the 18th Olympiad the _Quinquertium_ and Wrestling were added, _Lampus_ and
_Eurybatus_, two _Spartans_, being victors: And the Disc was one of the
games of the _Quinquertium_. [32] _Pausanias_ tells us that there were
three Discs kept in the Olympic treasury at _Altis_: these therefore having
the name of _Lycurgus_ upon them, shew that they were given by him, at the
institution of the _Quinquertium_, in the 18th Olympiad. Now _Polydectes_
King of _Sparta_, being slain before the birth of his son _Charillus_ or
_Charilaus_, left the Kingdom to _Lycurgus_ his brother; and _Lycurgus_,
upon the birth of _Charillus_, became tutor to the child; and after about
eight months travelled into _Crete_ and _Asia_, till the child grew up, and
brought back with him the poems of _Homer_; and soon after published his
laws, suppose upon the 22d or 23d Olympiad; for he was then growing old:
and _Terpander_ was a Lyric Poet, and began to flourish about this time;
for [33] he imitated _Orpheus_ and _Homer_, and sung _Homer's_ verses and
his own, and wrote the laws of _Lycurgus_ in verse, and was victor in the
_Pythic_ games in the 26th Olympiad, as above. He was the first who
distinguished the modes of Lyric music by several names. _Ardalus_ and
_Clonas_ soon after did the like for wind music: and from henceforward, by
the encouragement of the _Pythic_ games, now instituted, several eminent
Musicians and Poets flourished in _Greece_: as _Archilochus_, _Eumelus
Corinthius_, _Polymnestus_, _Thaletas_, _Xenodemus_, _Xenocritus_,
_Sacadas_, _Tyrt√¶us_, _Tlesilla_, _Rhianus_, _Alcman_, _Arion_,
_Stesichorus_, _Mimnermnus_, _Alc√¶us_, _Sappho_, _Theognis_, _Anacreon_,
_Ibycus_, _Simonides_, _√Üschylus_, _Pindar_, by whom the Music and Poetry
of the _Greeks_ were brought to perfection.

_Lycurgus_, published his laws in the Reign of _Agesilaus_, the son and
successor of _Doryagus_, in the Race of the Kings of _Sparta_ descended
from _Eurysthenes_. From the Return of the _Heraclides_ into
_Peloponnesus_, to the end of the Reign of _Agesilaus_, there were six
Reigns: and from the same Return to the end of the Reign of _Polydectes_,
in the Race of the _Spartan_ Kings descended from _Procles_, there were
also six Reigns: and these Reigns, at twenty years a-piece one with
another, amount unto 120 years; besides the short Reign of _Aristodemus_,
the father of _Eurysthenes_ and _Procles_, which might amount to a year or
two: for _Aristodemus_ came to the crown, as [34] _Herodotus_ and the
_Laced√¶monians_ themselves affirmed. The times of the deaths of _Agesilaus_
and _Polydectes_ are not certainly known: but it may be presumed that
_Lycurgus_ did not meddle with the Olympic games before he came to the
Kingdom; and therefore _Polydectes_ died in the beginning of the 18th
Olympiad, or but a very little before. If it may be supposed that the 20th
Olympiad was in, or very near to the middle time between the deaths of the
two Kings _Polydectes_ and _Agesilaus_, and from thence be counted upwards
the aforesaid 120 years, and one year more for the Reign of _Aristodemus_;
the reckoning will place the Return of the _Heraclides_, about 45 years
before the beginning of the Olympiads.

_Iphitus_, who restored the Olympic games, [35] was descended from
_Oxylus_, the son of _H√¶mon_, the son of _Thoas_, the son of _Andr√¶mon_:
_Hercules_ and _Andr√¶mon_ married two sisters: _Thoas_ warred at _Troy_:
_Oxylus_ returned into _Peloponnesus_ with the _Heraclides_. In this return
he commanded the body of the _√Ütolians_, and recovered _Elea_; [36] from
whence his ancestor _√Ütolus_, the son of _Endymion_, the son of _Aethlius_,
had been driven by _Salmoneus_ the grandson of _Hellen_. By the friendship
of the _Heraclides_, _Oxylus_ had the care of the Olympic Temple committed
to him: and the _Heraclides_, for his service done them, granted further
upon oath that the country of the _Eleans_ should be free from invasions,
and be defended by them from all armed force: And when the _Eleans_ were
thus consecrated, _Oxylus_ restored the Olympic games: and after they had
been again intermitted, _Iphitus_ their King [37] restored them, and made
them quadrennial. _Iphitus_ is by some reckoned the son of _H√¶mon_, by
others the son of _Praxonidas_, the son of _H√¶mon_: but _H√¶mon_ being the
father of _Oxylus_, I would reckon _Iphitus_ the son of _Praxonidas_, the
son of _Oxylus_, the son of _H√¶mon_. And by this reckoning the Return of
the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_ will be two Generations by the eldest
sons, or about 52 years, before the Olympiads.

_Pausanias_ [38] represents that _Melas_ the son of _Antissus_, of the
posterity of _Gonussa_ the daughter of _Sicyon_, was not above six
Generations older than _Cypselus_ King of _Corinth_; and that he was
contemporary to _Aletes_, who returned with the _Heraclides_ into
_Peloponnesus_. The Reign of _Cypselus_ began _An._ 2, Olymp. 31, according
to Chronologers; and six Generations, at about 30 years to a Generation,
amount unto 180 years. Count those years backwards from _An._ 2, Olymp. 31,
and they will place the Return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_ 58
years before the first Olympiad. But it might not be so early, if the Reign
of _Cypselus_ began three or four Olympiads later; for he reigned before
the _Persian_ Empire began.

_Hercules_ the _Argonaut_ was the father of _Hyllus_; the father of
_Cleodius_; the father of _Aristomachus_; the father of _Temenus_,
_Cresphontes_, and _Aristodemus_, who led the _Heraclides_ into
_Peloponnesus_ and _Eurystheus_, who was of the same age with _Hercules_,
was slain in the first attempt of the _Heraclides_ to return: _Hyllus_ was
slain in the second attempt, _Cleodius_ in the third attempt,
_Aristomachus_ in the fourth attempt, and _Aristodemus_ died as soon as
they were returned, and left the Kingdom of _Sparta_ to his sons
_Eurysthenes_ and _Procles_. Whence their Return was four Generations later
than the _Argonautic_ expedition: And these Generations were short ones,
being by the chief of the family, and suit with the reckoning of
_Thucydides_ and the Ancients, that the taking of _Troy_ was about 75 or
eighty years before the return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_; and
the _Argonautic_ expedition one Generation earlier than the taking of
_Troy_. Count therefore eighty years backward from the Return of the
_Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_ to the _Trojan_ war, and the taking of
_Troy_ will be about 76 years after the death of _Solomon_: And the
_Argonautic_ expedition, which was one Generation earlier, will be about 43
years after it. From the taking of _Troy_ to the Return of the
_Heraclides_, could scarce be more than eighty years, because _Orestes_ the
son of _Agamemnon_ was a youth at the taking of _Troy_, and his sons
_Penthilus_ and _Tisamenus_ lived till the Return of the _Heraclides_.

_√Üsculapius_ and _Hercules_ were _Argonauts_, and _Hippocrates_ was the
eighteenth inclusively by the father's side from _√Üsculapius_, and the
nineteenth from _Hercules_ by the mother's side: and because these
Generations, being taken notice of by writers, were most probably by the
principal of the family, and so for the most part by the eldest sons; we
may reckon about 28 or at the most about 30 years to a Generation. And thus
the seventeen intervals by the father's side, and eighteen by the mother's,
will at a middle reckoning amount unto about 507 years: which counted
backwards from the beginning of the _Peloponnesian_ war, at which time
_Hippocrates_ began to flourish, will reach up to the 43d year after the
death of _Solomon_, and there place the _Argonautic_ expedition.

When the _Romans_ conquered the _Carthaginians_, the Archives of _Carthage_
came into their hands: And thence _Appian_, in his history of the _Punic_
wars, tells in round numbers that _Carthage_ stood seven hundred years: and
[39] _Solinus_ adds the odd number of years in these words: _Adrymeto atque
Carthagini author est a Tyro populus. Urbem istam, ut Cato in Oratione
Senatoria autumat; cum rex Hiarbas rerum in Libya potiretur, Elissa mulier
extruxit, domo Ph≈ìnix & Carthadam dixit, quod Ph≈ìnicum ore exprimit
civitatem novam; mox sermone verso Carthago dicta est, qu√¶ post annos
septingentos triginta septem exciditur quam fuerat extructa_. _Elissa_ was
_Dido_, and _Carthage_ was destroyed in the Consulship of _Lentulus_ and
_Mummius_, in the year of the _Julian Period_ 4568; from whence count
backwards _737_ years, and the _Enc√¶nia_ or Dedication of the City, will
fall upon the 16th year of _Pygmalion_, the brother of _Dido_, and King of
_Tyre_. She fled in the seventh year of _Pygmalion_, but the _√Üra_ of the
City began with its _Enc√¶nia_. Now _Virgil_, and his Scholiast _Servius_,
who might have some things from the archives of _Tyre_ and _Cyprus_, as
well as from those of _Carthage_, relate that _Teucer_ came from the war of
_Troy_ to _Cyprus_, in the days of _Dido_, a little before the Reign of her
brother _Pygmalion_; and, in conjunction with her father, seized _Cyprus_,
and ejected _Cinyras_: and the Marbles say that _Teucer_ came to _Cyprus_
seven years after the destruction of _Troy_, and built _Salamis_; and
_Apollodorus_, that _Cinyras_ married _Metharme_ the daughter of
_Pygmalion_, and built _Paphos_. Therefore, if the _Romans_, in the days of
_Augustus_, followed not altogether the artificial Chronology of
_Eratosthenes_, but had these things from the records of _Carthage_,
_Cyprus_, or _Tyre_; the arrival of _Teucer_ at _Cyprus_ will be in the
Reign of the predecessor of _Pygmalion_: and by consequence the destruction
of _Troy_, about 76 years later than the death of _Solomon_.

_Dionysius Halicarnassensis_ [40] tells us, that in the time of the
_Trojan_ war, _Latinus_ was King of the _Aborigines_ in _Italy_, and that
in the sixteenth Age after that war, _Romulus_ built _Rome_. By Ages he
means Reigns of Kings: for after _Latinus_ he names sixteen Kings of the
_Latines_, the last of which was _Numitor_, in whose days _Romulus_ built
_Rome_: for _Romulus_ was contemporary to _Numitor_, and after him
_Dionysius_ and others reckon six Kings more over _Rome_, to the beginning
of the Consuls. Now these twenty and two Reigns, at about 18 years to a
Reign one with another, for many of these Kings were slain, took up 396
years; which counted back from the consulship of _Junius Brutus_ and
_Valerius Publicola_, the two first Consuls, place the _Trojan_ war about
78 years after the death of _Solomon_.

The expedition of _Sesostris_ was one Generation earlier than the
_Argonautic_ expedition: for in his return back into _Egypt_ he left
_√Üetes_ in _Colchis_, and _√Üetes_ reigned there 'till the _Argonautic_
expedition; and _Prometheus_ was left by _Sesostris_ with a body of men at
_Mount Caucasus_, to guard that pass, and after thirty years was released
by _Hercules_ the _Argonaut_: and _Phlyas_ and _Eumedon_, the sons of the
great _Bacchus_, so the Poets call _Sesostris_, and of _Ariadne_ the
daughter of _Minos_, were _Argonauts_. At the return of _Sesostris_ into
_Egypt_, his brother _Danaus_ fled from him into _Greece_ with his fifty
daughters, in a long ship; after the pattern of which the ship _Argo_ was
built: and _Argus_, the son of _Danaus_, was the master-builder thereof.
_Nauplius_ the _Argonaut_ was born in _Greece_, of _Amymone_, one of the
daughters of _Danaus_, and of _Neptune_, the brother and admiral of
_Sesostris_: And two others of the daughters of _Danaus_ married
_Archander_ and _Archilites_, the sons of _Ach√¶us_, the son of _Creusa_,
the daughter of _Erechtheus_ King of _Athens_: and therefore the daughters
of _Danaus_ were three Generations younger than _Erechtheus_; and by
consequence contemporary to _Theseus_ the son of _√Ügeus_, the adopted son
of _Pandion_, the son of _Erechtheus_. _Theseus_, in the time of the
_Argonautic_ expedition, was of about 50 years of age, and so was born
about the 33d year of _Solomon_: for he stole _Helena_ [41] just before
that expedition, being then 50 years old, and she but seven, or as some say
ten. _Pirithous_ the son of _Ixion_ helped _Theseus_ to steal _Helena_, and
then [42] _Theseus_ went with _Pirithous_ to steal _Persephone_, the
daughter of _Aidoneus_, or _Orcus_, King of the _Molossians_, and was taken
in the action: and whilst he lay in prison, _Castor_ and _Pollux_ returning
from the _Argonautic_ expedition, released their sister _Helena_, and
captivated _√Üthra_ the mother of _Theseus_. Now the daughters of _Danaus_
being contemporary to _Theseus_, and some of their sons being _Argonauts_,
_Danaus_ with his daughters fled from his brother _Sesostris_ into _Greece_
about one Generation before the _Argonautic_ expedition; and therefore
_Sesostris_ returned into _Egypt_ in the Reign of _Rehoboam_. He came out
of _Egypt_ in the fifth year of _Rehoboam_, [43] and spent nine years in
that expedition, against the Eastern Nations and _Greece_; and therefore
returned back into _Egypt_, in the fourteenth year of _Rehoboam_. _Sesac_
and _Sesostris_ were therefore Kings of all _Egypt_, at one and the same
time: and they agree not only in the time, but also in their actions and
conquests. God gave _Sesac_ ◊û◊û◊ú◊õ◊ï◊™ ◊î◊ê◊®◊¶◊ï◊™ _the Kingdoms of the lands_, 2
Chron. xii. Where _Herodotus_ describes the expedition of _Sesostris_,
_Josephus_ [44] tells us that he described the expedition of _Sesac_, and
attributed his actions to _Sesostris_, erring only in the name of the King.
Corruptions of names are frequent in history; _Sesostris_ was otherwise
called _Sesochris_, _Sesochis_, _Sesoosis_, _Sethosis_, _Sesonchis_,
_Sesonchosis_. Take away the _Greek_ termination, and the names become
_Sesost_, _Sesoch_, _Sesoos_, _Sethos_, _Sesonch_: which names differ very
little from _Sesach_. _Sesonchis_ and _Sesach_ differ no more than
_Memphis_ and _Moph_, two names of the same city. _Josephus_ [45] tells us
also, from _Manetho_, that _Sethosis_ was the brother of _Armais_, and that
these brothers were otherwise called _√Ügyptus_ and _Danaus_; and that upon
the return of _Sethosis_ or _√Ügyptus_, from his great conquests into
_Egypt_, _Armais_ or _Danaus_ fled from him into _Greece_.

_Egypt_ was at first divided into many small Kingdoms, like other nations;
and grew into one monarchy by degrees: and the father of _Solomon's_ Queen,
was the first King of _Egypt_, who came into _Ph≈ìnicia_ with an Army: but
he only took _Gezir_, and gave it to his daughter. _Sesac_, the next King,
came out of _Egypt_ with an army of _Libyans_, _Troglodites_ and
_Ethiopians_, 2 Chron. xii. 3. and therefore was then King of all those
countries; and we do not read in Scripture, that any former King of
_Egypt_; who Reigned over all those nations, came out of _Egypt_ with a
great army to conquer other countries. The sacred history of the
_Israelites_, from the days of _Abraham_ to the days of _Solomon_, admits
of no such conqueror. _Sesostris_ reigned over all the same nations of the
_Libyans_, _Troglodites_ and _Ethiopians_, and came out of _Egypt_ with a
great army to conquer other Kingdoms. The Shepherds reigned long in the
lower part of _Egypt_, and were expelled thence, just before the building
of _Jerusalem_ and the Temple; according to _Manetho_; and whilst they
Reigned in the lower part of _Egypt_, the upper part thereof was under
other Kings: and while _Egypt_ was divided into several Kingdoms, there was
no room for any such King of all _Egypt_ as _Sesostris_; and no historian
makes him later than _Sesac_: and therefore he was one and the same King of
_Egypt_ with _Sesac_. This is no new opinion: _Josephus_ discovered it when
he affirmed that _Herodotus_ erred, in ascribing the actions of _Sesac_ to
_Sesostris_, and that the error was only in the name of the King: for this
is as much as to say, that the true name of him who did those things
described by _Herodotus_, was _Sesac_; and that _Herodotus_ erred only in
calling him _Sesostris_; or that he was called _Sesostris_ by a corruption
of his name. Our great Chronologer, _Sir John Marsham_, was also of opinion
that _Sesostris_ was _Sesac_: and if this be granted, it is then most
certain, that _Sesostris_ came out of _Egypt_ in the fifth year of
_Rehoboam_ to invade the nations, and returned back into _Egypt_ in the
14th year of that King; and that _Danaus_ then flying from his brother,
came into _Greece_ within a year or two after: and the _Argonautic_
expedition being one Generation later than that invasion, and than the
coming of _Danaus_ into _Greece_, was certainly about 40 or 45 years later
than the death of _Solomon_. _Prometheus_ stay'd on _Mount Caucasus_ [46]
thirty years, and then was released by _Hercules_: and therefore the
_Argonautic_ expedition was thirty years after _Prometheus_ had been left
on _Mount Caucasus_ by _Sesostris_, that is, about 44 years after the death
of _Solomon_.

All nations, before the just length of the Solar year was known, reckoned
months by the course of the moon; and years by the [47] returns of winter
and summer, spring and autumn: and in making Calendars for their Festivals,
reckoned thirty days to a Lunar month, and twelve Lunar months to a year;
taking the nearest round numbers: whence came the division of the Ecliptic
into 360 degrees. So in the time of _Noah_'s flood, when the Moon could not
be seen, _Noah_ reckoned thirty days to a month: but if the Moon appeared a
day or two before the end of the month, [48] they began the next month with
the first day of her appearing: and this was done generally, 'till the
_Egyptians_ of _Thebais_ found the length of the Solar year. So [49]
_Diodorus_ tells us that _the _Egyptians_ of _Thebais_ use no intercalary
months, nor subduct any days_ [from the month] _as is done by most of the
_Greeks__. And [50] _Cicero_, _est consuetudo Siculorum c√¶terorumque
Gr√¶corum, quod suos dies mensesque congruere volunt cum Solis Lun√¶que
ratione, ut nonnumquam siquid discrepet, eximant unum aliquem diem aut
summum biduum ex mense_ [civili dierum triginta] _quos illi_ ŒµŒæŒ±ŒπœÅŒµœÉŒπŒºŒøœÖœÇ
_dies nominant_. And _Proclus_, upon _Hesiod_'s œÑœÅŒπŒ±Œ∫Œ±œÇ mentions the same
thing. And [51] _Geminus_: Œ†œÅŒøŒ∏ŒµœÉŒπœÇ Œ≥Œ±œÅ Œ∑ŒΩ œÑŒøŒπœÇ Œ±œÅœáŒ±ŒπŒøŒπœÇ, œÑŒøœÖœÇ ŒºŒµŒΩ ŒºŒ∑ŒΩŒ±œÇ
Œ±Œ≥ŒµŒπŒΩ Œ∫Œ±œÑŒ± œÉŒµŒªŒ∑ŒΩŒ∑ŒΩ, œÑŒøœÖœÇ Œ¥Œµ ŒµŒΩŒπŒ±œÖœÑŒøœÖœÇ Œ∫Œ±Œ∏' ‚ÄõŒ∑ŒªŒπŒøŒΩ. Œ§Œø Œ≥Œ±œÅ ‚ÄõœÖœÄŒø œÑœâŒΩ ŒΩŒøŒºœâŒΩ,
Œ∫Œ±Œπ œÑœâŒΩ œáœÅŒ∑œÉŒºœâŒΩ œÄŒ±œÅŒ±Œ≥Œ≥ŒµŒªŒªŒøŒºŒµŒΩŒøŒΩ, œÑŒø Œ∏œÖŒµŒπŒΩ Œ∫Œ±œÑŒ± Œ≥', Œ∑Œ≥ŒøœÖŒΩ œÑŒ± œÄŒ±œÑœÅŒπŒ±, ŒºŒ∑ŒΩŒ±œÇ,
‚ÄõŒ∑ŒºŒµœÅŒ±œÇ, ŒµŒΩŒπŒ±œÖœÑŒøœÖœÇ: œÑŒøœÖœÑŒø Œ¥ŒπŒµŒªŒ±Œ≤ŒøŒΩ Œ±œÄŒ±ŒΩœÑŒµœÇ ‚ÄõŒøŒπ ‚ÄõŒïŒªŒªŒ∑ŒΩŒµœÇ œÑœâŒπ œÑŒøœÖœÇ ŒºŒµŒΩ
‚ÄõŒµŒΩŒπŒ±œÖœÑŒøœÖœÇ œÉœÖŒºœÜœâŒΩœâœÇ Œ±Œ≥ŒµŒπŒΩ œÑœâŒπ ‚ÄõŒ∑ŒªŒπœâŒπŒá œÑŒ±œÇ Œ¥Œµ ‚ÄõŒ∑ŒºŒµœÅŒ±œÇ Œ∫Œ±Œπ œÑŒøœÖœÇ ŒºŒ∑ŒΩŒ±œÇ œÑŒ∑Œπ
œÉŒµŒªŒ∑ŒΩŒ∑. ŒµœÉœÑŒπ Œ¥Œµ œÑŒø ŒºŒµŒΩ Œ∫Œ±Œ∏' ‚ÄõŒ∑ŒªŒπŒøŒΩ Œ±Œ≥ŒµŒπŒΩ œÑŒøœÖœÇ ŒµŒΩŒπŒ±œÖœÑŒøœÖœÇ, œÑŒø œÄŒµœÅŒπ œÑŒ±œÇ Œ±œÖœÑŒ±œÇ
‚ÄõœâœÅŒ±œÇ œÑŒøœÖ ŒµŒΩŒπŒ±œÖœÑŒøœÖ œÑŒ±œÇ Œ±œÖœÑŒ±œÇ Œ∏œÖœÉŒπŒ±œÇ œÑŒøŒπœÇ Œ∏ŒµŒøŒπœÇ ŒµœÄŒπœÑŒµŒªŒµŒπŒ∏Œ±Œπ, Œ∫Œ±Œπ œÑŒ∑ŒΩ ŒºŒµŒΩ
ŒµŒ±œÅŒπŒΩŒ∑ŒΩ Œ∏œÖœÉŒπŒ±ŒΩ Œ¥ŒπŒ± œÄŒ±ŒΩœÑŒøœÇ Œ∫Œ±œÑŒ± œÑŒø ŒµŒ±œÅ œÉœÖŒΩœÑŒµŒªŒµŒπŒ∏Œ±ŒπŒá œÑŒ∑ŒΩ Œ¥Œµ Œ∏ŒµœÅŒπŒΩŒ∑ŒΩ, Œ∫Œ±œÑŒ± œÑŒø
Œ∏ŒµœÅŒøœÇŒá ‚ÄõŒøŒºŒøŒπœâœÇ Œ¥Œµ Œ∫Œ±Œπ Œ∫Œ±œÑŒ± œÑŒøœÖœÇ ŒªŒøŒπœÄŒøœÖœÇ Œ∫Œ±ŒπœÅŒøœÖœÇ œÑŒøœÖ ŒµœÑŒøœÖœÇ œÑŒ±œÇ Œ±œÖœÑŒ±œÇ Œ∏œÖœÉŒπŒ±œÇ
œÄŒπœÄœÑŒµŒπŒΩ. Œ§ŒøœÖœÑŒø Œ≥Œ±œÅ ‚ÄõœÖœÄŒµŒªŒ±Œ≤ŒøŒΩ œÄœÅŒøœÉŒ∑ŒΩŒµœÇ, Œ∫Œ±Œπ Œ∫ŒµœáŒ±œÅŒπœÉŒºŒµŒΩŒøŒΩ ŒµŒπŒΩŒ±Œπ œÑŒøŒπœÇ Œ∏ŒµŒøŒπœÇ.
Œ§ŒøœÖœÑŒø Œ¥' Œ±ŒªŒªœâœÇ ŒøœÖŒ∫ Œ±ŒΩ Œ¥œÖŒΩŒ±ŒπœÑŒø Œ≥ŒµŒΩŒµœÉŒ∏Œ±Œπ, ŒµŒπ ŒºŒ∑ ‚ÄõŒ±Œπ œÑœÅŒøœÄŒ±Œπ, Œ∫Œ±Œπ ‚ÄõŒ±Œπ ŒπœÉŒ∑ŒºŒµœÅŒπŒ±Œπ
œÄŒµœÅŒπ œÑŒøœÖœÇ Œ±œÖœÑŒøœÖœÇ œÑŒøœÄŒøœÖœÇ Œ≥ŒπŒ≥ŒΩŒøŒπŒΩœÑŒø. Œ§Œø Œ¥Œµ Œ∫Œ±œÑŒ± œÉŒµŒªŒ∑ŒΩŒ∑ŒΩ Œ±Œ≥ŒµŒπŒΩ œÑŒ±œÇ ‚ÄõŒ∑ŒºŒµœÅŒ±œÇ,
œÑŒøŒπŒøœÖœÑŒøŒΩ ŒµœÉœÑŒπŒá œÑŒø Œ±Œ∫ŒøŒªŒøœÖŒ∏œâœÇ œÑŒøŒπœÇ œÑŒ∑œÇ œÉŒµŒªŒ∑ŒΩŒ∑œÇ œÜœâœÑŒπœÉŒºŒøŒπœÇ œÑŒ±œÇ œÄœÅŒøœÉŒ∑Œ≥ŒøœÅŒπŒ±œÇ œÑœâŒΩ
‚ÄõŒ∑ŒºŒµœÅœâŒΩ Œ≥ŒπŒΩŒµœÉŒ∏Œ±Œπ. Œ±œÄŒø Œ≥Œ±œÅ œÑœâŒΩ œÑŒ∑œÇ œÉŒµŒªŒ∑ŒΩŒ∑œÇ œÜœâœÑŒπœÉŒºœâŒΩ ‚ÄõŒ±Œπ œÄœÅŒøœÉŒ∑Œ≥ŒøœÅŒπŒ±Œπ œÑœâŒΩ
‚ÄõŒ∑ŒºŒµœÅœâŒΩ Œ∫Œ±œÑœâŒΩŒøŒºŒ±œÉŒ∏Œ∑œÉŒ±ŒΩ. ŒïŒΩ ‚ÄõŒ∑Œπ ŒºŒµŒΩ Œ≥Œ±œÅ ‚ÄõŒ∑ŒºŒµœÅŒ±Œπ ŒΩŒµŒ± ‚ÄõŒ∑ œÉŒµŒªŒ∑ŒΩŒ∑ œÜŒ±ŒπŒΩŒµœÑŒ±Œπ, Œ∫Œ±œÑŒ±
œÉœÖŒΩŒ±ŒªŒøŒπœÜŒ∑ŒΩ ŒΩŒµŒøŒºŒ∑ŒΩŒπŒ± œÄœÅŒøœÉŒ∑Œ≥ŒøœÅŒµœÖŒ∏Œ∑Œá ŒµŒΩ ‚ÄõŒ∑Œπ Œ¥Œµ ‚ÄõŒ∑ŒºŒµœÅŒ±Œπ œÑŒ∑ŒΩ Œ¥ŒµœÖœÑŒµœÅŒ±ŒΩ œÜŒ±œÉŒπŒΩ
œÄŒøŒπŒµŒπœÑŒ±Œπ, Œ¥ŒµœÖœÑŒµœÅŒ±ŒΩ œÄœÅŒøœÉŒ∑Œ≥ŒøœÅŒµœÖœÉŒ±ŒΩŒá œÑŒ∑ŒΩ Œ¥Œµ Œ∫Œ±œÑŒ± ŒºŒµœÉŒøŒΩ œÑŒøœÖ ŒºŒ∑ŒΩŒøœÇ Œ≥ŒπŒΩŒøŒºŒµŒΩŒ∑ŒΩ
œÜŒ±œÉŒπŒΩ œÑŒ∑œÇ œÉŒµŒªŒ∑ŒΩŒ∑œÇ, Œ±œÄŒø Œ±œÖœÑŒøœÖ œÑŒøœÖ œÉœÖŒºŒ≤Œ±ŒπŒΩŒøŒΩœÑŒøœÇ Œ¥ŒπœáŒøŒºŒ∑ŒΩŒπŒ±ŒΩ ŒµŒ∫Œ±ŒªŒµœÉŒ±ŒΩ. Œ∫Œ±Œπ
Œ∫Œ±Œ∏ŒøŒªŒøœÖ Œ¥Œµ œÄŒ±œÉŒ±œÇ œÑŒ±œÇ ‚ÄõŒ∑ŒºŒµœÅŒ±œÇ Œ±œÄŒø œÑœâŒΩ œÑŒ∑œÇ œÉŒµŒªŒ∑ŒΩŒ∑œÇ œÜœâœÑŒπœÉŒºŒ±œÑœâŒΩ œÄœÅŒøœÉœâŒΩŒøŒºŒ±œÉŒ±ŒΩ.
‚ÄõŒøŒ∏ŒµŒΩ Œ∫Œ±Œπ œÑŒ∑ŒΩ œÑœÅŒπŒ±Œ∫ŒøœÉœÑŒ∑ŒΩ œÑŒøœÖ ŒºŒ∑ŒΩŒøœÇ ‚ÄõŒ∑ŒºŒµœÅŒ±ŒΩ ŒµœÉœáŒ±œÑŒ∑ŒΩ ŒøœÖœÉŒ±ŒΩ Œ±œÄŒø Œ±œÖœÑŒøœÖ œÑŒøœÖ
œÉœÖŒºŒ≤Œ±ŒπŒΩŒøŒΩœÑŒøœÇ œÑœÅŒπŒ±Œ∫Œ±Œ¥Œ± ŒµŒ∫Œ±ŒªŒµœÉŒ±ŒΩ. _Propositum enim fuit veteribus, menses
quidem agere secundum Lunam, annos vero secundum Solem. Quod enim a legibus
& Oraculis pr√¶cipiebatur, ut sacrificarent secundum tria, videlicet patria,
menses, dies, annos; hoc ita distincte faciebant universi Gr√¶ci, ut annos
agerent congruenter cum Sole, dies vero & menses cum Luna. Porro secundum
Solem annos agere, est circa easdem tempestates anni eadem sacrificia Diis
perfici, & vernum sacrificium semper in vere consummari, √¶stivum autem in
√¶state: similiter & in reliquis anni temporibus eadem sacrificia cadere.
Hoc enim putabant acceptum & gratum esse Diis. Hoc autem aliter fieri non
posset nisi conversiones solstitiales & √¶quinoctia in iisdem Zodiaci locis
fierent. Secundum Lunam vero dies agere est tale ut congruant cum Lun√¶
illuminationibus appellationes dierum. Nam a Lun√¶ illuminationibus
appellationes dierum sunt denominat√¶. In qua enim die Luna apparet nova, ea
per Synal≈ìphen, seu compositionem ŒΩŒµŒøŒºŒ∑ŒΩŒπŒ± id est, Novilunium appellatur.
In qua vero die secundam facit apparitionem, eam secundam Lunam vocarunt.
Apparitionem Lun√¶ qu√¶ circa medium mensis fit, ab ipso eventu Œ¥ŒπœáŒøŒºŒ∑ŒΩŒπŒ±ŒΩ,
id est medietatem mensis nominarunt. Ac summatim, omnes dies a Lun√¶
illuminationibus denominarunt. Unde etiam tricesimam mensis diem, cum
ultima sit, ab ipso eventu œÑœÅŒπŒ±Œ∫Œ±Œ¥Œ± vocarunt_.

The ancient Calendar year of the _Greeks_ consisted therefore of twelve
Lunar months, and every month of thirty days: and these years and months
they corrected from time to time, by the courses of the Sun and Moon,
omitting a day or two in the month, as often as they found the month too
long for the course of the Moon; and adding a month to the year, as often
as they found the twelve Lunar months too short for the return of the four
seasons. _Cleobulus_, [52] one of the seven wise men of _Greece_, alluded
to this year of the _Greeks_, in his Parable of one father who had twelve
sons, each of which had thirty daughters half white and half black: and
_Thales_ [53] called the last day of the month œÑœÅŒπŒ±Œ∫Œ±Œ¥Œ±, the thirtieth: and
_Solon_ counted the ten last days of the month backward from the thirtieth,
calling that day ŒµŒΩŒ∑ŒΩ Œ∫Œ±Œπ ŒΩŒµŒ±ŒΩ, the old and the new, or the last day of the
old month and the first day of the new: for he introduced months of 29 and
30 days alternately, making the thirtieth day of every other month to be
the first day of the next month.

To the twelve Lunar months [54] the ancient _Greeks_ added a thirteenth,
every other year, which made their _Dieteris_; and because this reckoning
made their year too long by a month in eight years, they omitted an
intercalary month once in eight years, which made their _Octaeteris_, one
half of which was their _Tetraeteris_: And these Periods seem to have been
almost as old as the religions of _Greece_, being used in divers of their
_Sacra_. The [55] _Octaeteris_ was the _Annus magnus_ of _Cadmus_ and
_Minos_, and seems to have been brought into _Greece_ and _Crete_ by the
_Ph≈ìnicians_, who came thither with _Cadmus_ and _Europa_, and to have
continued 'till after the days of _Herodotus_: for in counting the length
of seventy years [56], he reckons thirty days to a Lunar month, and twelve
such months, or 360 days, to the ordinary year, without the intercalary
months, and 25 such months to the _Dieteris_: and according to the number
of days in the Calendar year of the _Greeks_, _Demetrius Phalereus_ had 360
Statues erected to him by the _Athenians_. But the _Greeks_, _Cleostratus_,
_Harpalus_, and others, to make their months agree better with the course
of the Moon, in the times of the _Persian_ Empire, varied the manner of
intercaling the three months in the _Octaeteris_; and _Meton_ found out the
Cycle of intercaling seven months in nineteen years.

The Ancient year of the _Latines_ was also Luni-solar; for _Plutarch_ [57]
tells us, that the year of _Numa_ consisted of twelve Lunar months, with
intercalary months to make up what the twelve Lunar months wanted of the
Solar year. The Ancient year of the _Egyptians_ was also Luni-solar, and
continued to be so 'till the days of _Hyperion_, or _Osiris_, a King of
_Egypt_, the father of _Helius_ and _Selene_, or _Orus_ and _Bubaste_: For
the _Israelites_ brought this year out of _Egypt_; and _Diodorus_ tells
[58] us that _Ouranus_ the father of _Hyperion_ used this year, and [59]
that in the Temple of _Osiris_ the Priests appointed thereunto filled 360
Milk Bowls every day: I think he means one Bowl every day, in all 360, to
count the number of days in the Calendar year, and thereby to find out the
difference between this and the true Solar year: for the year of 360 days
was the year, to the end of which they added five days.

That the _Israelites_ used the Luni-solar year is beyond question. Their
months began with their new Moons. Their first month was called _Abib_,
from the earing of Corn in that month. Their Passover was kept upon the
fourteenth day of the first month, the Moon being then in the full: and if
the Corn was not then ripe enough for offering the first Fruits, the
Festival was put off, by adding an intercalary month to the end of the
year; and the harvest was got in before the Pentecost, and the other Fruits
gathered before the Feast of the seventh month.

_Simplicius_ in his commentary [60] on the first of _Aristotle_'s _Physical
Acroasis_, tells us, that _some begin the year upon the Summer Solstice, as
the People of _Attica_; or upon the Autumnal Equinox, as the People of
_Asia_; or in Winter, as the _Romans_; or about the Vernal Equinox, as the
_Arabians_ and People of _Damascus_: and the month began, according to
some, upon the Full Moon, or upon the New._ The years of all these Nations
were therefore Luni-solar, and kept to the four Seasons: and the _Roman_
year began at first in Spring, as I seem to gather from the Names of their
Months, _Quintilis_, _Sextilis_, _September_, _October_, _November_,
_December_: and the beginning was afterwards removed to Winter. The ancient
civil year of the _Assyrians_ and _Babylonians_ was also Luni-solar: for
this year was also used by the _Samaritans_, who came from several parts of
the _Assyrian_ Empire; and the _Jews_ who came from _Babylon_ called the
months of their Luni-solar year after the Names of the months of the
_Babylonian_ year: and _Berosus_ [61] tells us that the _Babylonians_
celebrated the Feast _Sac√¶a_ upon the 16th day of the month _Lous_, which
was a Lunar month of the _Macedonians_, and kept to one and the same Season
of the year: and the _Arabians_, a Nation who peopled _Babylon_, use Lunar
months to this day. _Suidas_ [62] tells us, that the _Sarus_ of the
_Chaldeans_ contains 222 Lunar months, which are eighteen years, consisting
each of twelve Lunar months, besides six intercalary months: and when [63]
_Cyrus_ cut the River _Gindus_ into 360 Channels, he seems to have alluded
unto the number of days in the Calendar year of the _Medes_ and _Persians_:
and the Emperor _Julian_ [64] writes, _For when all other People, that I
may say it in one word, accommodate their months to the course of the Moon,
we alone with the _Egyptians_ measure the days of the year by the course of
the Sun._

At length the _Egyptians_, for the sake of Navigation, applied themselves
to observe the Stars; and by their Heliacal Risings and Settings found the
true Solar year to be five days longer than the Calendar year, and
therefore added five days to the twelve Calendar months; making the Solar
year to consist of twelve months and five days. _Strabo_ [65] and [66]
_Diodorus_ ascribe this invention to the _Egyptians_ of _Thebes_. _The
_Theban_ Priests_, saith _Strabo_, _are above others said to be Astronomers
and Philosophers. They invented the reckoning of days not by the course of
the Moon, but by the course of the Sun. To twelve months each of thirty
days they add yearly five days._ In memory of this Emendation of the year
they dedicated the [67] five additional days to _Osiris_, _Isis_, _Orus_
senior, _Typhon_, and _Nephthe_ the wife of _Typhon_, feigning that those
days were added to the year when these five Princes were born, that is, in
the Reign of _Ouranus_, or _Ammon_, the father of _Sesac_: and in [68] the
Sepulchre of _Amenophis_, who Reigned soon after, they placed a Golden
Circle of 365 cubits in compass, and divided it into 365 equal parts, to
represent all the days in the year, and noted upon each part the Heliacal
Risings and Settings of the Stars on that day; which Circle remained there
'till the invasion of _Egypt_ by _Cambyses_ King of _Persia_. 'Till the
Reign of _Ouranus_, the father of _Hyperion_, and grandfather of _Helius_
and _Selene_, the _Egyptians_ used the old Lunisolar year: but in his
Reign, that is, in the Reign of _Ammon_, the father of _Osiris_ or _Sesac_,
and grandfather of _Orus_ and _Bubaste_, the _Thebans_ began to apply
themselves to Navigation and Astronomy, and by the Heliacal Risings and
Settings of the Stars determined the length of the Solar year; and to the
old Calendar year added five days, and dedicated them to his five children
above mentioned, as their birth days: and in the Reign of _Amenophis_, when
by further Observations they had sufficiently determined the time of the
Solstices, they might place the beginning of this new year upon the Vernal
Equinox. This year being at length propagated into _Chald√¶a_, gave occasion
to the year of _Nabonassar_; for the years of _Nabonassar_ and those of
_Egypt_ began on one and the same day, called by them _Thoth_, and were
equal and in all respects the same: and the first year of _Nabonassar_
began on the 26th day of _February_ of the old _Roman_ year, seven hundred
forty and seven years before the Vulgar _√Üra_ of _Christ_, and thirty and
three days and five hours before the Vernal Equinox, according to the Sun's
mean motion; for it is not likely that the Equation of the Sun's motion
should be known in the infancy of Astronomy. Now reckoning that the year of
365 days wants five hours and 49 minutes of the Equinoctial year; the
beginning of this year will move backwards thirty and three days and five
hours in 137 years: and by consequence this year began at first in _Egypt_
upon the Vernal Equinox, according to the Sun's mean motion, 137 years
before the _√Üra_ of _Nabonassar_ began; that is, in the year of the
_Julian_ Period 3830, or 96 years after the death of _Solomon_: and if it
began upon the next day after the Vernal Equinox, it might begin four years
earlier; and about that time ended the Reign of _Amenophis_: for he came
not from _Susa_ to the _Trojan_ war, but died afterwards in _Egypt_. This
year was received by the _Persian_ Empire from the _Babylonian_; and the
_Greeks_ also used it in the _√Üra Philipp√¶a_, dated from the Death of
_Alexander_ the great; and _Julius C√¶sar_ corrected it, by adding a day in
every four years, and made it the year of the _Romans_.

_Syncellus_ tells us, that the five days were added to the old year by the
last King of the Shepherds: and the difference in time between the Reign of
this King, and that of _Ammon_, is but small; for the Reign of the
Shepherds ended but one Generation, or two, before _Ammon_ began to add
those days. But the Shepherds minded not Arts and Sciences.

The first month of the Luni-solar year, by reason of the Intercalary month,
began sometimes a week or a fortnight before the Equinox or Solstice, and
sometimes as much after it. And this year gave occasion to the first
Astronomers, who formed the _Asterisms_, to place the Equinoxes and
Solstices in the middles of the Constellations of _Aries_, _Cancer_,
_Chel√¶_, and _Capricorn_. _Achilles Tatius_ [69] tells us, that _some
antiently placed the Solstice in the beginning of _Cancer_, others in the
eighth degree of _Cancer_, others about the twelfth degree, and others
about the fifteenth degree thereof._ This variety of opinions proceeded
from the precession of the Equinox, then not known to the _Greeks_. When
the Sphere was first formed, the Solstice was in the fifteenth degree or
middle of the Constellation of _Cancer_: then it came into the twelfth,
eighth, fourth, and first degree successively. _Eudoxus_, who flourished
about sixty years after _Meton_, and an hundred years before _Aratus_, in
describing the Sphere of the Ancients, placed the Solstices and Equinoxes
in the middles of the Constellations of _Aries_, _Cancer_, _Chel√¶_, and
_Capricorn_, as is affirmed by [70] _Hipparchus Bithynus_; and appears also
by the Description of the Equinoctial and Tropical Circles in _Aratus_,
[71] who copied after _Eudoxus_; and by the positions of the _Colures_ of
the Equinoxes and Solstices, which in the Sphere of _Eudoxus_, described by
_Hipparchus_, went through the middles of those Constellations. For
_Hipparchus_ tells us, that _Eudoxus_ drew the _Colure_ of the Solstices,
through the middle of the _great Bear_, and the middle of _Cancer_, and the
neck of _Hydrus_, and the Star between the Poop and Mast of _Argo_, and the
Tayl of the _South Fish_, and through the middle of _Capricorn_, and of
_Sagitta_, and through the neck and right wing of the _Swan_, and the left
hand of _Cepheus_; and that he drew the Equinoctial _Colure_, through the
left hand of _Arctophylax_, and along the middle of his Body, and cross the
middle of _Chel√¶_, and through the right hand and fore-knee of the
_Centaur_, and through the flexure of _Eridanus_ and head of _Cetus_, and
the back of _Aries_ a-cross, and through the head and right hand of
_Perseus_.

Now _Chiron_ delineated œÉœáŒ∑ŒºŒ±œÑŒ± ŒøŒªœÖŒºœÄŒøœÖ the _Asterisms_, as the ancient
Author of _Gigantomachia_, cited by [72] _Clemens Alexandrinus_ informs us:
for _Chiron_ was a practical Astronomer, as may be there understood also of
his daughter _Hippo_: and _Mus√¶us_, the son of _Eumolpus_ and master of
_Orpheus_, and one of the _Argonauts_, [73] made a Sphere, and is reputed
the first among the _Greeks_ who made one: and the Sphere it self shews
that it was delineated in the time of the _Argonautic_ expedition; for that
expedition is delineated in the _Asterisms_, together with several other
ancienter Histories of the _Greeks_, and without any thing later. There's
the golden _RAM_, the ensign of the Vessel in which _Phryxus_ fled to
_Colchis_; the _BULL_ with brazen hoofs tamed by _Jason_; and the _TWINS_,
_CASTOR_ and _POLLUX_, two of the _Argonauts_, with the _SWAN_ of _Leda_
their mother. There's the Ship _ARGO_, and _HYDRUS_ the watchful Dragon;
with _Medea_'s _CUP_, and a _RAVEN_ upon its Carcass, the Symbol of Death.
There's _CHIRON_ the master of _Jason_, with his _ALTAR_ and _SACRIFICE_.
There's the _Argonaut_ _HERCULES_ with his _DART_ and _VULTURE_ falling
down; and the _DRAGON_, _CRAB_ and _LION_, whom he slew; and the _HARP_ of
the _Argonaut_ _Orpheus_. All these relate to the _Argonauts_. There's
_ORION_ the son of _Neptune_, or as some say, the grandson of _Minos_, with
his _DOGS_, and _HARE_, and _RIVER_, and _SCORPION_. There's the story of
_Perseus_ in the Constellations of _PERSEUS_, _ANDROMEDA_, _CEPHEUS_,
_CASSIOPEA_ and _CETUS_: That of _Callisto_, and her son _Arcas_, in _URSA
MAJOR_ and _ARCTOPHYLAX_: That of _Icareus_ and his daughter _Erigone_ in
_BOOTES_, _PLAUSTRUM_ and _VIRGO_. _URSA MINOR_ relates to one of the
Nurses of _Jupiter_, _AURIGA_ to _Erechthonius_, _OPHIUCHUS_ to _Phorbas_,
_SAGITTARIUS_ to _Crolus_ the son of the Nurse of the Muses, _CAPRICORN_ to
_Pan_, and _AQUARIUS_ to _Ganimede_. There's _Ariadne_'s _CROWN_,
_Bellerophon_'s _HORSE_, _Neptune_'s _DOLPHIN_, _Ganimede_'s _EAGLE_,
_Jupiter_'s _GOAT_ with her _KIDS_, _Bacchus_'s _ASSES_, and the _FISHES_
of _Venus_ and _Cupid_, and their Parent the _SOUTH FISH_. These with
_DELTOTON_, are the old Constellations mentioned by _Aratus_: and they all
relate to the _Argonauts_ and their Contemporaries, and to Persons one or
two Generations older: and nothing later than that Expedition was
delineated there Originally. _ANTINOUS_ and _COMA BERENICES_ are novel. The
Sphere seems therefore to have been formed by _Chiron_ and _Mus√¶us_, for
the use of the _Argonauts_: for the Ship _Argo_ was the first long ship
built by the _Greeks_. Hitherto they had used round vessels of burden, and
kept within sight of the shore; and now, upon an Embassy to several Princes
upon the coasts of the _Euxine_ and _Mediterranean_ Seas, [74] by the
dictates of the Oracle, and consent of the Princes of _Greece_, the Flower
of _Greece_ were to sail with Expedition through the deep, in a long Ship
with Sails, and guide their Ship by the Stars. The People of the Island
_Corcyra_ [75] attributed the invention of the Sphere to _Nausicaa_, the
daughter of _Alcinous_, King of the _Pheaces_ in that Island: and it's most
probable that she had it from the _Argonauts_, who [76] in their return
home sailed to that Island, and made some stay there with her father. So
then in the time of the _Argonautic_ Expedition, the Cardinal points of the
Equinoxes and Solstices were in the middles of the Constellations of
_Aries_, _Cancer_, _Chel√¶_, and _Capricorn_.

In the end of the year of our Lord 1689 the Star called _Prima Arietis_ was
in [Aries]. 28¬∞. 51'. 00", with North Latitude 7¬∞. 8'. 58". And the Star
called _ultima caud√¶ Arietis_ was in [Taurus]. 19¬∞. 3'. 42", with North
Latitude 2¬∞. 34'. 5". And the _Colurus √Üquinoctiorum_ passing through the
point in the middle between those two Stars did then cut the Ecliptic in
[Taurus]. 6¬∞. 44': and by this reckoning the Equinox in the end of the year
1689 was gone back 36¬∞. 44'. since the _Argonautic_ Expedition: Supposing
that the said _Colure_ passed through the middle of the Constellation of
_Aries_, according to the delineation of the Ancients. The Equinox goes
back fifty seconds in one year, and one degree in seventy and two years,
and by consequence 36¬∞. 44'. in 2645 years, which counted back from the end
of the year of our Lord 1689, or beginning of the year 1690, will place the
_Argonautic_ Expedition about 25 years after the Death of _Solomon_: but it
is not necessary that the middle of the Constellation of _Aries_ should be
exactly in the middle between the two Stars called _prima Arietis_ and
_ultima Caud√¶_: and it may be better to fix the Cardinal points by the
Stars, through which the _Colures_ passed in the primitive Sphere,
according to the description of _Eudoxus_ above recited. By the _Colure_ of
the Equinoxes, I mean a great Circle passing through the Poles of the
Equator, and cutting the Ecliptic in the Equinoxes in an Angle of 66¬Ω
degrees, the complement of the Sun's greatest Declination; and by the
_Colure_ of the Solstices I mean a great Circle passing through the same
Poles, and cutting the Ecliptic at right Angles in the Solstices: and by
the Primitive Sphere, that which was in use before the motions of the
Equinoxes and Solstices were known: now the _Colures_ passed through the
following Stars according to _Eudoxus_.

In the back of _Aries_ is a Star of the sixth magnitude, marked ŒΩ by
_Bayer_: in the end of the year 1689, and beginning of the year 1690, its
Longitude was [Taurus]. 9¬∞. 38'. 45", and North Latitude 6¬∞. 7'. 56": and
the _Colurus √Üquinoctiorum_ drawn though it, according to _Eudoxus_, cuts
the Ecliptic in [Taurus]. 6¬∞. 58'. 57". In the head of _Cetus_ are two
Stars of the fourth Magnitude, called ŒΩ and Œæ by _Bayer_: in the end of the
year 1689 their Longitudes were [Taurus]. 4¬∞. 3'. 9". and [Taurus]. 3¬∞. 7'.
37", and their South Latitudes 9¬∞. 12'. 26". and 5¬∞. 53'. 7"; and the
_Colurus √Üquinoctiorum_ passing in the mid way between them, cuts the
Ecliptic in [Taurus]. 6¬∞. 58'. 51". In the extreme flexure of _Eridanus_,
rightly delineated, is a Star of the fourth Magnitude, of late referred to
the breast of _Cetus_, and called œÅ by _Bayer_; it is the only Star in
_Eridanus_ through which this _Colure_ can pass; its Longitude, in the end
of the year 1689, was [Aries]. 25¬∞. 22'. 10". and South Latitude 25¬∞. 15'.
50". and the _Colurus √Üquinoctiorum_ passing through it, cuts the Ecliptic
in [Taurus]. 7¬∞. 12'. 40". In the head of _Perseus_, rightly delineated, is
a Star of the fourth Magnitude, called œÑ by _Bayer_; the Longitude of this
Star, in the end of the year 1689, was [Taurus]. 23¬∞. 25'. 30", and North
Latitude 34¬∞. 20'. 12": and the _Colurus √Üquinoctiorum_ passing through it,
cuts the Ecliptic in [Taurus]. 6¬∞. 18'. 57". In the right hand of
_Perseus_, rightly delineated, is a Star of the fourth Magnitude, called Œ∑
by _Bayer_; its Longitude in the end of the year 1689, was [Taurus]. 24¬∞.
25'. 27", and North Latitude 37¬∞. 26'. 50": and the _Colurus √Üquinoctiorum_
passing through it cuts the Ecliptic in [Taurus]. 4¬∞. 56'. 40": and the
fifth part of the summ of the places in which these five _Colures_ cut the
Ecliptic, is [Taurus]. 6¬∞. 29'. 15": and therefore the Great Circle which
in the Primitive Sphere according to _Eudoxus_, and by consequence in the
time of the _Argonautic_ Expedition, was the _Colurus √Üquinoctiorum_
passing through the Stars above described; did in the end of the year 1689,
cut the Ecliptic in [Taurus]. 6¬∞. 29'. 15": as nearly as we have been able
to determin by the Observations of the Ancients, which were but coarse.

In the middle of _Cancer_ is the _South Asellus_, a Star of the fourth
Magnitude, called by _Bayer_ Œ¥; its Longitude in the end of the year 1689,
was [Leo]. 4¬∞. 23'. 40". In the neck of _Hydrus_, rightly delineated, is a
Star of the fourth Magnitude, called Œ¥ by _Bayer_; its Longitude in the end
of the year 1689, was [Leo]. 5¬∞. 59'. 3". Between the poop and mast of the
Ship _Argo_ is a Star of the third Magnitude, called Œπ by _Bayer_; its
Longitude in the end of that year, was [Leo]. 7¬∞. 5'. 31". In _Sagitta_ is
a Star of the sixth Magnitude, called Œ∏ by _Bayer_; its Longitude in the
end of the same year 1689, was [Aquarius]. 6¬∞. 29'. 53". In the middle of
_Capricorn_ is a Star of the fifth Magnitude, called Œ∑ by _Bayer_; its
Longitude in the end of the same year was [Aquarius]. 8¬∞. 25'. 55": and the
fifth part of the summ of the three first Longitudes, and of the
complements of the two last to 180 Degrees; is [Leo]. 6¬∞. 28'. 46". This is
the new Longitude of the old _Colurus Solstitiorum_ passing through these
Stars. The same _Colurus_ passes also in the middle between the Stars Œ∑ and
Œ∫, of the fourth and fifth Magnitudes, in the neck of the _Swan_; being
distant from each about a Degree: it passeth also by the Star Œ∫, of the
fourth Magnitude, in the right wing of the _Swan_; and by the Star Œø, of
the fifth Magnitude, in the left hand of _Cepheus_, rightly delineated; and
by the Stars in the tail of the _South-Fish_; and is at right angles with
the _Colurus √Üquinoctiorum_ found above: and so it hath all the characters,
of the _Colurus Solstitiorum_ rightly drawn.

The two _Colures_ therefore, which in the time of the _Argonautic_
Expedition cut the Ecliptic in the Cardinal Points, did in the end of the
year 1689 cut it in [Taurus]. 6¬∞. 29'; [Leo]. 6¬∞. 29'; [Scorpio]. 6¬∞. 29';
and [Aquarius]. 6¬∞. 29'; that is, at the distance of 1 Sign, 6 Degrees and
29 Minutes from the Cardinal Points of _Chiron_; as nearly as we have been
able to determin from the coarse observations of the Ancients: and
therefore the Cardinal Points, in the time between that Expedition and the
end of the year 1689, have gone back from those _Colures_ one Sign, 6
Degrees and 29 Minutes; which, after the rate of 72 years to a Degree,
answers to 2627 years. Count those years backwards from the end of the year
1689, or beginning of the year 1690, and the reckoning will place the
_Argonautic_ Expedition, about 43 years after the death of _Solomon_.

By the same method the place of any Star in the Primitive Sphere may
readily be found, counting backwards one Sign, 6¬∞. 29'. from the Longitude
which it had in the end of the year of our Lord 1689. So the Longitude of
the first Star of _Aries_ in the end of the year 1689 was [Aries]. 28¬∞.
51'. as above: count backward 1 Sign, 6¬∞. 29'. and its Longitude, counted
from the Equinox in the middle of the Constellation of _Aries_, in the time
of the _Argonautic_ expedition, will be [Pisces]. 22¬∞. 22': and by the same
way of arguing, the Longitude of the _Lucida Pleiadum_ in the time of the
_Argonautic_ Expedition will be [Aries]. 19¬∞. 26'. 8": and the Longitude of
_Arcturus_ [Virgo]. 13¬∞. 24'. 52": and so of any other Stars.

After the _Argonautic_ Expedition we hear no more of Astronomy 'till the
days of _Thales_: He [77] revived Astronomy, and wrote a book of the
Tropics and Equinoxes, and predicted Eclipses; and _Pliny_ [78] tells us,
that he determined the _Occasus Matutinus_ of the _Pleiades_ to be upon the
25th day after the Autumnal Equinox: and thence [79] _Petavius_ computes
the Longitude of the _Pleiades_ in [Aries]. 23¬∞. 53': and by consequence
the _Lucida Pleiadum_ had, since the _Argonautic_ Expedition, moved from
the Equinox 4¬∞. 26'. 52": and this motion, after the rate of 72 years to a
Degree, answers to 320 years: count these years back from the time in which
_Thales_ was a young man fit to apply himself to Astronomical Studies, that
is from about the 41st Olympiad, and the reckoning will place the
_Argonautic_ Expedition about 44 years after the death of _Solomon_, as
above: and in the days of _Thales_, the Solstices and Equinoxes, by this
reckoning, will have been in the middle of the eleventh Degrees of the
Signs. But _Thales_, in publishing his book about the Tropics and
Equinoxes, might lean a little to the opinion of former Astronomers, so as
to place them in the twelfth Degrees of the Signs.

_Meton_ and _Euctemon_, [80] in order to publish the Lunar Cycle of
nineteen years, observed the Summer Solstice in the year of _Nabonassar_
316, the year before the _Peloponnesian_ war began; and _Columella_ [81]
tells us that they placed it in the eighth Degree of _Cancer_, which is at
least seven Degrees backwarder than at first. Now the Equinox, after the
rate of a Degree in Seventy and two years, goes backwards seven Degrees in
504 years: count backwards those years from the 316th year of _Nabonassar_,
and the _Argonautic_ Expedition will fall upon the 44th year after the
death of _Solomon_, or thereabout, as above. And thus you see the truth of
what we cited above out of _Achilles Tatius_; viz. that some anciently
placed the Solstice in the eighth Degree of _Cancer_, others about the
twelfth Degree, and others about the fifteenth Degree thereof.

_Hipparchus_ the great Astronomer, comparing his own Observations with
those of former Astronomers, concluded first of any man, that the Equinoxes
had a motion backwards in respect of the fixt Stars: and his opinion was,
that they went backwards one Degree in about an hundred years. He made his
observations of the Equinoxes between the years of _Nabonassar_ 586 and
618: the middle year is 602, which is 286 years after the aforesaid
observation of _Meton_ and _Euctemon_; and in these years the Equinox must
have gone backwards four degrees, and so have been in the fourth Degree of
_Aries_ in the days of _Hipparchus_, and by consequence have then gone back
eleven Degrees since the _Argonautic_ Expedition; that is, in 1090 years,
according to the Chronology of the ancient _Greeks_ then in use: and this
is after the rate of about 99 years, or in the next round number an hundred
years to a Degree, as was then stated by _Hipparchus_. But it really went
back a Degree in seventy and two years, and eleven Degrees in 792 years:
count these 792 years backward from the year of _Nabonassar,_ 602, the year
from which we counted the 286 years, and the reckoning will place the
_Argonautic_ Expedition about 43 years after the death of _Solomon_. The
_Greeks_ have therefore made the _Argonautic_ Expedition about three
hundred years ancienter than the truth, and thereby given occasion to the
opinion of the great _Hipparchus_, that the Equinox went backward after the
rate of only a Degree in an hundred years.

_Hesiod_ tells us that sixty days after the winter Solstice the Star
_Arcturus_ rose just at Sunset: and thence it follows that _Hesiod_
flourished about an hundred years after the death of _Solomon_, or in the
Generation or Age next after the _Trojan_ war, as _Hesiod_ himself
declares.

From all these circumstances, grounded upon the coarse observations of the
ancient Astronomers, we may reckon it certain that the _Argonautic_
Expedition was not earlier than the Reign of _Solomon_: and if these
Astronomical arguments be added to the former arguments taken from the mean
length of the Reigns of Kings, according to the course of nature; from them
all we may safely conclude that the _Argonautic_ Expedition was after the
death of _Solomon_, and most probably that it was about 43 years after it.

The _Trojan_ War was one Generation later than that Expedition, as was said
above, several Captains of the _Greeks_ in that war being sons of the
_Argonauts_: and the ancient _Greeks_ reckoned _Memnon_ or _Amenophis_,
King of _Egypt_, to have Reigned in the times of that war, feigning him to
be the son of _Tithonus_ the elder brother of _Priam_, and in the end of
that war to have come from _Susa_ to the assistance of _Priam_. _Amenophis_
was therefore of the same age with the elder children of _Priam_, and was
with his army at _Susa_ in the last year of that war: and after he had
there finished the _Memnonia_, he might return into _Egypt_, and adorn it
with Buildings, and Obelisks, and Statues, and die there about 90 or 95
years after the death of _Solomon_; when he had determined and settled the
beginning of the new _Egyptian_ year of 365 days upon the Vernal Equinox,
so as to deserve the Monument above-mentioned in memory thereof.

_Rehoboam_ was born in the last year of King _David_, being 41 years old at
the Death of _Solomon_, 1 _Kings_ xiv. 21. and therefore his father
_Solomon_ was probably born in the 18th year of King _David's_ Reign, or
before: and two or three years before his Birth, _David_ besieged _Rabbah_
the Metropolis of the _Ammonites_, and committed adultery with _Bathsheba_:
and the year before this siege began, _David_ vanquished the _Ammonites_,
and their Confederates the _Syrians_ of _Zobah_, and _Rehob_, and _Ishtob_,
and _Maacah_, and _Damascus_, and extended his Dominion over all these
Nations as far as to the entring in of _Hamath_ and the River _Euphrates_:
and before this war began he smote _Moab_, and _Ammon_, and _Edom_, and
made the _Edomites_ fly, some of them into _Egypt_ with their King _Hadad_,
then a little child; and others to the _Philistims_, where they fortified
_Azoth_ against _Israel_; and others, I think, to the _Persian Gulph_, and
other places whither they could escape: and before this he had several
Battles with the _Philistims_: and all this was after the eighth year of
his Reign, in which he came from _Hebron_ to _Jerusalem_. We cannot err
therefore above two or three years, if we place this Victory over _Edom_ in
the eleventh or twelfth year of his Reign; and that over _Ammon_ and the
_Syrians_ in the fourteenth. After the flight of _Edom_, the King of _Edom_
grew up, and married _Tahaphenes_ or _Daphnis_, the sister of _Pharaoh_'s
Queen, and before the Death of _David_ had by her a son called _Genubah_,
and this son was brought up among the children of _Pharaoh_: and among
these children was the chief or _first born of her mother's children_, whom
_Solomon_ married in the beginning of his Reign; and her _little sister
who_ at that time _had no breasts_, and her _brother who_ then _sucked the
breasts of his mother_, _Cant._ vi. 9. and viii. 1, 8: and of about the
same Age with these children was _Sesac_ or _Sesostris_; for he became King
of _Egypt_ in the Reign of _Solomon_, 1 _Kings_ xi. 40; and before he began
to Reign he warred under his father, and whilst he was very young,
conquered _Arabia_, _Troglodytica_ and _Libya_, and then invaded
_Ethiopia_; and succeeding his father Reigned 'till the fifth year of
_Asa_: and therefore he was of about the same age with the children of
_Pharaoh_ above-mentioned; and might be one of them, and be born near the
end of _David_'s Reign, and be about 46 years old when he came out of
_Egypt_ with a great Army to invade the East: and by reason of his great
Conquests, he was celebrated in several Nations by several Names. The
_Chald√¶ans_ called him _Belus_, which in their Language signified _the
Lord_: the _Arabians_ called him _Bacchus_, which in their Language
signified _the great_: the _Phrygians_ and _Thracians_ called him
_Ma-fors_, _Mavors_, _Mars_, which signified _the valiant_: and thence the
_Amazons_, whom he carried from _Thrace_ and left at _Thermodon_, called
themselves the daughters of _Mars_. The _Egyptians_ before his Reign called
him their _Hero_ or _Hercules_; and after his death, by reason of his great
works done to the River _Nile_, dedicated that River to him, and Deified
him by its names _Sihor_, _Nilus_ and _√Ügyptus_; and the _Greeks_ hearing
them lament _0 Sihor, Bou Sihor_, called him _Osiris_ and _Busiris_.
_Arrian_ [82] tells us that the _Arabians_ worshipped, only two Gods,
_C≈ìlus_ and _Dionysus_; and that they worshipped _Dionysus_ for the glory
of leading his Army into _India_. The _Dionysus_ of the _Arabians_ was
_Bacchus_, and all agree that _Bacchus_ was the same King of _Egypt_ with
_Osiris_: and the _C≈ìlus_, or _Uranus_, or _Jupiter Uranius_ of the
_Arabians_, I take to be the same King of _Egypt_ with His father _Ammon_,
according to the Poet:

  _Quamvis √Üthiopum populis, Arabumque beatis_
  _Gentibus, atque Indis unus sit Jupiter Ammon._

I place the end of the Reign of _Sesac_ upon the fifth year of _Asa_,
because in that year _Asa_ became free from the Dominion of _Egypt_, so as
to be able to fortify _Jud√¶a_, and raise that great Army with which he met
_Zerah_, and routed him. _Osiris_ was therefore slain in the fifth year of
_Asa_, by his brother _Japetus_, whom the _Egyptians_ called _Typhon_,
_Python_, and _Neptune_: and then the _Libyans_, under _Japetus_ and his
son _Atlas_, invaded _Egypt_, and raised that famous war between the Gods
and Giants, from whence the _Nile_ had the name of _Eridanus_: but _Orus_
the son of _Osiris_, by the assistance of the _Ethiopians_, prevailed, and
Reigned 'till the 15th year of _Asa_: and then the _Ethiopians_ under
_Zerah_ invaded _Egypt_, drowned _Orus_ in _Eridanus_, and were routed by
_Asa_, so that _Zerah_ could not recover himself. _Zerah_ was succeeded by
_Amenophis_, a youth of the Royal Family of the _Ethiopians_, and I think
the son of _Zerah_: but the People of the lower _Egypt_ revolted from him,
and set up _Osarsiphus_ over them, and called to their assistance a great
body of men from _Ph≈ìnicia_, I think a part of the Army of _Asa_; and
thereupon _Amenophis_, with the remains of his father's Army of
_Ethiopians_, retired from the lower _Egypt_ to _Memphis_, and there turned
the River _Nile_ into a new channel, under a new bridge which he built
between two Mountains; and at the same time he built and fortified that
City against _Osarsiphus_, calling it by his own name, _Amenoph_ or
_Memphis_: and then he retired into _Ethiopia_, and stayed there thirteen
years; and then came back with a great Army, and subdued the lower _Egypt_,
expelling the People which had been called in from _Ph≈ìnicia_: and this I
take to be the second expulsion of the Shepherds. Dr. _Castel_ [83] tells
us, that in _Coptic_ this City is called _Manphtha_; whence by contraction
came its Names _Moph_, _Noph_.

While _Amenophis_ staid in _Ethiopia_, _Egypt_ was in its greatest
distraction: and then it was, as I conceive, that the _Greeks_ hearing
thereof contrived the _Argonautic_ Expedition, and sent the flower of
_Greece_ in the Ship _Argo_ to persuade the Nations upon the Sea Coasts of
the _Euxine_ and _Mediterranean Seas_ to revolt from _Egypt_, and set up
for themselves, as the _Libyans_, _Ethiopians_ and _Jews_ had done before.
And this is a further argument for placing that Expedition about 43 years
after the Death of _Solomon_; this Period being in the middle of the
distraction of _Egypt_. _Amenophis_ might return from _Ethiopia_, and
conquer the lower _Egypt_ about eight years after that Expedition, and
having settled his Government over it, he might, for putting a stop to the
revolting of the eastern Nations, lead his Army into _Persia_, and leave
_Proteus_ at _Memphis_ to govern _Egypt_ in his absence, and stay some time
at _Susa_, and build the _Memnonia_, fortifying that City, as the
Metropolis of his Dominion in those parts.

_Androgeus_ the son of _Minos_, upon his overcoming in the _Athen√¶a_, or
quadrennial Games at _Athens_ in his youth, was perfidiously slain out of
envy: and _Minos_ thereupon made war upon the _Athenians_, and compelled
them to send every eighth year to _Crete_ seven beardless Youths, and as
many young Virgins, to be given as a reward to him that should get the
Victory in the like Games instituted in _Crete_ in honour of _Androgeus_.
These Games seem to have been celebrated in the beginning of the
_Octaeteris_, and the _Athen√¶a_ in the beginning of the _Tetraeteris_, then
brought into _Crete_ and _Greece_ by the _Ph≈ìnicians_ and upon the third
payment of the tribute of children, that is, about seventeen years after
the said war was at an end, and about nineteen or twenty years after the
death of _Androgeus_, _Theseus_ became Victor, and returned from _Crete_
with _Ariadne_ the daughter of _Minos_; and coming to the Island _Naxus_ or
_Dia_, [84] _Ariadne_ was there relinquished by him, and taken up by
_Glaucus_, an _Egyptian_ Commander at Sea, and became the mistress of the
great _Bacchus_, who at that time returned from _India_ in Triumph; and
[85] by him she had two sons, _Phlyas_ and _Eumedon_, who were _Argonauts_.
This _Bacchus_ was caught in bed in _Phrygia_ with _Venus_ the mother of
_√Üneas_, according [86] to _Homer_; just before he came over the
_Hellespont_, and invaded _Thrace_; and he married _Ariadne_ the daughter
of _Minos_, according to _Hesiod_ [87]: and therefore by the Testimony of
both _Homer_ and _Hesiod_, who wrote before the _Greeks_ and _Egyptians_
corrupted their Antiquities, this _Bacchus_ was one Generation older than
the _Argonauts_; and so being King of _Egypt_ at the same time with
_Sesostris_, they must be one and the same King: for they agree also in
their actions; _Bacchus_ invaded _India_ and _Greece_, and after he was
routed by the Army of _Perseus_, and the war was composed, the _Greeks_ did
him great honours, and built a Temple to him at _Argos_, and called it the
Temple of the _Cresian Bacchus_, because _Ariadne_ was buried in it, as
_Pausanias_ [88] relates. _Ariadne_ therefore died in the end of the war,
just before the return of _Sesostris_ into _Egypt_, that is, in the 14th
year of _Rehoboam_: She was taken from _Naxus_ upon the return of _Bacchus_
from _India_, and then became the Mistress of _Bacchus_, and accompanied
him in his Triumphs; and therefore the expedition of _Theseus_ to _Crete_,
and the death of his father _√Ügeus_, was about nine or ten years after the
death of _Solomon_. _Theseus_ was then a beardless young man, suppose about
19 or 20 years old, and _Androgeus_ was slain about twenty years before,
being then about 20 or 22 years old; and his father _Minos_ might be about
25 years older, and so be born about the middle of _David_'s Reign, and be
about 70 years old when he pursued _D√¶dalus_ into _Sicily_: and _Europa_
and her brother _Cadmus_ might come into _Europe_, two or three years
before the birth of _Minos_.

_Justin_, in his 18th book, tells us: _A rege Ascaloniorum expugnati
Sidonii navibus appulsi Tyron urbem ante annum * * Trojan√¶ cladis
condiderunt_ And _Strabo_, [89] that _Aradus was built by the men who fled
from _Zidon__. Hence [90] _Isaiah_ calls _Tyre_ _the daughter of _Zidon_,
the inhabitants of the Isle whom the Merchants of _Zidon_ have
replenished_: and [91] _Solomon_ in the beginning of his Reign calls the
People of _Tyre_ _Zidonians_. _My Servants_, saith he, in a Message to
_Hiram_ King of _Tyre_, _shall be with thy Servants, and unto thee will I
give hire for thy Servants according to all that thou desirest: for thou
knowest that there is not among us any that can skill to hew timber like
the _Zidonians__. The new Inhabitants of _Tyre_ had not yet lost the name
of _Zidonians_, nor had the old Inhabitants, if there were any considerable
number of them, gained the reputation of the new ones for skill in hewing
of timber, as they would have done had navigation been long in use at
_Tyre_. The Artificers who came from _Zidon_ were not dead, and the flight
of the _Zidonians_ was in the Reign of _David_, and by consequence in the
beginning of the Reign of _Abibalus_ the father of _Hiram_, and the first
King of _Tyre_ mentioned in History. _David_ in the twelfth year of his
Reign conquered _Edom_, as above, and made some of the _Edomites_, and
chiefly the Merchants and Seamen, fly from the _Red Sea_ to the
_Philistims_ upon the _Mediterranean_, where they fortified _Azoth_. For
[92] _Stephanus_ tells us: Œ§Œ±œÖœÑŒ∑ŒΩ ŒµŒ∫œÑŒπœÉŒµŒΩ ‚ÄõŒµŒπœÇ œÑœâŒΩ ŒµœÄŒ±ŒΩŒµŒªŒ∏ŒøŒΩœÑœâŒΩ Œ±œÄ' ŒïœÅœÖŒ∏œÅŒ±œÇ
Œ∏Œ±ŒªŒ±œÉœÉŒ∑œÇ Œ¶ŒµœÖŒ≥Œ±Œ¥œâŒΩ: _One of the Fugitives from the Red Sea built_ Azoth:
that is, a Prince of _Edom_, who fled from _David_, fortified _Azoth_ for
the _Philistims_ against him. The _Philistims_ were now grown very strong,
by the access of the _Edomites_ and Shepherds, and by their assistance
invaded and took _Zidon_, that being a town very convenient for the
Merchants who fled from the _Red Sea_: and then did the _Zidonians_ fly by
Sea to _Tyre_ and _Aradus_, and to other havens in _Asia Minor_, _Greece_,
and _Libya_, with which, by means of their trade, they had been acquainted
before; the great wars and victories of _David_ their enemy, prompting them
to fly by Sea: for [93] they went with a great multitude, not to seek
_Europa_ as was pretended, but to seek new Seats, and therefore fled from
their enemies: and when some of them fled under _Cadmus_ and his brothers
to _Cilicia_, _Asia minor_, and _Greece_; others fled under other
Commanders to seek new Seats in _Libya_, and there built many walled towns,
as _Nonnus_ [94] affirms: and their leader was also there called _Cadmus_,
which word signifies an eastern man, and his wife was called _Sithonis_ a
_Zidonian_. Many from those Cities went afterwards with the great _Bacchus_
in his Armies: and by these things, the taking of _Zidon_, and the flight
of the _Zidonians_ under _Abibalus_, _Cadmus_, _Cilix_, _Thasus_,
_Membliarius_, _Atymnus_, and other Captains, to _Tyre_, _Aradus_,
_Cilicia_, _Rhodes_, _Caria_, _Bithynia_, _Phrygia_, _Calliste_, _Thasus_,
_Samothrace_, _Crete_, _Greece_ and _Libya_, and the building of _Tyre_ and
_Thebes_, and beginning of the Reigns of _Abibalus_ and _Cadmus_ over those
Cities, are fixed upon the fifteenth or sixteenth year of _David_'s Reign,
or thereabout. By means of these Colonies of _Ph≈ìnicians_, the people of
_Caria_ learnt sea-affairs, in such small vessels with oars as were then in
use, and began to frequent the _Greek Seas_, and people some of the Islands
therein, before the Reign of _Minos_: for _Cadmus_, in coming to _Greece_,
arrived first at _Rhodes_, an Island upon the borders of _Caria_, and left
there a Colony of _Ph≈ìnicians_, who sacrificed men to _Saturn_, and the
_Telchines_ being repulsed by _Phoroneus_, retired from _Argos_ to _Rhodes_
with _Phorbas_, who purged the Island from Serpents; and _Triopas_, the son
of _Phorbas_, carried a Colony from _Rhodes_ to _Caria_, and there
possessed himself of a promontory, thence called _Triopium_: and by this
and such like Colonies _Caria_ was furnished with Shipping and Seamen, and
called [95] _Ph≈ìnice_. _Strabo_ and _Herodotus_ [96] tell us, that the
_Cares_ were called _Leleges_, and became subject to _Minos_, and lived
first in the Islands of the _Greek Seas_, and went thence into _Caria_, a
country possest before by some of the _Leleges_ and _Pelasgi_: whence it's
probable that when _Lelex_ and _Pelasgus_ came first into _Greece_ to seek
new Seats, they left part of their Colonies in _Caria_ and the neighbouring
Islands.

The _Zidonians_ being still possessed of the trade of the _Mediterranean_,
as far westward as _Greece_ and _Libya_, and the trade of the _Red Sea_
being richer; the _Tyrians_ traded on the _Red Sea_ in conjunction with
_Solomon_ and the Kings of _Judah_, 'till after the _Trojan_ war; and so
also did the Merchants of _Aradus_, _Arvad_, or _Arpad_: for in the
_Persian Gulph_ [97] were two Islands called _Tyre_ and _Aradus_, which had
Temples like the _Ph≈ìnician_; and therefore the _Tyrians_ and _Aradians_
sailed thither, and beyond, to the Coasts of _India_, while the _Zidonians_
frequented the _Mediterranean_: and hence it is that _Homer_ celebrates
_Zidon_, and makes no mention of _Tyre_. But at length, [98] in the Reign
of _Jehoram_ King of _Judah_, _Edom_ revolted from the Dominion of _Judah_,
and made themselves a King; and the trade of _Judah_ and _Tyre_ upon the
_Red Sea_ being thereby interrupted, the _Tyrians_ built ships for
merchandise upon the _Mediterranean_, and began there to make long Voyages
to places not yet frequented by the _Zidonians_; some of them going to the
coasts of _Afric_ beyond the _Syrtes_, and building _Adrymetum_,
_Carthage_, _Leptis_, _Utica_, and _Capsa_; and others going to the Coasts
of _Spain_, and building _Carteia_, _Gades_ and _Tartessus_; and others
going further to the _Fortunate Islands_, and to _Britain_ and _Thule_.
_Jehoram_ Reigned eight years, and the two last years was sick in his
bowels, and before that sickness _Edom_ revolted, because of _Jehoram_'s
wicked Reign: if we place that revolt about the middle of the first six
years, it will fall upon the fifth year of _Pygmalion_ King of _Tyre_, and
so was about twelve or fifteen years after the taking of _Troy_: and then,
by reason of this revolt, the _Tyrians_ retired from the _Red Sea_, and
began long Voyages upon the _Mediterranean_; for in the seventh year of
_Pygmalion_, his Sister _Dido_ sailed to the Coast of _Afric_ beyond the
_Syrtes_, and there built _Carthage_. This retiring of the _Tyrians_ from
the _Red Sea_ to make long Voyages on the _Mediterranean_, together with
the flight of the _Edomites_ from _David_ to the _Philistims_, gave
occasion to the tradition both of the ancient _Persians_, and of the
_Ph≈ìnicians_ themselves, that the _Ph≈ìnicians_ came originally from the
_Red Sea_ to the coasts of the _Mediterranean_, and presently undertook
long Voyages, as _Herodotus_ [99] relates: for _Herodotus_, in the
beginning of his first book, relates that the _Ph≈ìnicians_ coming from the
_Red Sea_ to the _Mediterranean_, and beginning to make long Voyages with
_Egyptian_ and _Assyrian_ wares, among other places came to _Argos_, and
having sold their wares, seized and carried away into _Egypt_ some of the
_Grecian_ women who came to buy them; and amongst those women was _Io_ the
daughter of _Inachus_. The _Ph≈ìnicians_ therefore came from the _Red Sea_,
in the days of _Io_ and her brother _Phoroneus_ King of _Argos_, and by
consequence at that time when _David_ conquered the _Edomites_, and made
them fly every way from the _Red Sea_; some into _Egypt_ with their young
King, and others to the _Philistims_ their next neighbours and the enemies
of _David_. And this flight gave occasion to the _Philistims_ to call many
places _Erythra_, in memory of their being _Erythreans_ or _Edomites_, and
of their coming from the _Erythrean_ Sea; for _Erythra_ was the name of a
City in _Ionia_, of another in _Libya_, of another in _Locris_, of another
in _B≈ìotia_, of another in _Cyprus_, of another in _√Ütolia_, of another in
_Asia_ near _Chius_; and _Erythia Acra_ was a promontory in _Libya_, and
_Erythr√¶um_ a promontory in _Crete_, and _Erythros_ a place near _Tybur_,
and _Erythini_ a City or Country in _Paphlagonia_: and the name _Erythea_
or _Erythr√¶_ was given to the Island _Gades_, peopled by _Ph≈ìnicians_. So
_Solinus_, [100] _In capite B√¶tic√¶ insula a continenti septingentis
passibus memoratur quam Tyrii a rubro mari profecti Erytheam, P≈ìni sua
lingua Gadir, id est sepem nominarunt._ And _Pliny_, [101] concerning a
little Island near it; _Erythia dicta est quoniam Tyrii Aborigines eorum,
orti ab Erythr√¶o mari ferebantur._ Among the _Ph≈ìnicians_ who came with
_Cadmus_ into _Greece_, there were [102] _Arabians_, and [103] _Erythreans_
or Inhabitants of the _Red Sea_, that is _Edomites_; and in _Thrace_ there
settled a People who were circumcised and called _Odomantes_, that is, as
some think, _Edomites_. _Edom_, _Erythra_ and _Ph≈ìnicia_ are names of the
same signification, the words denoting a red colour: which makes it
probable that the _Erythreans_ who fled from _David_, settled in great
numbers in _Ph≈ìnicia_, that is, in all the Sea-coasts of _Syria_ from
_Egypt_ to _Zidon_; and by calling themselves _Ph≈ìnicians_ in the language
of _Syria_, instead of _Erythreans_, gave the name of _Ph≈ìnicia_ to all
that Sea-coast, and to that only. So _Strabo_: [104] ‚ÄõŒüŒπ ŒºŒµŒΩ Œ≥Œ±œÅ Œ∫Œ±Œπ œÑŒøœÖœÇ
Œ¶ŒøŒπŒΩŒπŒ∫Œ±œÇ, Œ∫Œ±Œπ œÑŒøœÖœÇ Œ£ŒπŒ¥ŒøŒΩŒπŒøœÖœÇ œÑŒøœÖœÇ Œ∫Œ±Œ∏' ‚ÄõŒ∑ŒºŒ±œÇ Œ±œÄŒøŒπŒ∫ŒøœÖœÇ ŒµŒπŒΩŒ±Œπ œÑœâŒΩ ŒµŒΩ œÑœâŒπ
Œ©Œ∫ŒµŒ±ŒΩœâŒπ œÜŒ±œÉŒπ, œÄœÅŒøœÉœÑŒπŒ∏ŒµŒΩœÑŒµœÇ Œ∫Œ±Œπ Œ¥ŒπŒ± œÑŒπ Œ¶ŒøŒπŒΩŒπŒ∫ŒµœÇ ŒµŒ∫Œ±ŒªŒøœÖŒΩœÑŒø, ‚ÄõŒøœÑŒπ Œ∫Œ±Œπ ‚ÄõŒ∑
Œ∏Œ±ŒªŒ±œÑœÑŒ± ŒµœÅœÖŒ∏œÅŒ±. _Alii referunt Ph≈ìnices & Sidonios nostros esse colonos
eorum qui sunt in Oceano, addentes illos ideo vocari Ph≈ìnices _[puniceos]_
quod mare rubrum sit._

_Strabo_ [105] mentioning the first men who left the Sea-coasts, and
ventured out into the deep, and undertook long Voyages, names _Bacchus_,
_Hercules_, _Jason_, _Ulysses_ and _Menelaus_; and saith that the Dominion
of _Minos_ over the Sea was celebrated, and the Navigation of the
_Ph≈ìnicians_ who went beyond the Pillars of _Hercules_, and built Cities
there, and in the middle of the Sea-coasts of _Afric_, presently after the
war of _Troy_. These _Ph≈ìnicians_ [106] were the _Tyrians_, who at that
time built _Carthage_ in _Afric_, and _Carteia_ in _Spain_, and _Gades_ in
the Island of that name without the _Straights_; and gave the name of
_Hercules_ to their chief Leader, because of his labours and success, and
that of _Heraclea_ to the city _Carteia_ which he built. So _Strabo_: [107]
ŒïŒ∫œÄŒªŒµŒøœÖœÉŒπŒΩ ŒøœÖŒΩ ŒµŒ∫ œÑŒ∑œÇ ‚ÄõŒ∑ŒºŒµœÑŒµœÅŒ±œÇ Œ∏Œ±ŒªŒ±œÑœÑŒ∑œÇ ŒµŒπœÇ œÑŒ∑ŒΩ ŒµŒæœâ, Œ¥ŒµŒæŒπŒøŒΩ ŒµœÉœÑŒπ œÑŒøœÖœÑŒøŒá
Œ∫Œ±Œπ œÄœÅŒøœÇ Œ±œÖœÑŒø ŒöŒ±ŒªœÄŒ∑ [ŒöŒ±œÅœÑŒ∑ŒπŒ±] [108] œÄŒøŒªŒπœÇ ŒµŒΩ œÑŒµœÑœÑŒ±œÅŒ±Œ∫ŒøŒΩœÑŒ± œÉœÑŒ±Œ¥ŒπŒøŒπœÇ
Œ±ŒæŒπŒøŒªŒøŒ≥ŒøœÇ Œ∫Œ±Œπ œÄŒ±ŒªŒ±ŒπŒ±, ŒΩŒ±œÖœÉœÑŒ±Œ∏ŒºŒøŒΩ œÄŒøœÑŒµ Œ≥ŒµŒΩŒøŒºŒµŒΩŒ∑ œÑœâŒΩ ŒôŒ≤Œ∑œÅœâŒΩŒá ŒµŒΩŒπŒøŒπ Œ¥Œµ Œ∫Œ±Œπ
ŒóœÅŒ±Œ∫ŒªŒµŒøœÖœÇ Œ∫œÑŒπœÉŒºŒ± ŒªŒµŒ≥ŒøœÖœÉŒπŒΩ Œ±œÖœÑŒ∑ŒΩ, ‚ÄõœâŒΩ ŒµœÉœÑŒπ Œ∫Œ±Œπ Œ§ŒπŒºŒøœÉŒ∏ŒµŒΩŒ∑œÇŒá ‚ÄõŒøœÇ Œ¶Œ∑œÉŒπ Œ∫Œ±Œπ
ŒóœÅŒ±Œ∫ŒªŒµŒπŒ±ŒΩ ŒøŒΩŒøŒºŒ±Œ∂ŒµœÉŒ∏Œ±Œπ œÑŒø œÄŒ±ŒªŒ±ŒπŒøŒΩŒá Œ¥ŒµŒπŒ∫ŒΩœÖœÉŒ∏Œ±Œπ œÑŒµ ŒºŒµŒ≥Œ±ŒΩ œÄŒµœÅŒπŒ≤ŒøŒªŒøŒΩ, Œ∫Œ±Œπ
ŒΩŒµœâœÉŒøŒπŒ∫ŒøœÖœÇ. _Mons Calpe ad dextram est e nostro mari foras navigantibus, &
ad quadraginta inde stadia urbs Carteia vetusta ac memorabilis, olim statio
navibus Hispanorum. Hanc ab Hercule quidam conditam aiunt, inter quos est
Timosthenes, qui eam antiquitus Heracleam fuisse appellatam refert,
ostendique adhuc magnum murorum circuitum & navalia._ This _Hercules_, in
memory of his building and Reigning over the City _Carteia_, they called
also _Melcartus_, the King of _Carteia_. _Bochart_ [109] writes, that
_Carteia_ was at first called _Melcarteia_, from its founder _Melcartus_,
and by an _Aph√¶resis_, _Carteia_; and that _Melcartus_ signifies _Melec
Kartha_, the King of the city, that is, saith he, of the city _Tyre_: but
considering that no ancient Author tells us, that _Carteia_ was ever called
_Melcarteia_, or that _Melcartus_ was King of _Tyre_; I had rather say that
_Melcartus_, or _Melecartus_, had his name from being the Founder and
Governor or Prince of the city _Carteia_. Under _Melcartus_ the _Tyrians_
sailed as far as _Tartessus_ or _Tarshish_, a place in the Western part of
_Spain_, between the two mouths of the river _B≈ìtis_, and there they [110]
met with much silver, which they purchased for trifles: they sailed also as
far as _Britain_ before the death of _Melcartus_; for [111] _Pliny_ tells
us, _Plumbum ex Cassiteride insula primus apportavit Midacritus_: And
_Bochart_ [112] observes that _Midacritus_ is a _Greek_ name corruptly
written for _Melcartus_; _Britain_ being unknown to the _Greeks_ long after
it was discovered by the _Ph≈ìnicians_. After the death of _Melcartus_, they
[113] built a Temple to him in the Island _Gades_, and adorned it with the
sculptures of the labours of _Hercules_, and of his _Hydra_, and the Horses
to whom he threw _Diomedes_, King of the _Bistones_ in _Thrace_, to be
devoured. In this Temple was the golden Belt of _Teucer_, and the golden
Olive of _Pygmalion_ bearing _Smaragdine_ fruit: and by these consecrated
gifts of _Teucer_ and _Pygmalion_, you may know that it was built in their
days. _Pomponius_ derives it from the times of the _Trojan_ war; for
_Teucer_, seven years after that war, according to the Marbles, arrived at
_Cyprus_, being banished from home by his father _Telamon_, and there built
_Salamis_: and he and his Posterity Reigned there 'till _Evagoras_, the
last of them, was conquered by the _Persians_, in the twelfth year of
_Artaxerxes Mnemon_. Certainly this _Tyrian Hercules_ could be no older
than the _Trojan_ war, because the _Tyrians_ did not begin to navigate the
_Mediterranean_ 'till after that war: for _Homer_ and _Hesiod_ knew nothing
of this navigation, and the _Tyrian Hercules_ went to the coasts of
_Spain_, and was buried in _Gades_: so _Arnobius_ [114]; _Tyrius Hercules
sepultus in finibus Hispani√¶_: and _Mela_, speaking of the Temple of
_Hercules_ in _Gades_, saith, _Cur sanctum sit ossa ejus ibi sepulta
efficiunt_. _Carthage_ [115] paid tenths to this _Hercules_, and sent their
payments yearly to _Tyre_: and thence it's probable that this _Hercules_
went to the coast of _Afric_, as well as to that of _Spain_, and by his
discoveries prepared the way to _Dido_: _Orosius_ [116] and others tell us
that he built _Capsa_ there. _Josephus_ tells of an earlier _Hercules_, to
whom _Hiram_ built a Temple at _Tyre_: and perhaps there might be also an
earlier _Hercules_ of _Tyre_, who set on foot their trade on the _Red Sea_
in the days of _David_ or _Solomon_.

_Tatian_, in his book against the _Greeks_, relates, that amongst the
_Ph≈ìnicians_ flourished three ancient Historians, _Theodotus_, _Hysicrates_
and _Mochus_, _who all of them delivered in their histories, translated
into _Greek_ by _Latus_, under which of the Kings happened the rapture of
_Europa_; the voyage of _Menelaus_ into _Ph≈ìnicia_; and the league and
friendship between _Solomon_ and _Hiram_, when _Hiram_ gave his daughter to
_Solomon_, and furnished him with timber for building the Temple: and that
the same is affirmed by _Menander_ of _Pergamus__. _Josephus_ [117] lets us
know that the Annals of the _Tyrians_, from the days of _Abibalus_ and
_Hiram_, Kings of _Tyre_, were extant in his days; and that _Menander_ of
_Pergamus_ translated them into _Greek_, and that _Hiram_'s friendship to
_Solomon_, and assistance in building the Temple, was mentioned in them;
and that the Temple was founded in the eleventh year of _Hiram_: and by the
testimony of _Menander_ and the ancient _Ph≈ìnician_ historians, the rapture
of _Europa_, and by consequence the coming of her brother _Cadmus_ into
_Greece_, happened within the time of the Reigns of the Kings of _Tyre_
delivered in these histories; and therefore not before the Reign of
_Abibalus_, the first of them, nor before the Reign of King _David_ his
contemporary. The voyage of _Menelaus_ might be after the destruction of
_Troy_. _Solomon_ therefore Reigned in the times between the raptures of
_Europa_ and _Helena_, and _Europa_ and her brother _Cadmus_ flourished in
the days or _David_. _Minos_, the son of _Europa_, flourished in the Reign
of _Solomon_, and part of the Reign of _Rehoboam_: and the children of
_Minos_, namely _Androgeus_ his eldest son, _Deucalion_ his youngest son
and one of the _Argonauts_, _Ariadne_ the mistress of _Theseus_ and
_Bacchus_, and _Ph√¶dra_ the wife of _Theseus_; flourished in the latter end
of _Solomon_, and in the Reigns of _Rehoboam_, _Abijah_ and _Asa_: and
_Idomeneus_, the grandson of _Minos_, was at the war of _Troy_: and _Hiram_
succeeded his father _Abibalus_, in the three and twentieth year of
_David_: and _Abibalus_ might found the Kingdom of _Tyre_ about sixteen or
eighteen years before, when _Zidon_ was taken by the _Philistims_; and the
_Zidonians_ fled from thence, under the conduct of _Cadmus_ and other
commanders, to seek new seats. Thus by the Annals of _Tyre_, and the
ancient _Ph≈ìnician_ Historians who followed them, _Abibalus_, _Alymnus_,
_Cadmus_, and _Europa_ fled from _Zidon_ about the sixteenth year of
_David_'s Reign: and the _Argonautic_ Expedition being later by about three
Generations, will be about three hundred years later than where the
_Greeks_ have placed it.

After Navigation in long ships with sails, and one order of oars, had been
propagated from _Egypt_ to _Ph≈ìnicia_ and _Greece_, and thereby the
_Zidonians_ had extended their trade to _Greece_, and carried it on about
an hundred and fifty years; and then the _Tyrians_ being driven from the
_Red Sea_ by the _Edomites_, had begun a new trade on the _Mediterranean_
with _Spain_, _Afric_, _Britain_, and other remote nations; they carried it
on about an hundred and sixty years; and then the _Corinthians_ began to
improve Navigation, by building bigger ships with three orders of oars,
called _Triremes_. For [118] _Thucydides_ tells us that the _Corinthians_
were the first of the _Greeks_ who built such ships, and that a
ship-carpenter of _Corinth_ went thence to _Samos_, about 300 years before
the end of the _Peloponnesian_ war, and built also four ships for the
_Samians_; and that 260 years before the end of that war, that is, about
the 29th Olympiad, there was a fight at sea between the _Corinthians_ and
the _Corcyreans_ which was the oldest sea-fight mentioned in history.
_Thucydides_ tells us further, that the first colony which the _Greeks_
sent into _Sicily_, came from _Chalcis_ in _Eub≈ìa_, under the conduct of
_Thucles_, and built _Naxus_; and the next year _Archias_ came from
_Corinth_ with a colony, and built _Syracuse_; and that _Lamis_ came about
the same time into _Sicily_, with a colony from _Megara_ in _Achaia_, and
lived first at _Trotilum_, and then at _Leontini_, and died at _Thapsus_
near _Syracuse_; and that after his death, this colony was invited by
_Hyblo_ to _Megara_ in _Sicily_, and lived there 245 years, and was then
expelled by _Gelo_ King of _Sicily_. Now _Gelo_ flourished about 78 years
before the end of the _Peloponnesian_ war: count backwards the 78 and the
245 years, and about 12 years more for the Reign of _Lamis_ in _Sicily_,
and the reckoning will place the building of _Syracuse_ about 335 years
before the end of the _Peloponnesian_ war, or in the tenth Olympiad; and
about that time _Eusebius_ and others place it: but it might be twenty or
thirty years later, the antiquities of those days having been raised more
or less by the _Greeks_. From the colonies henceforward sent into _Italy_
and _Sicily_ came the name of _Gr√¶cia magna_.

_Thucydides_ [119] tells us further, that the _Greeks_ began to come into
_Sicily_ almost three hundred years after the _Siculi_ had invaded that
Island with an army out of _Italy_: suppose it 280 years after, and the
building of _Syracuse_ 310 years before the end of the _Peloponnesian_ war;
and that invasion of _Sicily_ by the _Siculi_ will be 590 years before the
end of that war, that is, in the 27th year of _Solomon_'s Reign, or
thereabout. _Hellanicus_ [120] tells us, that it was in the third
Generation before the _Trojan_ war; and in the 26th year of the Priesthood
of _Alcinoe_, Priestess of _Juno Argiva_: and _Philistius_ of _Syracuse_,
that it was 80 years before the _Trojan_ war: whence it follows that the
_Trojan_ war and _Argonautic_ Expedition were later than the days of
_Solomon_ and _Rehoboam_, and could not be much earlier than where we have
placed them.

The Kingdom of _Macedon_ [121] was founded by _Caranus_ and _Perdiccas_,
who being of the Race of _Temenus_ King of _Argos_, fled from _Argos_ in
the Reign of _Phidon_ the brother of _Caranus_. _Temenus_ was one of the
three brothers who led the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_, and shared the
conquest among themselves: he obtained _Argos_; and after him, and his son
_Cisus_, the Kingdom of _Argos_ became divided among the posterity of
_Temenus_, until _Phidon_ reunited it, expelling his kindred. _Phidon_ grew
potent, appointed weights and measures in _Peloponnesus_, and coined silver
money; and removing the _Pis√¶ans_ and _Eleans_, presided in the Olympic
games; but was soon after subdued by the _Eleans_ and _Spartans_.
_Herodotus_ [122] reckons that _Perdiccas_ was the first King of _Macedon_;
later writers, as _Livy_, _Pausanias_ and _Suidas_, make _Caranus_ the
first King: _Justin_ calls _Perdiccas_ the Sucessor of _Caranus_; and
_Solinus_ saith that _Perdiccas_ succeeded _Caranus_; and was the first
that obtained the name of King. It's probable that _Caranus_ and
_Perdiccas_ were contemporaries, and fled about the same time from
_Phidon_, and at first erected small principalities in _Macedonia_, which,
after the death of _Caranus_, became one under _Perdiccas_. _Herodotus_
[123] tells us, that after _Perdiccas_ Reigned _Ar√¶us_, or _Arg√¶us_,
_Philip_, _√Üropus_, _Alcetas_, _Amyntas_, and _Alexander_, successively.
_Alexander_ was contemporary to _Xerxes_ King of _Persia_, and died _An._
4. Olymp. 79, and was succeeded by _Perdiccas_, and he by his son
_Archelaus_: and _Thucydides_ [124] tells us that there were eight Kings of
_Macedon_ before this _Archelaus_: now by reckoning above forty years
a-piece to these Kings, Chronologers have made _Phidon_ and _Caranus_ older
than the Olympiads; whereas if we should reckon their Reigns at about 18 or
20 years a-piece one with another, the first seven Reigns counted backwards
from the death of this _Alexander_, will place the dominion of _Phidon_,
and the beginning of the Kingdom of _Macedon_ under _Perdiccas_ and
_Caranus_, upon the 46th or 47th Olympiad, or thereabout. It could scarce
be earlier, because _Leocides_ the son of _Phidon_, and _Megacles_ the son
of _Alcm√¶on_, at one and the same time courted _Agarista_, the daughter of
_Clisthenes_ King of _Sicyon_, as _Herodotus_ [125] tells us; and the
_Amphictyons_, by the advice of _Solon_, made _Alcm√¶on_, and _Clisthenes_,
and _Eurolycus_ King of _Thessaly_, commanders of their army, in their war
against _Cirrha_; and the _Cirrheans_ were conquered _An._ 2. Olymp. 47.
according to the Marbles. _Phidon_ therefore and his brother _Caranus_ were
contemporary to _Solon_, _Alcm√¶on_, _Clisthenes_, and _Eurolycus_, and
flourished about the 48th and 49th Olympiads. They were also contemporary
in their later days to _Cr≈ìsus_; for _Solon_ conversed with _Cr≈ìsus_, and
_Alcm√¶on_ entertained and conducted the messengers whom _Cr≈ìsus_ sent to
consult the Oracle at _Delphi_, _An._ 1. Olymp. 56. according to the
Marbles, and was sent for by _Cr≈ìsus_, and rewarded with much riches.

But the times set down in the Marbles before the _Persian_ Empire began,
being collected by reckoning the Reigns of Kings equipollent to
Generations, and three Generations to an hundred years or above; and the
Reigns of Kings, one with another, being shorter in the proportion of about
four to seven; the Chronology set down in the Marbles, until the Conquest
of _Media_ by _Cyrus_, _An._ 4, Olymp. 60, will approach the truth much
nearer, by shortening the times before that Conquest in the proportion of
four to seven. So the _Cirrheans_ were conquered _An._ 2, Olymp. 47,
according to the Marbles, that is 54 years before the Conquest of _Media_;
and these years being shortened in the proportion of four to seven, become
31 years; which subducted from _An._ 4, Olymp. 60, place the Conquest of
_Cirrha_ upon _An._ 1, Olymp. 53: and, by the like correction of the
Marbles, _Alcm√¶on_ entertained and conducted the messengers whom _Cr≈ìsus_
sent to consult the Oracle at _Delphi_, _An._ 1, Olymp. 58; that is, four
years before the Conquest of _Sardes_ by _Cyrus_: and the Tyranny of
_Pisistratus_, which by the Marbles began at _Athens_, _An._ 4, Olymp. 54,
by the like correction began _An._ 3, Olymp. 57; and by consequence _Solon_
died _An._ 4, Olymp. 57. This method may be used alone, where other
arguments are wanting; but where they are not wanting, the best arguments
are to be preferred.

_Iphitus_ [126] presided both in the Temple of _Jupiter Olympius_, and in
the Olympic Games, and so did his Successors 'till the 26th Olympiad; and
so long the victors were rewarded with a _Tripos_: but then the _Pis√¶ans_
getting above the _Eleans_, began to preside, and rewarded the victors with
a Crown, and instituted the _Carnea_ to _Apollo_; and continued to preside
'till _Phidon_ interrupted them, that is, 'till about the time of the 49th
Olympiad: for [127] in the 48th Olympiad the _Eleans_ entered the country
of the _Pis√¶ans_, suspecting their designs, but were prevailed upon to
return home quietly; afterwards the _Pis√¶ans_ confederated with several
other _Greek_ nations, and made war upon the _Eleans_, and in the end were
beaten: in this war I conceive it was that _Phidon_ presided, suppose in
the 49th Olympiad; for [128] in the 50th Olympiad, for putting an end to
the contentions between the Kings about presiding, two men were chosen by
lot out of the city _Elis_ to preside, and their number in the 65th
Olympiad was increased to nine, and afterwards to ten; and these judges
were called _Hellenodic√¶_, judges for or in the name of _Greece_.
_Pausanias_ tells us, that the _Eleans_ called in _Phidon_ and together
with him celebrated the 8th Olympiad; he should have said the 49th
Olympiad; but _Herodotus_ tells us, that _Phidon_ removed the _Eleans_; and
both might be true: the _Eleans_ might call in _Phidon_ against the
_Pis√¶ans_, and upon overcoming be refused presiding in the Olympic games by
_Phidon_, and confederate with the _Spartans_, and by their assistance
overthrow the Kingdom of _Phidon_, and recover their ancient right of
presiding in the games.

_Strabo_ [129] tells us that _Phidon_ was the tenth from _Temenus_; not the
tenth King, for between _Cisus_ and _Phidon_ they Reigned not, but the
tenth from father to son, including _Temenus_. If 27 years be reckoned to a
Generation by the eldest sons, the nine intervals will amount unto 243
years, which counted back from the 48th Olympiad, in which _Phidon_
flourished, will place the Return of the _Heraclides_ about fifty years
before the beginning of the Olympiads, as above. But Chronologers reckon
about 515 years from the Return of the _Heraclides_ to the 48th Olympiad,
and account _Phidon_ the seventh from _Temenus_; which is after the rate of
85 years to a Generation, and therefore not to be admitted.

_Cyrus_ took _Babylon_, according to _Ptolomy_'s Canon, nine years before
his death, _An. Nabonass._ 209, _An._ 2, Olymp. 60: and he took _Sardes_ a
little before, namely _An._ 1, Olymp. 59, as _Scaliger_ collects from
_Sosicrates_: _Cr≈ìsus_ was then King of _Sardes_, and Reigned fourteen
years, and therefore began to Reign _An._ 3, Olymp. 55. After _Solon_ had
made laws for the _Athenians_, he obliged them upon oath to observe those
laws 'till he returned from his travels; and then travelled ten years,
going to _Egypt_ and _Cyprus_, and visiting _Thales_ of _Miletus_: and upon
His Return to _Athens_, _Pisistratus_ began to affect the Tyranny of that
city, which made _Solon_ travel a second time; and now he was invited by
_Cr≈ìsus_ to _Sardes_; and _Cr≈ìsus_, before _Solon_ visited him, had subdued
all _Asia Minor_, as far as to the River _Halys_; and therefore he received
that visit towards the latter part of his Reign; and we may place it upon
the ninth year thereof, _An._ 3, Olymp. 57: and the legislature of _Solon_
twelve years earlier, _An._ 3, Olymp. 54: and that of _Draco_ still ten
years earlier, _An._ 1, Olymp. 52. After _Solon_ had visited _Cr≈ìsus_, he
went into _Cilicia_ and some other places, and died [130] in his travels:
and this was in the second year of the Tyranny of _Pisistratus_. _Comias_
was Archon when _Solon_ returned from his first travels to _Athens_; and
the next year _Hegestratus_ was Archon, and _Solon_ died before the end of
the year, _An._ 3, Olymp. 57, as above: and by this reckoning the objection
of _Plutarch_ above mentioned is removed.

We have now shewed that the _Ph≈ìnicians_ of _Zidon_, under the conduct of
_Cadmus_ and other captains, flying from their enemies, came into _Greece_,
with letters and other arts, about the sixteenth year of King _David_'s
Reign; that _Europa_ the sister of _Cadmus_, fled some days before him from
_Zidon_ and came to _Crete_, and there became the mother of _Minos_, about
the 18th or 20th year of _David_'s Reign; that _Sesostris_ and the great
_Bacchus_, and by consequence also _Osiris_, were one and the same King of
_Egypt_ with _Sesac_, and came out of _Egypt_ in the fifth year of
_Rehoboam_ to invade the nations, and died 25 years after _Solomon_; that
the _Argonautic_ expedition was about 43 years after the death of
_Solomon_; that _Troy_ was taken about 76 or 78 years after the death of
_Solomon_; that the _Ph≈ìnicians_ of _Tyre_ were driven from the _Red Sea_
by the _Edomites_, about 87 years after the death of _Solomon_, and within
two or three years began to make long voyages upon the _Mediterranean_,
sailing to _Spain_, and beyond, under a commander whom for his industry,
conduct, and discoveries, they honoured with the names of _Melcartus_ and
_Hercules_; that the return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_ was
about 158 years after the death of _Solomon_; that _Lycurgus_ the
Legislator Reigned at _Sparta_, and gave the three Discs to the Olympic
treasury, _An._ 1, Olymp. 18, or 273 years after the death of _Solomon_,
the _Quinquertium_ being at that time added to the Olympic Games; that the
_Greeks_ began soon after to build _Triremes_, and to send Colonies into
_Sicily_ and _Italy_, which gave the name of _Gr√¶cia magna_ to those
countries; that the first _Messenian_ war ended about 350 years after the
death of _Solomon_, _An._ 1, Olymp. 37; that _Phidon_ was contemporary to
_Solon_, and presided in the Olympic Games in the 49th Olympiad, that is,
397 years after the death of _Solomon_; that _Draco_ was Archon, and made
his laws, _An._ 1, Olymp. 52; and _Solon_, _An._ 3, Olymp. 54; and that
_Solon_ visited _Cr≈ìsus_ _Ann._ 3, Olymp. 57, or 433 years after the death
of _Solomon_; and _Sardes_ was taken by _Cyrus_ 438 years, and _Babylon_ by
_Cyrus_ 443 years, and _Echatane_ by _Cyrus_ 445 years after the death of
_Solomon_: and these periods being settled, they become a foundation for
building the Chronology of the antient times upon them; and nothing more
remains for settling such a Chronology, than to make these Periods a little
exacter, if it can be, and to shew how the rest of the Antiquities of
_Greece_, _Egypt_, _Assyria_, _Chald√¶a_, and _Media_ may suit therewith.

Whilst _Bacchus_ made his expedition into _India_, _Theseus_ left _Ariadne_
in the Island _Naxus_ or _Dia_, as above, and succeeded his father _√Ügeus_
at _Athens_; and upon the Return of _Bacchus_ from _India_, _Ariadne_
became his mistress, and accompanied him in his triumphs; and this was
about ten years after the death of _Solomon_: and from that time reigned
eight Kings in _Athens_, viz. _Theseus_, _Menestheus_, _Demophoon_,
_Oxyntes_, _Aphidas_, _Thym√¶tes_, _Melanthus_, and _Codrus_; these Kings,
at 19 years a-piece one with another, might take up about 152 years, and
end about 44 years before the Olympiads: then Reigned twelve Archons for
life, which at 14 or 15 years a-piece, the State being unstable, might take
up about 174 years, and end _An._ 2, Olymp. 33: then reigned seven
decennial Archons, which are usually reckoned at seventy years; but some of
them dying in their Regency, they might not take up above forty years, and
so end about _An._ 2, Olymp. 43, about which time began the Second
_Messenian_ war: these decennial Archons were followed by the annual
Archons, amongst whom were the Legislators _Draco_ and _Solon_. Soon after
the death of _Codrus_, his second Son _Neleus_, not bearing the Reign of
his lame brother _Medon_ at _Athens_, retired into _Asia_, and was followed
by his younger brothers _Androcles_ and _Cyaretus_, and many others: these
had the name of _Ionians_, from _Ion_ the son of _Xuthus_, who commanded
the army of the _Athenians_ at the death of _Erechtheus_, and gave the name
of _Ionia_ to the country which they invaded: and about 20 or 25 years
after the death of _Codrus_, these new Colonies, being now Lords of
_Ionia_, set up over themselves a common Council called _Panionium_, and
composed of Counsellors sent from twelve of their cities, _Miletus_,
_Myus_, _Priene_, _Ephesus_, _Colophon_, _Lebedus_, _Teos_, _Clazomen√¶_,
_Phoc√¶a_, _Samos_, _Chios_, and _Erythr√¶a_: and this was the _Ionic_
Migration.

[131] When the _Greeks_ and _Latines_ were forming their Technical
Chronology, there were great disputes about the Antiquity of _Rome_: the
_Greeks_ made it much older than the Olympiads: some of them said it was
built by _√Üneas_; others, by _Romus_, the son or grandson of _√Üneas_;
others, by _Romus_, the son or grandson of _Latinus_ King of the
_Aborigines_; others, by _Romus_ the son of _Ulysses_, or of _Ascanius_, or
of _Italus_: and some of the _Latines_ at first fell in with the opinion of
the _Greeks_, saying that it was built by _Romulus_, the son or grandson of
_√Üneas_. _Tim√¶us Siculus_ represented it built by _Romulus_, the grandson
of _√Üneas_, above an hundred years before the Olympiads; and so did
_N√¶vius_ the Poet, who was twenty years older than _Ennius_, and served in
the first _Punic_ war, and wrote the history of that war. Hitherto nothing
certain was agreed upon, but about 140 or 150 years after the death of
_Alexander the Great_, they began to say that _Rome_ was built a second
time by _Romulus_, in the fifteenth Age after the destruction of _Troy_: by
Ages they meant Reigns of the Kings of the _Latines_ at _Alba_, and
reckoned the first fourteen Reigns at about 432 years, and the following
Reigns of the seven Kings of _Rome_ at 244 years, both which numbers made
up the time of about 676 years from the taking of _Troy_, according to
these Chronologers; but are much too long for the course of nature: and by
this reckoning they placed the building of _Rome_ upon the sixth or seventh
Olympiad; _Varro_ placed it on the first year of the Seventh Olympiad, and
was therein generally followed by the _Romans_; but this can scarce be
reconciled to the course of nature: for I do not meet with any instance in
all history, since Chronology was certain, wherein seven Kings, most of
whom were slain, Reigned 244 years in continual Succession. The fourteen
Reigns of the Kings of the _Latines_, at twenty years a-piece one with
another, amount unto 280 years, and these years counted from the taking of
_Troy_ end in the 38th Olympiad: and the Seven Reigns of the Kings of
_Rome_, four or five of them being slain and one deposed, may at a moderate
reckoning amount to fifteen or sixteen years a-piece one with another: let
them be reckoned at seventeen years a-piece, and they will amount unto 119
years; which being counted backwards from the Regifuge, end also in the
38th Olympiad: and by these two reckonings _Rome_ was built in the 38th
Olympiad, or thereabout. The 280 years and the 119 years together make up
399 years; and the same number of years arises by counting the twenty and
one Reigns at nineteen years a-piece: and this being the whole time between
the taking of _Troy_ and the Regifuge, let these years be counted backward
from the Regifuge, _An._ 1, Olymp. 68, and they will place the taking of
_Troy_ about 74 years after the death of _Solomon_.

When _Sesostris_ returned from _Thrace_ into _Egypt_, he left _√Üetes_ with
part of his army in _Colchis_, to guard that pass; and _Phryxus_ and his
sister _Helle_ fled from _Ino_, the daughter of _Cadmus_, to _√Üetes_ soon
after, in a ship whose ensign was a golden ram: _Ino_ was therefore alive
in the fourteenth year of _Rehoboam_, the year in which _Sesostris_
returned into _Egypt_; and by consequence her father _Cadmus_ flourished in
the Reign of _David_, and not before. _Cadmus_ was the father of
_Polydorus_, the father of _Labdacus_, the father of _Laius_, the father of
_Oedipus_, the father of _Eteocles_ and _Polynices_ who slew one another in
their youth, in the war of the seven Captains at _Thebes_, about ten or
twelve years after the _Argonautic_ Expedition: and _Thersander_, the son
of _Polynices_, warred at _Troy_. These Generations being by the eldest
sons who married young, if they be reckoned at about twenty and four years
to a Generation, will place the birth of _Polydorus_ upon the 18th year of
_David_'s Reign, or thereabout: and thus _Cadmus_ might be a young man, not
yet married, when he came first into _Greece_. At his first coming he
sail'd to _Rhodes_, and thence to _Samothrace_, an Island near _Thrace_ on
the north side of _Lemnos_, and there married _Harmonia_, the sister of
_Jasius_ and _Dardanus_, which gave occasion to the _Samothracian_
mysteries: and _Polydorus_ might be their son, born a year or two after
their coming; and his sister _Europa_ might be then a young woman, in the
flower of her age. These Generations cannot well be shorter; and therefore
_Cadmus_, and his son _Polydorus_, were not younger than we have reckoned
them: nor can they be much longer, without making _Polydorus_ too old to be
born in _Europe_, and to be the son of _Harmonia_ the sister of _Jasius_.
_Labdacus_ was therefore born in the end of _David_'s Reign, _Laius_ in the
24th year of _Solomon_'s, and _Oedipus_ in the seventh of _Rehoboam_'s, or
thereabout: unless you had rather say, that _Polydorus_ was born at
_Zidon_, before his father came into _Europe_; but his name _Polydorus_ is
in the language of _Greece_.

_Polydorus_ married _Nycteis_, the daughter of _Nycteus_ a native of
_Greece_, and dying young, left his Kingdom and young son _Labdacus_ under
the administration of _Nycteus_. Then _Epopeus_ King of _√Ügialus_,
afterwards called _Sicyon_, stole _Antiope_ the daughter of _Nycteus_,
[132] and _Nycteus_ thereupon made war upon him, and in a battle wherein
_Nycteus_ overcame, both were wounded and died soon after. _Nycteus_ left
the tuition of _Labdacus_, and administration of the Kingdom, to his
brother _Lycus_; and _Epopeus_ or, as _Hyginus_ [133] calls him, _Epaphus_
the _Sicyonian_, left his Kingdom to _Lamedon_, who presently ended the
war, by sending home _Antiope_: and she, in returning home, brought forth
_Amphion_ and _Zethus_. _Labdacus_ being grown up received the Kingdom from
_Lycus_, and soon after dying left it again to his administration, for his
young son _Laius_. When _Amphion_ and _Zethus_ were about twenty years old,
at the instigation of their mother _Antiope_, they killed _Lycus_, and made
_Laius_ flee to _Pelops_, and seized the city _Thebes_, and compassed it
with a wall; and _Amphion_ married _Niobe_ the sister of _Pelops_, and by
her had several children, amongst whom was _Chloris_, the mother of
_Periclymenus_ the _Argonaut_. _Pelops_ was the father of _Plisthenes_,
_Atreus_, and _Thyestes_; and _Agamemnon_ and _Menelaus_, the adopted sons
of _Atreus_, warred at _Troy_. _√Ügisthus_, the son of _Thyestes_, slew
_Agamemnon_ the year after the taking of _Troy_; and _Atreus_ died just
before _Paris_ stole _Helena_, which, according to [134] _Homer_, was
twenty years before the taking of _Troy_. _Deucalion_ the son of _Minos_,
[135] was an _Argonaut_; and _Talus_ another son of _Minos_, was slain by
the _Argonauts_; and _Idomeneus_ and _Meriones_ the grandsons of _Minos_
were at the _Trojan_ war. All these things confirm the ages of _Cadmus_ and
_Europa_, and their posterity, above assigned, and place the death of
_Epopeus_ or _Epaphus_ King of _Sicyon_, and birth of _Amphion_ and
_Zethus_, upon the tenth year of _Solomon_; and the taking of _Thebes_ by
_Amphion_ and _Zethus_, and the flight of _Laius_ to _Pelops_, upon the
thirtieth year of that King, or thereabout. _Amphion_ might marry the
sister of _Pelops_, the same year, and _Pelops_ come into _Greece_ three or
four years before that flight, or about the 26th year of _Solomon_.

[Sidenode p: Hygin. Fab. 14.]

In the days of _Erechtheus_ King of _Athens_, and _Celeus_ King of
_Eleusis_, _Ceres_ came into _Attica_; and educated _Triptolemus_ the son
of _Celeus_, and taught him to sow corn. She [136] lay with _Jasion_, or
_Jasius_, the brother of _Harmonia_ the wife of _Cadmus_; and presently
after her death _Erechtheus_ was slain, in a war between the _Athenians_
and _Eleusinians_; and, for the benefaction of bringing tillage into
_Greece_, the _Eleusinia Sacra_ were instituted to her [137] with
_Egyptian_ ceremonies, by _Celeus_ and _Eumolpus_; and a Sepulchre or
Temple was erected to her in _Eleusine_, and in this Temple the families of
_Celeus_ and _Eumolpus_ became her Priests: and this Temple, and that which
_Eurydice_ erected to her daughter _Danae_, by the name of _Juno Argiva_,
are the first instances that I meet with in _Greece_ of Deifying the dead,
with Temples, and Sacred Rites, and Sacrifices, and Initiations, and a
succession of Priests to perform them. Now by this history it is manifest
that _Erechtheus_, _Celeus_, _Eumolpus_, _Ceres_, _Jasius_, _Cadmus_,
_Harmonia_, _Asterius_, and _Dardanus_ the brother of _Jasius_, and one of
the founders of the Kingdom of _Troy_, were all contemporary to one
another, and flourished in their youth, when _Cadmus_ came first into
_Europe_. _Erechtheus_ could not be much older, because his daughter
_Procris_ convers'd with _Minos_ King of _Crete_; and his grandson
_Thespis_ had fifty daughters, who lay with _Hercules_; and his daughter
_Orithyia_ was the mother of _Calais_ and _Zetes_, two of the _Argonauts_
in their youth; and his son _Orneus_ [138] was the father of _Peteos_ the
father of _Menestheus_, who warred at _Troy_: nor much younger, because his
second son _Pandion_, who with the _Metionides_ deposed his elder brother
_Cecrops_, was the father of _√Ügeus_, the father of _Theseus_; and
_Metion_, another of his sons, was the father of _Eupalamus_, the father of
_D√¶dalus_, who was older than _Theseus_; and his daughter _Creusa_ married
_Xuthus_, the son of _Hellen_, and by him had two sons, _Ach√¶us_ and _Ion_;
and _Ion_ commanded the army of the _Athenians_ against the _Eleusinians_,
in the battle in which his grandfather _Erechtheus_ was slain: and this was
just before the institution of the _Eleusinia Sacra_, and before the Reign
of _Pandion_ the father of _√Ügeus_. _Erechtheus_ being an _Egyptian_
procured corn from _Egypt_, and for that benefaction was made King of
_Athens_; and near the beginning of his Reign _Ceres_ came into _Attica_
from _Sicily_, in quest of her daughter _Proserpina_. We cannot err much if
we make _Hellen_ contemporary to the Reign of _Saul_, and to that of
_David_ at _Hebron_; and place the beginning of the Reign of _Erechtheus_
in the 25th year, the coming of _Ceres_ into _Attica_ in the 30th year, and
the dispersion of corn by _Triptolemus_ about the 40th year of _David_'s
Reign; and the death of _Ceres_ and _Erechtheus_, and institution of the
_Eleusinia Sacra_, between the tenth and fifteenth year of _Solomon_.

_Teucer_, _Dardanus_, _Erichthonius_, _Tros_, _Ilus_, _Laomedon_, and
_Priamus_ Reigned successively at _Troy_; and their Reigns, at about twenty
years a-piece one with another, amount unto an hundred and forty years:
which counted back from the taking of _Troy_, place the beginning of the
Reign of _Teucer_ about the fifteenth year of the Reign of King _David_;
and that of _Dardanus_, in the days of _Ceres_, who lay with _Jasius_ the
brother of _Dardanus_: whereas Chronologers reckon that the six last of
these Kings Reigned 296 years, which is after the rate of 49‚Öì years a-piece
one with another; and that they began their Reign in the days of _Moses_.
_Dardanus_ married the daughter of _Teucer_, the Son of _Scamander_, and
succeeded him: whence _Teucer_ was of about the same age with _David_.

Upon the return of _Sesostris_ into _Egypt_, his brother _Danaus_ not only
attempted his life, as above, but also commanded his daughters, who were
fifty in number and had married the sons of _Sesostris_, to slay their
husbands; and then fled with his daughters from _Egypt_, in a long ship of
fifty oars. This Flight was in the fourteenth year of _Rehoboam_. _Danaus_
came first to _Lindus_, a town in _Rhodes_, and there built a Temple, and
erected a Statue to _Minerva_, and lost three of his daughters by a plague
which raged there; and then sailed thence with the rest of his daughters to
_Argos_. He came to _Argos_ therefore in the fifteenth or sixteenth year of
_Rehoboam_: and at length contending there with _Gelanor_ the brother of
_Eurystheus_ for the crown of _Argos_, was chosen by the people, and
Reigned at _Argos_, while _Eurystheus_ Reigned at _Mycen√¶_; and
_Eurystheus_ was born [139] the same year with _Hercules_. _Gelanor_ and
_Eurystheus_ were the sons of _Sthenelus_, by _Nicippe_ the daughter of
_Pelops_; and _Sthenelus_ was the son of _Perseus_, and Reigned at _Argos_,
and _Danaus_, who succeeded him at _Argos_, was succeeded there by his son
in law _Lynceus_, and he by his son _Abas_; that _Abas_ who is commonly,
but erroneously, reputed the father of _Acrisius_ and _Pr√¶tus_. In the time
of the _Argonautic_ expedition _Castor_ and _Pollux_ were beardless young
men, and their sisters _Helena_ and _Clytemnestra_ were children, and their
wives _Ph≈ìbe_ and _Ilaira_ were also very young: all these, with the
_Argonauts_ _Lynceus_ and _Idas_, were the grandchildren of _Gorgophone_,
the daughter of _Perseus_, the son of _Danae_, the daughter of _Acrisius_
and _Eurydice_; and _Perieres_ and _Oebalus_, the husbands of _Gorgophone_,
were the sons of _Cynortes_, the son of _Amyclas_, the brother of
_Eurydice_. _Mestor_ or _Mastor_, the brother of _Sthenelus_, married
_Lysidice_, another of the daughters of _Pelops_: and _Pelops_ married
_Hippodamia_, the daughter of _Evarete_, the daughter of _Acrisius_.
_Alcmena_, the mother of _Hercules_, was the daughter of _Electryo_; and
_Sthenelus_, _Mestor_ and _Electryo_ were brothers of _Gorgophone_, and
sons of _Perseus_ and _Andromeda_: and the _Argonaut_ _√Üsculapius_ was the
grandson of _Leucippus_ and _Phlegia_, and _Leucippus_ was the son of
_Perieres_, the grandson of _Amyclas_ the brother of _Eurydice_, and
_Amyclas_ and _Eurydice_ were the children of _Laced√¶mon_ and _Sparta_: and
_Capaneus_, one of the seven Captains against _Thebes_, was the husband of
_Euadne_ the daughter of _Iphis_, the son of _Elector_, the son of
_Anaxagoras_, the son of _Megapenthes_, the son of _Pr√¶tus_ the brother of
_Acrisius_. Now from these Generations it may be gathered that _Perseus_,
_Perieres_ and _Anaxagoras_ were of about the same age with _Minos_,
_Pelops_, _√Ügeus_ and _Sesac_; and that _Acrisius_, _Pr√¶tus_, _Eurydice_,
and _Amyclas_, being two little Generations older, were of about the same
age with King _David_ and _Erechtheus_; and that the Temple of _Juno
Argiva_ was built about the same time with the Temple of _Solomon_; the
same being built by _Eurydice_ to her daughter _Danae_, as above; or as
some say, by _Pirasus_ or _Piranthus_, the son or successor of _Argus_, and
great grandson of _Phoroneus_: for the first Priestess of that Goddess was
_Callithea_ the daughter of _Piranthus_; _Callithea_ was succeeded by
_Alcinoe_, about three Generations before the taking of _Troy_, that is
about the middle of _Solomon_'s Reign: in her Priesthood the _Siculi_
passed out of _Italy_ into _Sicily_: afterwards _Hypermnestra_ the daughter
of _Danaus_ became Priestess of this Goddess, and she flourished in the
times next before the _Argonautic_ expedition: and _Admeta_, the daughter
of _Eurystheus_, was Priestess of this _Juno_ about the times of the
_Trojan_ war. _Andromeda_ the wife of _Perseus_, was the daughter of
_Cepheus_ an _Egyptian_, the son of _Belus_, according to [140]
_Herodotus_; and the _Egyptian_ _Belus_ was _Ammon_: _Perseus_ took her
from _Joppa_, where _Cepheus_, I think a kinsman of _Solomon_'s Queen,
resided in the days of _Solomon_. _Acrisius_ and _Pr√¶tus_ were the sons of
_Abas_: but this _Abas_ was not the same man with _Abas_ the grandson of
_Danaus_, but a much older Prince, who built _Ab√¶a_ in _Phocis_, and might
be the Prince from whom the island _Eub≈ìa_ [141] was anciently called
_Abantis_, and the people thereof _Abantes_: for _Apollonius Rhodius_ [142]
tells us, that the _Argonaut_ _Canthus_ was the son of _Canethus_, and that
_Canethus_ was of the posterity of _Abas_; and the Commentator upon
_Apollonius_ tells us further, that from this _Abas_ the inhabitants of
_Eub≈ìa_ were anciently called _Abantes_. This _Abas_ therefore flourished
three or four Generations before the _Argonautic_ expedition, and so might
be the father of _Acrisius_: the ancestors of _Acrisius_ were accounted
_Egyptians_ by the _Greeks_, and they might come from _Egypt_ under _Abas_
into _Eub≈ìa_, and from thence into _Peloponnesus_. I do not reckon
_Phorbas_ and his son _Triopas_ among the Kings of _Argos_, because they
fled from that Kingdom to the Island _Rhodes_; nor do I reckon _Crotopus_
among them, because because he went from _Argos_, and built a new city for
himself in _Megaris_, as [143] _Conon_ relates.

We said that _Pelops_ came into _Greece_ about the 26th year of _Solomon_:
he [144] came thither in the days of _Acrisius_, and in those of
_Endymion_, and of his sons, and took _√Ütolia_ from _Aetolus_. _Endymion_
was the son of _A√´thlius_, the son of _Protogenia_, the sister of _Hellen_,
and daughter of _Deucalion_: _Phrixus_ and _Helle_, the children of
_Athamus_, the brother of _Sisyphus_ and Son of _√Üolus_, the son of
_Hellen_, fled from their stepmother _Ino_, the daughter of _Cadmus_, to
_√Üetes_ in _Colchis_, presently after the return of _Sesostris_ into
_Egypt_: and _Jason_ the _Argonaut_ was the son of _√Üson_, the son of
_Cretheus_, the son of _√Üolus_, the son of _Hellen_: and _Calyce_ was the
wife of _A√´thlius_, and mother of _Endymion_, and daughter of _√Üolus_, and
sister of _Cretheus_, _Sisyphus_ and _Athamas_: and by these circumstances
_Cretheus_, _Sisyphus_ and _Athamas_ flourished in the latter part of the
Reign of _Solomon_, and in the Reign of _Rehoboam_: _A√´thlius_, _√Üolus_,
_Xuthus_, _Dorus_, _Tantalus_, and _Danae_ were contemporary to
_Erechtheus_, _Jasius_ and _Cadmus_; and _Hellen_ was about one, and
_Deucalion_ about two Generations older than _Erechtheus_. They could not
be much older, because _Xuthus_ the youngest son of _Hellen_ [145] married
_Creusa_ the daughter of _Erechtheus_; nor could they be much younger,
because _Cephalus_ the son of _Deioneus_, the son of _√Üolus_, the eldest
son of _Hellen_, [146] married _Procris_ the daughter of _Erechtheus_; and
_Procris_ fled from her husband to _Minos_. Upon the death of _Hellen_, his
youngest son _Xuthus_ [147] was expelled _Thessaly_ by his brothers _√Üolus_
and _Dorus_, and fled to _Erechtheus_, and married _Creusa_ the daughter of
_Erechtheus_; by whom he had two sons, _Ach√¶us_ and _Ion_, the youngest of
which grew up before the death of _Erechtheus_, and commanded the army of
the _Athenians_, in the war in which _Erechtheus_ was slain: and therefore
_Hellen_ died about one Generation before _Erechtheus_.

_Sisyphus_ therefore built _Corinth_ about the latter end of the Reign of
_Solomon_, or the beginning of the Reign of _Rehoboam_. Upon the flight of
_Phrixus_ and _Helle_, their father _Athamas_, a little King in _B≈ìotia_,
went distracted and slew his son _Learchus_; and his wife _Ino_ threw her
self into the sea, together with her other son _Melicertus_; and thereupon
_Sisyphus_ instituted the _Isthmia_ at _Corinth_ to his nephew
_Melicertus_. This was presently after _Sesostris_ had left _√Üetes_ in
_Colchis_, I think in the fifteenth or sixteenth year of _Rehoboam_: so
that _Athamas_, the son of _√Üolus_ and grandson of _Hellen_, and _Ino_ the
daughter of _Cadmus_, flourished 'till about the sixteenth year of
_Rehoboam_. _Sisyphus_ and his successors _Ornytion_, _Thoas_, _Demophon_,
_Propodas_, _Doridas_, and _Hyanthidas_ Reigned successively at _Corinth_,
'till the return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_: then Reigned the
_Heraclides_, _Aletes_, _Ixion_, _Agelas_, _Prumnis_, _Bacchis_, _Agelas
II_, _Eudamus_, _Aristodemus_, and _Telestes_ successively about 170 years,
and then _Corinth_ was governed by _Prytanes_ or annual Archons about 42
years, and after them by _Cypselus_ and _Periander_ about 48 years more.

_Celeus_ King of _Eleusis_, who was contemporary to _Erechtheus_, [148] was
the son of _Rharus_, the son of _Cranaus_, the successor of _Cecrops_; and
in the Reign of _Cranaus_, _Deucalion_ fled with his sons _Hellen_ and
_Amphictyon_ from the flood which then overflowed _Thessaly_, and was
called _Deucalion_'s flood: they fled into _Attica_, and there _Deucalion_
died soon after; and _Pausanias_ tells us that his Sepulchre was to be seen
near _Athens_. His eldest son _Hellen_ succeeded him in _Thessaly_, and his
other son _Amphictyon_ married the daughter of _Cranaus_, and Reigning at
_Thermopyl√¶_, erected there the _Amphictyonic_ Council; and _Acrisius_ soon
after erected the like Council at _Delphi_. This I conceive was done when
_Amphictyon_ and _Acrisius_ were aged, and fit to be Counsellors; suppose
in the latter half of the Reign of _David_, and beginning of the Reign of
_Solomon_; and soon after, suppose about the middle of the Reign of
_Solomon_, did _Phemono√´_ become the first Priestess of _Apollo_ at
_Delphi_, and gave Oracles in hexameter verse: and then was _Acrisius_
slain accidentally by his grandson _Perseus_. The Council of _Thermopyl√¶_
included twelve nations of the _Greeks_, without _Attica_, and therefore
_Amphictyon_ did not then Reign at _Athens_: he might endeavour to succeed
_Cranaus_, his wife's father, and be prevented by _Erechtheus_.

Between the Reigns of _Cranaus_ and _Erechtheus_, Chronologers place also
_Erichthonius_, and his son _Pandion_; but I take this _Erichthonius_ and
this his son _Pandion_, to be the same with _Erechtheus_ and his son and
successor _Pandion_, the names being only repeated with a little variation
in the list of the Kings of _Attica_: for _Erichthonius_, he that was the
son of the Earth, nursed up by _Minerva_, is by _Homer_ called
_Erechtheus_; and _Themistius_ [149] tells us, that it was _Erechtheus_
that first joyned a chariot to horses; and _Plato_ [150] alluding to the
story of _Erichthonius_ in a basket, saith, _The people of magnanimous
_Erechtheus_ is beautiful, but it behoves us to behold him taken out_:
_Erechtheus_ therefore immediately succeeded _Cranaus_, while _Amphictyon_
Reigned at _Thermopyl√¶_. In the Reign of _Cranaus_ the Poets place the
flood of _Deucalion_, and therefore the death of _Deucalion_, and the Reign
of his sons _Hellen_ and _Amphictyon_, in _Thessaly_ and _Thermpoly√¶_, was
but a few years, suppose eight or ten, before the Reign of _Erechtheus_.

The first Kings of _Arcadia_ were successively _Pelasgus_, _Lycaon_,
_Nyctimus_, _Arcas_, _Clitor_, _√Üpytus_, _Aleus_, _Lycurgus_, _Echemus_,
_Agapenor_, _Hippothous_, _√Üpytus_ II, _Cypselus_, _Ol√¶as_, &c. Under
_Cypselus_ the _Heraclides_ returned into _Peloponnesus_, as above:
_Agapenor_ was one of those who courted _Helena_; he courted her before he
reigned, and afterwards he went to the war at _Troy_, and thence to
_Cyprus_, and there built _Paphos_. _Echemus_ slew _Hyllus_ the son of
_Hercules._ _Lycurgus_, _Cepheus_, and _Auge_, were [151] the children of
_Aleus_, the son of _Aphidas_, the son of _Arcas_, the son of _Callisto_,
the daughter of _Lycaon_: _Auge_ lay with _Hercules_, and _Anc√¶us_ the son
of _Lycurgus_ was an _Argonaut_, and his uncle _Cepheus_ was his Governour
in that Expedition; and _Lycurgus_ stay'd at home, to look after his aged
father _Aleus_, who might be born about 75 years before that Expedition;
and his grandfather _Arcas_ might be born about the end of the Reign of
_Saul_, and _Lycaon_ the grandfather of _Arcas_ might be then alive, and
dye before the middle of _David_'s Reign; and His youngest son _Oenotrus_,
the _Janus_ of the _Latines_, might grow up, and lead a colony into _Italy_
before the Reign of _Solomon_. _Arcas_ received [152] bread-corn from
_Triptolemus_, and taught his people to make bread of it; and so did
_Eumelus_, the first King of a region afterwards called _Achaia_: and
therefore _Arcas_ and _Eumelus_ were contemporary to _Triptolemus_, and to
his old father _Celeus_, and to _Erechtheus_ King of _Athens_; and
_Callisto_ to _Rharus_, and her father _Lycaon_ to _Cranaus_: but _Lycaon_
died before _Cranaus_, so as to leave room for _Deucalion_'s flood between
their deaths. The eleven Kings of _Arcadia_, between this Flood and the
Return of the _Heraclides_ into _Peloponnesus_, that is, between the Reigns
of _Lycaon_ and _Cypselus_, after the rate of about twenty years to a Reign
one with another, took up about 220 years; and these years counted back
from the Return of the _Heraclides_, place the Flood of _Deucalion_ upon
the fourteenth year of _David_'s Reign, or thereabout.

_Herodotus_ [153] tells us, that the _Ph≈ìnicians_ who came with _Cadmus_
brought many doctrines into _Greece_: for amongst those _Ph≈ìnicians_ were a
sort of men called _Curetes_, who were skilled in the Arts and Sciences of
_Ph≈ìnicia_, above other men, and [154] settled some in _Phrygia_, where
they were called _Corybantes_; some in _Crete_, where they were called
_Id√¶i Dactyli_; some in _Rhodes_, where they were called _Telchines_; some
in _Samothrace_, where they were called _Cabiri_; some in _Eub≈ìa_, where,
before the invention of iron, they wrought in copper, in a city thence
called _Chalcis_ some in _Lemnos_, where they assisted _Vulcan_; and some
in _Imbrus_, and other places: and a considerable number of them settled in
_√Ütolia_, which was thence called the country of the _Curetes_; until
_√Ütolus_ the son of _Endymion_, having slain _Apis_ King of _Sicyon_, fled
thither, and by the assistance of his father invaded it, and from his own
name called it _√Ütolia_: and by the assistance of these artificers,
_Cadmus_ found out gold in the mountain _Pang√¶us_ in _Thrace_, and copper
at _Thebes_; whence copper ore is still called _Cadmia_. Where they settled
they wrought first in copper, 'till iron was invented, and then in iron;
and when they had made themselves armour, they danced in it at the
sacrifices with tumult and clamour, and bells, and pipes, and drums, and
swords, with which they struck upon one another's armour, in musical times,
appearing seized with a divine fury; and this is reckoned the original of
music in _Greece:_ so _Solinus_ [155] _Studium musicum inde c≈ìptum cum Id√¶i
Dactyli modulos crepitu & tinnitu √¶ris deprehensos in versificum ordinem
transtulissent_: and [156] _Isidorus_, _Studium musicum ab Id√¶is Dactylis
c≈ìptum_. _Apollo_ and the Muses were two Generations later. _Clemens_ [157]
calls the _Id√¶i Dactyli_ barbarous, that is strangers; and saith, that they
reputed the first wise men, to whom both the letters which they call
_Ephesian_, and the invention of musical rhymes are referred: it seems that
when the _Ph≈ìnician_ letters, ascribed to _Cadmus_, were brought into
_Greece_, they were at the same time brought into _Phrygia_ and _Crete_, by
the _Curetes_; who settled in those countries, and called them _Ephesian_,
from the city _Ephesus_, where they were first taught. The _Curetes_, by
their manufacturing copper and iron, and making swords, and armour, and
edged tools for hewing and carving of wood, brought into _Europe_ a new way
of fighting; and gave _Minos_ an opportunity of building a Fleet, and
gaining the dominion of the seas; and set on foot the trades of Smiths and
Carpenters in _Greece_, which are the foundation of manual trades: the
[158] fleet of _Minos_ was without sails, and _D√¶dalus_ fled from him by
adding sails to his vessel; and therefore ships with sails were not used by
the _Greeks_ before the flight of _D√¶dalus_, and death of _Minos_, who was
slain in pursuing him to _Sicily_, in the Reign of _Rehoboam_. _D√¶dalus_
and his nephew _Talus_, in the latter part of the Reign of _Solomon_,
invented the chip-ax, and saw, and wimble, and perpendicular, and compass,
and turning-lath, and glew, and the potter's wheel; and his father
_Eupalamus_ invented the anchor: and these things gave a beginning to
manual Arts and Trades in _Europe_.

The [159] _Curetes_, who thus introduced Letters, and Music, and Poetry,
and Dancing, and Arts, and attended on the Sacrifices, were no less active
about religious institutions, and for their skill and knowledge and
mystical practices, were accounted wise men and conjurers by the vulgar. In
_Phrygia_ their mysteries were about _Rhea_, called _Magna Mater_, and from
the places where she was worshipped, _Cybele_, _Berecynthia_,
_Pessinuntia_, _Dindymene_, _Mygdonia_, and _Id√¶a Phrygia_: and in _Crete_,
and the _Terra Curetum_, they were about _Jupiter Olympius_, the son of the
_Cretan Rhea_: they represented, [160] that when _Jupiter_ was born in
_Crete_, his mother _Rhea_ caused him to be educated in a cave in mount
_Ida_, under their care and tuition; and [161] that they danced about him
in armour, with great noise, that his father _Saturn_ might not hear him
cry; and when he was grown up, assisted him in conquering his father, and
his father's friends; and in memory of these things instituted their
mysteries. _Bochart_ [162] brings them from _Palestine_, and thinks that
they had the name of _Curetes_ from the people among the _Philistims_
called _Crethim_, or _Cerethites_: _Ezek._ xxv. 16. _Zeph._ ii. 5. 1 _Sam._
xxx. 14, for the _Philistims_ conquered _Zidon_, and mixed with the
_Zidonians_.

The two first Kings of _Crete_, who reigned after the coming of the
_Curetes_, were _Asterius_ and _Minos_; and _Europa_ was the Queen of
_Asterius_, and mother of _Minos_; and the _Id√¶an Curetes_ were her
countrymen, and came with her and her brother _Alymnus_ into _Crete_, and
dwelt in the _Id√¶an_ cave in her Reign, and there educated _Jupiter_, and
found out iron, and made armour: and therefore these three, _Asterius_,
_Europa_, and _Minos_, must be the _Saturn_, _Rhea_ and _Jupiter_ of the
_Cretans_. _Minos_ is usually called the son of _Jupiter_; but this is in
relation to the fable, that _Jupiter_ in the shape of a bull, the Ensign of
the Ship, carried away _Europa_ from _Zidon_: for the _Ph≈ìnicians_, upon
their first coming into _Greece_, gave the name of _Jao-pater_, _Jupiter_,
to every King: and thus both _Minos_ and his father were _Jupiters_.
_Echemenes_, an ancient author cited by _Athen√¶us_, [163] said that _Minos_
was that _Jupiter_ who committed the rape upon _Ganimede_; though others
said more truly that it was _Tantalus_: _Minos_ alone was that _Jupiter_
who was most famous among the _Greeks_ for Dominion and Justice, being the
greatest King in all _Greece_ in those days, and the only legislator.
_Plutarch_ [164] tells us, that the people of _Naxus_, contrary to what
others write, pretended that there were two _Minos's_, and two _Ariadnes_;
and that the first _Ariadne_ married _Bacchus_, and the last was carried
away by _Theseus_: but [165] _Homer_, _Hesiod_, _Thucydides_, _Herodotus_,
and _Strabo_, knew but of one _Minos_; and _Homer_ describes him to be the
son of _Jupiter_ and _Europa_, and the brother of _Rhadamanthus_ and
_Sarpedon_, and the father of _Deucalion_ the _Argonaut_, and grandfather
of _Idomeneus_ who warred at _Troy_, and that he was the legislator of
Hell: _Herodotus_ [166] makes _Minos_ and _Rhadamanthus_ the sons of
_Europa_, contemporary to _√Ügeus_: and [167] _Apollodorus_ and _Hyginus_
say, that _Minos_, the father of _Androgeus_, _Ariadne_ and _Ph√¶dra_, was
the son of _Jupiter_ and _Europa_, and brother of _Rhadamanthus_ and
_Sarpedon_.

_Lucian_ [168] lets us know that _Europa_ the mother of _Minos_ was
worshipped by the name of _Rhea_, the form of a woman sitting in a chariot
drawn by lions, with a drum in her hand, and a _Corona turrita_ on her
head, like _Astarte_ and _Isis_; and the _Cretans_ [169] anciently shewed
the house where this _Rhea_ lived: and [170] _Apollonius Rhodius_ tells us,
that _Saturn_, while he Reigned over the _Titans_ in _Olympus_, a mountain
in _Crete_, and _Jupiter_ was educated by the _Curetes_ in the _Cretan_
cave, deceived _Rhea_, and of _Philyra_ begot _Chiron_: and therefore the
_Cretan Saturn_ and _Rhea_, were but one Generation older than _Chiron_,
and by consequence not older than _Asterius_ and _Europa_, the parents of
_Minos_; for _Chiron_ lived 'till after the _Argonautic_ Expedition, and
had two grandsons in that Expedition, and _Europa_ came into _Crete_ above
an hundred years before that Expedition: _Lucian_ [171] tells us, that the
_Cretans_ did not only relate, that _Jupiter_ was born and buried among
them, but also shewed his sepulchre: and _Porphyry_ [172] tells us, that
_Pythagoras_ went down into the _Id√¶an_ cave, to see sepulchre: and
_Cicero_, [173] in numbering three _Jupiters_, saith, that the third was
the _Cretan Jupiter_, _Saturn_'s son, whose sepulchre was shewed in
_Crete_: and the Scholiast upon _Callimachus_ [174] lets us know, that this
was the sepulchre of _Minos_: his words are, ŒïŒΩ ŒöœÅŒ∑œÑŒ∑ ŒµœÄŒπ œÑœâŒπ œÑŒ±œÜœâŒπ œÑŒøœÖ
ŒúŒπŒΩœâŒøœÇ ŒµœÄŒµŒ≥ŒµŒ≥œÅŒ±œÄœÑŒø, ŒúŒôŒùŒ©ŒüŒ£ Œ§ŒüŒ• ŒîŒôŒüŒ£ Œ§ŒëŒ¶ŒüŒ£. œÑœâŒπ œáœÅŒøŒΩœâŒπ Œ¥Œµ œÑŒøœÖ ŒúŒπŒΩœâŒøœÇ
Œ±œÄŒ∑ŒªŒµŒπœÜŒ∏Œ∑, ‚ÄõœâœÉœÑŒµ œÄŒµœÅŒπŒªŒµŒπœÜŒ∏Œ∑ŒΩŒ±Œπ, ŒîŒôŒüŒ£ Œ§ŒëŒ¶ŒüŒ£. ŒµŒ∫ œÑŒøœÖœÑŒøœÖ ŒøœÖŒΩ ŒµœáŒµŒπŒΩ ŒªŒµŒ≥ŒøœÖœÉŒπ
ŒöœÅŒ∑œÑŒµœÇ œÑŒøŒΩ œÑŒ±œÜŒøŒΩ œÑŒøœÖ ŒîŒπŒøœÇ. _In _Crete_ upon the Sepulchre of _Minos_ was
written _Minois Jovis sepulchrum_: but in time _Minois_ wore out so that
there remained only, _Jovis sepulchrum_, and thence the _Cretans_ called it
the Sepulchre of _Jupiter__. By _Saturn_, _Cicero_, who was a _Latine_,
understood the _Saturn_ so called by the _Latines_: for when _Saturn_ was
expelled his Kingdom he fled from _Crete_ by sea, to _Italy_; and this the
Poets exprest by saying, that _Jupiter_ cast him down to _Tartarus_, that
is, into the Sea: and because he lay hid in _Italy_, the _Latines_ called
him _Saturn_; and _Italy_, _Saturnia_, and _Latium_, and themselves
_Latines_: so [175] _Cyprian_; _Antrum Jovis in Creta visitur, & sepulchrum
ejus ostenditur: & ab eo Saturnum fugatum esse manifestum est: unde Latium
de latebra ejus nomen accepit: hic literas imprimere, hic signare nummos in
Italia primus instituit, unde √¶rarium Saturni vocatur; & rusticitatis hic
cultor fuit, inde falcem ferens senex pingitur:_ and _Minutius Felix_;
_Saturnus Creta profugus, Italiam metu filii s√¶vientis accesserat, & Jani
susceptus hospitio, rudes illos homines & agrestes multa docuit, ut
Gr√¶culus & politus, literas imprimere, nummos signare, instrumenta
conficere: itaque latebram suam, quod tuto latuisset, vocari maluit Latium,
& urbem Saturniam de suo nomine. * * Ejus filius Jupiter Cret√¶ excluso
parente regnavit, illic obiit, illic filios habuit; adhuc antrum Jovis
visitur, & sepulchrum ejus ostenditur, & ipsis sacris suis humanitatis
arguitur_: and _Tertullian_; [176] _Quantum rerum argumenta docent, nusquam
invenio fideliora quam apud ipsam Italiam, in qua Saturnus post multas
expeditiones, postque Attica hospitia consedit, exceptus ab Jano, vel Jane
ut Salii volunt. Mons quem incoluerat Saturnius dictus: civitas quam
depalaverat Saturnia usque nunc est. Tota denique Italia post Oenotriam
Saturnia cognominabatur. Ab ipso primum tabul√¶, & imagine signatus nummus,
& inde √¶rario pr√¶sidet_. By _Saturn_'s carrying letters into _Italy_, and
coyning money, and teaching agriculture, and making instruments, and
building a town, you may know that he fled from _Crete_, after letters, and
the coyning of money, and manual arts were brought into _Europe_ by the
_Ph≈ìnicians_; and from _Attica_, after agriculture was brought into
_Greece_ by _Ceres_; and so could not be older than _Asterius_, and
_Europa_, and her brother _Cadmus_: and by _Italy_'s being called
_Oenotria_, before it was called _Saturnia_, you may know that he came into
_Italy_ after _Oenotrus_, and so was not older than the sons of _Lycaon_.
_Oenotrus_ carried the first colony of the _Greeks_ into _Italy_, _Saturn_
the second, and _Evander_ the third; and the _Latines_ know nothing older
in _Italy_ than _Janus_ and _Saturn_: and therefore _Oenotrus_ was the
_Janus_ of the _Latines_, and _Saturn_ was contemporary to the sons of
_Lycaon_, and by consequence also to _Celeus_, _Erechtheus_, _Ceres_, and
_Asterius_: for _Ceres_ educated _Triptolemus_ the son of _Celeus_, in the
Reign of _Erechtheus_, and then taught him to plow and sow corn: _Arcas_
the son of _Callisto_, and grandson of _Lycaon_, received corn from
_Triptolemus_, and taught his people to make bread of it; and _Procris_,
the daughter of _Erechtheus_, fled to _Minos_ the son of _Asterius_. In
memory of _Saturn_'s coming into _Italy_ by sea, the _Latines_ coined their
first money with his head on one side, and a ship on the other. _Macrobius_
[177] tells us, that when _Saturn_ was dead, _Janus_ erected an Altar to
him, with sacred rites as to a God, and instituted the _Saturnalia_, and
that humane sacrifices were offered to him; 'till _Hercules_ driving the
cattle of _Geryon_ through _Italy_, abolished that custom: by the human
sacrifices you may know that _Janus_ was of the race of _Lycaon_; which
character agrees to _Oenotrus_. _Dionysius Halicarnassensis_ tells us
further, that _Oenotrus_ having found in the western parts of _Italy_ a
large region fit for pasturage and tillage, but yet for the most part
uninhabited, and where it was inhabited, peopled but thinly; in a certain
part of it, purged from the _Barbarians_, he built towns little and
numerous, in the mountains; which manner of building was familiar to the
ancients: and this was the Original of Towns in _Italy_.

_Pausanias_ [178] tells us that _the people of _Elis_, who were best
skilled in Antiquities, related this to have been the Original of the
Olympic Games: that _Saturn_ Reigned first and had a Temple built to him in
_Olympia_ by the men of the Golden Age; and that when _Jupiter_ was newly
born, his mother _Rhea_ recommended him to the care of the _Id√¶i Dactyli_,
who were also called _Curetes_: that afterwards five of them, called
_Hercules_, _P≈ìonius_, _Epimedes_, _Jasius_, and _Ida_, came from _Ida_, a
mountain in _Crete_, into _Elis_; and _Hercules_, called also _Hercules
Id√¶us_, being the oldest of them, in memory of the war between _Saturn_ and
_Jupiter_, instituted the game of racing, and that the victor should be
rewarded with a crown of olive_; and there erected an altar to _Jupiter
Olympius_, and called these games Olympic: and that some of the _Eleans_
said, _that _Jupiter_ contended here with _Saturn_ for the Kingdom; others
that _Hercules Id√¶us_ instituted these games in memory of their victory
over the _Titans__: for the people of _Arcadia_ [179] had a tradition, that
the Giants fought with the Gods in the valley of _Bathos_, near the river
_Alpheus_ and the fountain _Olympias_. [180] Before the Reign of
_Asterius_, his father _Teutamus_ came into _Crete_ with a colony from
_Olympia_; and upon the flight of _Asterius_, some of his friends might
retire with him into their own country, and be pursued and beaten there by
the _Id√¶an Hercules_: the _Eleans_ said also that _Clymenus_ the grandson
of the _Id√¶an Hercules_, about fifty years after _Deucalion_'s flood,
coming from _Crete_, celebrated these games again in _Olympia_, and erected
there an altar to _Juno Olympia_, that is, to _Europa_, and another to this
_Hercules_ and the rest of the _Curetes_; and Reigned in _Elis_ 'till he
was expelled by _Endymion_, [181] who thereupon celebrated these games
again: and so did _Pelops_, who expelled _√Ütolus_ the son of _Endymion_;
and so also did _Hercules_ the son of _Alcmena_, and _Atreus_ the son of
_Pelops_, and _Oxylus_: they might be celebrated originally in triumph for
victories, first by _Hercules Id√¶us_, upon the conquest of _Saturn_ and the
_Titans_, and then by _Clymenus_, upon his coming to Reign in the _Terra
Curetum_; then by _Endymion_, upon his conquering _Clymenus_; and
afterwards by _Pelops_, upon his conquering _√Ütolus_; and by _Hercules_,
upon his killing _Augeas_; and by _Atreus_, upon his repelling the
_Heraclides_; and by _Oxylus_, upon the return of the _Heraclides_ into
_Peloponnesus_. This _Jupiter_, to whom they were instituted, had a Temple
and Altar erected to him in _Olympia_, where the games were celebrated, and
from the place was called _Jupiter Olympius_: _Olympia_ was a place upon
the confines of _Pisa_, near the river _Alpheus_.

In the [182] Island _Thasus_, where _Cadmus_ left his brother _Thasus_, the
_Ph≈ìnicians_ built a Temple to _Hercules Olympius_, that _Hercules_, whom
_Cicero_ [183] calls _ex Id√¶is Dactylis; cui inferias afferunt_. When the
mysteries of _Ceres_ were instituted in _Eleusis_, there were other
mysteries instituted to her and her daughter and daughter's husband, in the
Island _Samothrace_, by the _Ph≈ìnician_ names of _Dii Cabiri Axieros_,
_Axiokersa_, and _Axiokerses_, that is, the great Gods _Ceres_,
_Proserpina_ and _Pluto_: for [184] _Jasius_ a _Samothracian_, whose sister
married _Cadmus_, was familiar with _Ceres_; and _Cadmus_ and _Jasius_ were
both of them instituted in these mysteries. _Jasius_ was the brother of
_Dardanus_, and married _Cybele_ the daughter of _Meones_ King of
_Phrygia_, and by her had _Corybas_; and after his death, _Dardanus_,
_Cybele_ and _Corybas_ went into _Phrygia_, and carried thither the
mysteries of the mother of the Gods, and _Cybele_ called the goddess after
her own name, and _Corybas_ called her priests _Corybantes_: thus
_Diodorus_; but _Dionysius_ saith [185] that _Dardanus_ instituted the
_Samothracian_ mysteries, and that his wife _Chryses_ learnt them in
_Arcadia_, and that _Id√¶us_ the son of _Dardanus_ instituted afterwards the
mysteries of the mother of the gods in _Phrygia_: this _Phrygian_ Goddess
was drawn in a chariot by lions, and had a _corona turrita_ on her head,
and a drum in her hand, like the _Ph≈ìnician_ Goddess _Astarte_, and the
_Corybantes_ danced in armour at her sacrifices in a furious manner, like
the _Id√¶i Dactyli_; and _Lucian_ [186] tells us that she was the _Cretan
Rhea_, that is, _Europa_ the mother of _Minos_: and thus the _Ph≈ìnicians_
introduced the practice of Deifying dead men and women among the _Greeks_
and _Phrygians_; for I meet with no instance of Deifying dead men and women
in _Greece_, before the coming of _Cadmus_ and _Europa_ from _Zidon_.

From these originals it came into fashion among the _Greeks_, Œ∫œÑŒµœÅŒπŒ∂ŒµŒπŒΩ,
_parentare_, to celebrate the funerals of dead parents with festivals and
invocations and sacrifices offered to their ghosts, and to erect
magnificent sepulchres in the form of temples, with altars and statues, to
persons of renown; and there to honour them publickly with sacrifices and
invocations: every man might do it to his ancestors; and the cities of
_Greece_ did it to all the eminent _Greeks_: as to _Europa_ the sister, to
_Alymnus_ the brother, and to _Minos_ and _Rhadamanthus_ the nephews of
_Cadmus_; to his daughter _Ino_, and her son _Melicertus_; to _Bacchus_ the
son of his daughter _Semele_, _Aristarchus_ the husband of his daughter
_Autonoe_, and _Jasius_ the brother of his wife _Harmonia_; to _Hercules_ a
_Theban_, and his mother _Alcmena_; to _Danae_ the daughter of _Acrisius_;
to _√Üsculapius_ and _Polemocrates_ the son of _Machaon_, to _Pandion_ and
_Theseus_ Kings of _Athens_, _Hippolytus_ the son of _Theseus_, _Pan_ the
son of _Penelope_, _Proserpina_, _Triptolemus_, _Celeus_, _Trophonius_,
_Castor_, _Pollux_, _Helena_, _Menelaus_, _Agamemnon_, _Amphiaraus_ and his
son _Amphilochus_, _Hector_ and _Alexandra_ the son and daughter of
_Priam_, _Phoroneus_, _Orpheus_, _Protesilaus_, _Achilles_ and his mother
_Thetis_, _Ajax_, _Arcas_, _Idomeneus_, _Meriones_, _√Üacus_, _Melampus_,
_Britomartis_, _Adrastus_, _Iolaus_, and divers others. They Deified their
dead in divers manners, according to their abilities and circumstances, and
the merits of the person; some only in private families, as houshold Gods
or _Dii P√¶nates_; others by erecting gravestones to them in publick, to be
used as altars for annual sacrifices; others, by building also to them
sepulchres in the form of houses or temples; and some by appointing
mysteries, and ceremonies, and set sacrifices, and festivals, and
initiations, and a succession of priests for performing those institutions
in the temples, and handing them down to posterity. Altars might begin to
be erected in _Europe_ a little before the days of _Cadmus_, for
sacrificing to the old God or Gods of the Colonies, but Temples began in
the days of _Solomon_; for [187] _√Üacus_ the son of _√Ügina_, who was two
Generations older than the _Trojan_ war, is by some reputed one of the
first who built a Temple in _Greece_. Oracles came first from _Egypt_ into
_Greece_ about the same time, as also did the custom of forming the images
of the Gods with their legs bound up in the shape of the _Egyptian_
mummies: for Idolatry began in _Chald√¶a_ and _Egypt_, and spread thence
into _Ph≈ìnicia_ and the neighbouring countries, long before it came into
_Europe_; and the _Pelasgians_ propagated it in _Greece_, by the dictates
of the Oracles. The countries upon the _Tigris_ and the _Nile_ being
exceeding fertile, were first frequented by mankind, and grew first into
Kingdoms, and therefore began first to adore their dead Kings and Queens:
hence came the Gods of _Laban_, the Gods and Goddesses called _Baalim_ and
_Ashtaroth_ by the _Canaanites_, the D√¶mons or Ghosts to whom they
sacrificed, and the _Moloch_ to whom they offered their children in the
days of _Moses_ and the Judges. Every City set up the worship of its own
Founder and Kings, and by alliances and conquests they spread this worship,
and at length the _Ph≈ìnicians_ and _Egyptians_ brought into _Europe_ the
practice of Deifying the dead. The Kingdom of the lower _Egypt_ began to
worship their Kings before the days of _Moses_; and to this worship the
second commandment is opposed: when the Shepherds invaded the lower
_Egypt_, they checked this worship of the old _Egyptians_, and spread that
of their own Kings: and at length the _Egyptians_ of _Coptos_ and
_Thebais_, under _Misphragmuthosis_ and _Amosis_, expelling the Shepherds,
checked the worship of the Gods of the Shepherds, and Deifying their own
Kings and Princes, propagated the worship of twelve of them into their
conquests; and made them more universal than the false Gods of any other
nation had been before, so as to be called, _Dii magni majorum gentium_.
_Sesostris_ conquered _Thrace_, and _Amphictyon_ the son of _Prometheus_
brought the twelve Gods from _Thrace_ into _Greece_: _Herodotus_ [188]
tells us that they came from _Egypt_; and by the names of the cities of
_Egypt_ dedicated to many of these Gods, you may know that they were of an
_Egyptian_ original: and the _Egyptians_, according to _Diodorus_, [189]
usually represented, that after their _Saturn_ and _Rhea_, Reigned
_Jupiter_ and _Juno_, the parents of _Osiris_ and _Isis_, the parents of
_Orus_ and _Bubaste_.

By all this it may be understood, that as the _Egyptians_ who Deified their
Kings, began their monarchy with the Reign of their Gods and Heroes,
reckoning _Menes_ the first man who reigned after their Gods; so the
_Cretans_ had the Ages of their Gods and Heroes, calling the first four
Ages of their Deified Kings and Princes, the Golden, Silver, Brazen, and
Iron Ages. _Hesiod_ [190] describing these four Ages of the Gods and
Demi-Gods of _Greece_, represents them to be four Generations of men, each
of which ended when the men then living grew old and dropt into the grave,
and tells us that the fourth ended with the wars of _Thebes_ and _Troy_:
and so many Generations there were, from the coming of the _Ph≈ìnicians_ and
_Curetes_ with _Cadmus_ and _Europa_ into _Greece_ unto the destruction of
_Troy_. _Apollonius Rhodius_ saith that when the _Argonauts_ came to
_Crete_, they slew _Talus_ a brazen man, who remained of those that were of
the Brazen Age, and guarded that pass: _Talus_ was reputed [191] the son of
_Minos_, and therefore the sons of _Minos_ lived in the Brazen Age, and
_Minos_ Reigned in the Silver Age: it was the Silver Age of the _Greeks_ in
which they began to plow and sow Corn, and _Ceres_, that taught them to do
it, flourished in the Reign of _Celeus_ and _Erechtheus_ and _Minos_.
Mythologists tell us that the last woman with whom _Jupiter_ lay, was
_Alcmena_; and thereby they seem to put an end to the Reign of _Jupiter_
among mortals, that is to the Silver Age, when _Alcmena_ was with child of
_Hercules_; who therefore was born about the eighth or tenth year of
_Rehoboam's_ Reign, and was about 34 years old at the time of the
_Argonautic_ expedition. _Chiron_ was begot by _Saturn_ of _Philyra_ in the
Golden Age, when _Jupiter_ was a child in the _Cretan_ cave, as above; and
this was in the Reign of _Asterius_ King of _Crete_: and therefore
_Asterius_ Reigned in _Crete_ in the Golden Age; and the Silver Age began
when _Chiron_ was a child: if _Chiron_ was born about the 35th year of
_David_'s Reign, he will be born in the Reign of _Asterius_, when _Jupiter_
was a child in the _Cretan_ cave, and be about 88 years old in the time of
the _Argonautic_ expedition, when he invented the Asterisms; and this is
within the reach of nature. The Golden Age therefore falls in with the
Reign of _Asterius_, and the Silver Age with that of _Minos_; and to make
these Ages much longer than ordinary generations, is to make _Chiron_ live
much longer than according to the course of nature. This fable of the four
Ages seems to have been made by the _Curetes_ in the fourth Age, in memory
of the first four Ages of their coming into _Europe_, as into a new world;
and in honour of their country-woman _Europa_, and her husband _Asterius_
the _Saturn_ of the _Latines_, and of her son _Minos_ the _Cretan Jupiter_
and grandson _Deucalion_, who Reigned 'till the _Argonautic_ expedition,
and is sometimes reckoned among the _Argonauts_, and of their great
grandson _Idomeneus_ who warred at _Troy_. _Hesiod_ tells us that he
himself lived in the fifth Age, the Age next after the taking of _Troy_,
and therefore he flourished within thirty or thirty five years after it:
and _Homer_ was of about the same Age; for he [192] lived sometime with
_Mentor_ in _Ithaca_, and there learnt of him many things concerning
_Ulysses_, with whom _Mentor_ had been personally acquainted: now
_Herodotus_, the oldest Historian of the _Greeks_ now extant, [193] tells
us that _Hesiod_ and _Homer_ were not above four hundred years older than
himself, and therefore they flourished within 110 or 120 years after the
death of _Solomon_; and according to my reckoning the taking of _Troy_ was
but one Generation earlier.

Mythologists tell us, that _Niobe_ the daughter of _Phoroneus_ was the
first woman with whom _Jupiter_ lay, and that of her he begat _Argus_, who
succeeded _Phoroneus_ in the Kingdom of _Argos_, and gave his name to that
city; and therefore _Argus_ was born in the beginning of the Silver Age:
unless you had rather say that by _Jupiter_ they might here mean
_Asterius_; for the _Ph≈ìnicians_ gave the name of _Jupiter_ to every King,
from the time of their first coming into _Greece_ with _Cadmus_ and
_Europa_, until the invasion of _Greece_ by _Sesostris_, and the birth of
_Hercules_, and particularly to the fathers of _Minos_, _Pelops_,
_Laced√¶mon_, _√Üacus_, and _Perseus_.

The four first Ages succeeded the flood of _Deucalion_; and some tell us
that _Deucalion_ was the son of _Prometheus_, the son of _Japetus_, and
brother of _Atlas_: but this was another _Deucalion_; for _Japetus_ the
father of _Prometheus_, _Epimetheus,_ and _Atlas_, was an _Egyptian_, the
brother of _Osiris_, and flourished two generations after the flood of
_Deucalion_.

I have now carried up the Chronology of the _Greeks_ as high as to the
first use of letters, the first plowing and sowing of corn, the first
manufacturing of copper and iron, the beginning of the trades of Smiths,
Carpenters, Joyners, Turners, Brick-makers, Stone-cutters, and Potters, in
_Europe_; the first walling of cities about, the first building of Temples,
and the original of Oracles in _Greece_; the beginning of navigation by the
Stars in long ships with sails; the erecting of the _Amphictyonic_ Council;
the first Ages of _Greece_, called the Golden, Silver, Brazen and Iron
Ages, and the flood of _Deucalion_ which immediately preceded them. Those
Ages could not be earlier than the invention and use of the four metals in
_Greece_, from whence they had their names; and the flood of _Ogyges_ could
not be much above two or three ages earlier than that of _Deucalion_: for
among such wandering people as were then in _Europe_, there could be no
memory of things done above three or four ages before the first use of
letters: and the expulsion of the Shepherds out of _Egypt_, which gave the
first occasion to the coming of people from _Egypt_ into _Greece_, and to
the building of houses and villages in _Greece_, was scarce earlier than
the days of _Eli_ and _Samuel_; for _Manetho_ tells us, that when they were
forced to quit _Abaris_ and retire out of _Egypt_, they went through the
wilderness into _Jud√¶a_ and built _Jerusalem_: I do not think, with
_Manetho,_ that they were the _Israelites_ under _Moses_, but rather
believe that they were _Canaanites_; and upon leaving _Abaris_ mingled with
the _Philistims_ their next neighbours: though some of them might assist
_David_ and _Solomon_ in building _Jerusalem_ and the Temple.

_Saul_ was made King [194], that he might rescue _Israel_ out of the hand
of the _Philistims_, who opressed them; and in the second year of his
Reign, the _Philistims_ brought into the field against him _thirty thousand
chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and people as the sand which is on the
sea shore for multitude_: the _Canaanites_ had their horses from _Egypt_;
and yet in the days of _Moses_ all the chariots of _Egypt_, with which
_Pharaoh_ pursued _Israel_ were but six hundred, _Exod._ xiv. 7. From the
great army of the _Philistims_ against _Saul_, and the great number of
their horses, I seem to gather that the Shepherds had newly relinquished
_Egypt_; and joyned them: the Shepherds might be beaten and driven out of
the greatest part of _Egypt_, and shut up in _Abaris_ by _Misphragmuthosis_
in the latter end of the days of _Eli_; and some of them fly to the
_Philistims_, and strengthen them against _Israel_, in the last year of
_Eli_; and from the _Philistims_ some of the Shepherds might go to _Zidon_,
and from _Zidon_, by sea to _Asia minor_ and _Greece_: and afterwards, in
the beginning of the Reign of _Saul_, the Shepherds who still remained in
_Egypt_ might be forced by _Tethmosis_ or _Amosis_ the son of
_Misphragmuthosis_, to leave _Abaris_, and retire in very great numbers to
the _Philistims_; and upon these occasions several of them, as _Pelasgus_,
_Inachus_, _Lelex_, _Cecrops_, and _Abas_, might come with their people by
sea from _Egypt_ to _Zidon_ and _Cyprus_, and thence to _Asia minor_ and
_Greece_, in the days of _Eli_, _Samuel_ and _Saul_, and thereby begin to
open a commerce by sea between _Zidon_ and _Greece_, before the revolt of
_Edom_ from _Jud√¶a_, and the final coming of the _Ph≈ìnicians_ from the _Red
Sea_.

_Pelasgus_ Reigned in _Arcadia_, and was the father of _Lycaon_, according
to _Pherecydes Atheniensis_, and _Lycaon_ died just before the flood of
_Deucalion_; and therefore his father _Pelasgus_ might come into _Greece_
about two Generations before _Cadmus_, or in the latter end of the days of
_Eli_: _Lycaon_ sacrificed children, and therefore his father might come
with his people from the Shepherds in _Egypt_, and perhaps from the regions
of _Heliopolis_, where they sacrificed men, 'till _Amosis_ abolished that
custom. _Misphragmuthosis_ the father of _Amosis_, drove the Shepherds out
of a great part of _Egypt_, and shut the remainder up in _Abaris_: and then
great numbers might escape to _Greece_; some from the regions of
_Heliopolis_ under _Pelasgus_, and others from _Memphis_ and other places,
under other Captains: and hence it might come to pass that the _Pelasgians_
were at the first very numerous in _Greece_, and spake a different language
from the _Greek_, and were the ringleaders in bringing into _Greece_ the
worship of the dead.

_Inachus_ is called the son of _Oceanus_, perhaps because he came to
_Greece_ by sea: he might come with his people to _Argos_ from _Egypt_ in
the days of _Eli_, and seat himself upon the river _Inachus_, so named from
him, and leave his territories to his sons _Phoroneus_, _√Ügialeus_, and
_Phegeus_, in the days of _Samuel_: for _Car_ the son of _Phoroneus_ built
a Temple to _Ceres_ in _Megara_, and therefore was contemporary to
_Erechtheus_. _Phoroneus_ Reigned at _Argos_, and _Aegialeus_ at _Sicyon_,
and founded those Kingdoms; and yet _√Ügialeus_ is made above five hundred
years older than _Phoroneus_ by some Chronologers: but [195] _Acusilaus_,
[196] _Anticlides_ and [197] _Plato_, accounted _Phoroneus_ the oldest King
in _Greece_, and [198] _Apollodorus_ tells us, _√Ügialeus_ was the brother
of _Phoroneus_. _√Ügialeus_ died without issue, and after him Reigned
_Europs_, _Telchin_, _Apis_, _Lamedon_, _Sicyon_, _Polybus_, _Adrastus_,
and _Agamemnon_, _&c._ and _Sicyon_ gave his name to the Kingdom:
_Herodotus_ [199] saith that _Apis_ in the _Greek_ Tongue is _Epaphus_; and
_Hyginus_, [200] that _Epaphus_ the _Sicyonian_ got _Antiopa_ with child:
but the later _Greeks_ have made two men of the two names _Apis_ and
_Epaphus_ or _Epopeus_, and between them inserted twelve feigned Kings of
_Sicyon_, who made no wars, nor did any thing memorable, and yet Reigned
five hundred and twenty years, which is, one with another, above forty and
three years a-piece. If these feigned Kings be rejected, and the two Kings
_Apis_ and _Epopeus_ be reunited; _√Ügialeus_ will become contemporary to
his brother _Phoroneus_, as he ought to be; for _Apis_ or _Epopeus_, and
_Nycteus_ the guardian of _Labdacus_, were slain in battle about the tenth
year of _Solomon_, as above; and the first four Kings of _Sicyon_,
_√Ügialeus_, _Europs_, _Telchin_, _Apis_, after the rate of about twenty
years to a Reign, take up about eighty years; and these years counted
upwards from the tenth year of _Solomon_, place the beginning of the Reign
of _√Ügialeus_ upon the twelfth year of _Samuel_, or thereabout: and about
that time began the Reign of _Phoroneus_ at _Argos_; _Apollodorus_ [201]
calls _Adrastus_ King of _Argos_; but _Homer_ [202] tells us, that he
Reigned first at _Sicyon_: he was in the first war against _Thebes_. Some
place _Janiscus_ and _Ph√¶stus_ between _Polybus_ and _Adrastus_, but
without any certainty.

_Lelex_ might come with his people into _Laconia_ in the days of _Eli_, and
leave his territories to his sons _Myles_, _Eurotas_, _Cleson_, and
_Polycaon_ in the days of _Samuel_. _Myles_ set up a quern, or handmill to
grind corn, and is reputed the first among the _Greeks_ who did so: but he
flourished before _Triptolemus_, and seems to have had his corn and
artificers from _Egypt_. _Eurotas_ the brother, or as some say the son of
_Myles_, built _Sparta_, and called it after the name of his daughter
_Sparta_, the wife of _Laced√¶mon_, and mother of _Eurydice_. _Cleson_ was
the father of _Pylas_ the father of _Sciron_, who married the daughter of
_Pandion_ the son of _Erechtheus_, and contended with _Nisus_ the son of
_Pandion_ and brother of _√Ügeus_, for the Kingdom; and _√Üacus_ adjudged it
to _Nisus_. _Polycaon_ invaded _Messene_, then peopled only by villages,
called it _Messene_ after the name of his wife, and built cities therein.

_Cecrops_ came from _Sais_ in _Egypt_ to _Cyprus_, and thence into
_Attica_: and he might do this in the days of _Samuel_, and marry _Agraule_
the daughter of _Act√¶us_, and succeed him in _Attica_ soon after, and leave
his Kingdom to _Cranaus_ in the Reign of _Saul_, or in the beginning of the
Reign of _David_: for the flood of _Deucalion_ happened in the Reign of
_Cranaus_.

Of about the same age with _Pelasgus_, _Inachus_, _Lelex_, and _Act√¶us_,
was _Ogyges_: he Reigned in _B≈ìotia_, and some of his people were
_Leleges_: and either he or his son _Eleusis_ built the city _Eleusis_ in
_Attica_, that is, they built a few houses of clay, which in time grew into
a city. _Acusilaus_ wrote that _Phoroneus_ was older than _Ogyges_, and
that _Ogyges_ flourished 1020 years before the first Olympiad, as above;
but _Acusilaus_ was an _Argive_, and feigned these things in honour of his
country: to call things _Ogygian_ has been a phrase among the ancient
_Greeks_, to signify that they are as old as the first memory of things;
and so high we have now carried up the Chronology of the _Greeks_.
_Inachus_ might be as old as _Ogyges_, but _Acusilaus_ and his followers
made them seven hundred years older than the truth; and Chronologers, to
make out this reckoning, have lengthened the races of the Kings of _Argos_
and _Sicyon_, and changed several contemporary Princes of _Argos_ into
successive Kings, and inserted many feigned Kings into the race of the
Kings of _Sicyon_.

_Inachus_ had several sons, who Reigned in several parts of _Peloponnesus_,
and there built Towns; as _Phoroneus_, who built _Phoronicum_, afterwards
called _Argos_, from _Argus_ his grandson; _√Ügialeus_, who built _√Ügialea_,
afterwards called _Sicyon_, from _Sicyon_ the grandson of _Erechtheus_;
_Phegeus_, who built _Phegea_, afterwards called _Psophis_, from _Psophis_
the daughter of _Lycaon_: and these were the oldest towns in _Peloponnesus_
then _Sisyphus_, the son of _√Üolus_ and grandson of _Hellen_, built
_Ephyra_, afterwards called _Corinth_; and _A√´thlius_, the son of _√Üolus_,
built _Elis_: and before them _Cecrops_ built _Cecropia_, the cittadel of
_Athens_; and _Lycaon_ built _Lycosura_, reckoned by some the oldest town
in _Arcadia_; and his sons, who were at least four and twenty in number,
built each of them a town; except the youngest, called _Oenotrus_, who grew
up after his father's death, and sailed into _Italy_ with his people, and
there set on foot the building of towns, and became the _Janus_ of the
_Latines_. _Phoroneus_ had also several children and grand-children, who
Reigned in several places, and built new towns, as _Car_, _Apis_, &c. and
_H√¶mon_, the son of _Pelasgus_, Reigned in _H√¶monia_, afterwards called
_Thessaly_, and built towns there. This division and subdivision has made
great confusion in the history of the first Kingdoms of _Peloponnesus_, and
thereby given occasion to the vain-glorious _Greeks_, to make those
kingdoms much older than they really were: but by all the reckonings
abovementioned, the first civilizing of the _Greeks_, and teaching them to
dwell in houses and towns, and the oldest towns in _Europe_, could scarce
be above two or three Generations older than the coming of _Cadmus_ from
_Zidon_ into _Greece_; and might most probably be occasioned by the
expulsion of the Shepherds out of _Egypt_ in the days of _Eli_ and
_Samuel_, and their flying into _Greece_ in considerable numbers: but it's
difficult to set right the Genealogies and Chronology of the Fabulous Ages
of the _Greeks_, and I leave these things to be further examined.

Before the _Ph≈ìnicians_ introduced the Deifying of dead men, the _Greeks_
had a Council of Elders in every town for the government thereof, and a
place where the elders and people worshipped their God with Sacrifices: and
when many of those towns, for their common safety, united under a common
Council, they erected a _Prytaneum_ or Court in one of the towns, where the
Council and People met at certain times, to consult their common safety,
and worship their common God with sacrifices, and to buy and sell: the
towns where these Councils met, the _Greeks_ called Œ¥Œ∑ŒºŒøŒπ, peoples or
communities, or Corporation Towns: and at length, when many of these Œ¥Œ∑ŒºŒøŒπ
for their common safety united by consent under one common Council, they
erected a _Prytaneum_ in one of the Œ¥Œ∑ŒºŒøŒπ for the common Council and People
to meet in, and to consult and worship in, and feast, and buy, and sell;
and this Œ¥Œ∑ŒºŒøœÇ they walled about for its safety, and called œÑŒ∑ŒΩ œÄŒøŒªŒπŒΩ the
city: and this I take to have been the original of Villages, Market-Towns,
Cities, common Councils, Vestal Temples, Feasts and Fairs, in _Europe_: the
_Prytaneum_, œÄœÖœÅŒøœÇ œÑŒ±ŒºŒµŒπŒøŒΩ, was a Court with a place of worship, and a
perpetual fire kept therein upon an Altar for sacrificing: from the word
‚ÄõŒïœÉœÑŒπŒ± fire, came the name _Vesta_, which at length the people turned into
a Goddess, and so became fire-worshippers like the ancient _Persians_: and
when these Councils made war upon their neighbours, they had a general
commander to lead their armies, and he became their King.

So _Thucydides_ [203] tells us, that _under_ Cecrops _and the ancient
Kings, untill _Theseus_; _Attica_ was always inhabited city by city, each
having Magistrates and _Prytanea_: neither did they consult the King, when
there was no fear of danger, but each apart administred their own
common-wealth, and had their own Council, and even sometimes made war, as
the _Eleusinians_ with _Eumolpus_ did against _Erechtheus_: but when
_Theseus_, a prudent and potent man obtained the Kingdom, he took away the
Courts and Magistrates of the other cities, and made them all meet in one
Council and _Prytaneum_ at _Athens__. _Polemon_, as he is cited by [204]
_Strabo_, tells us, _that in this body of _Attica_, there were 170 _Œ¥Œ∑ŒºŒøŒπ_,
one of which was _Eleusis__: and _Philochorus_ [205] relates, that _when
_Attica_ was infested by sea and land by the _Cares_ and _B≈ìoti_, _Cecrops_
the first of any man reduced the multitude, _that is the 170 towns_, into
twelve cities, whose names were _Cecropia_, _Tetrapolis_, _Epacria_,
_Decelia_, _Eleusis_, _Aphydna_, _Thoricus_, _Brauron_, _Cytherus_,
_Sphettus_, _Cephissia_, and _Phalerus_; and that _Theseus_ contracted
those twelve cities into one, which was _Athens__.

The original of the Kingdom of the _Argives_ was much after the same
manner: for _Pausanias_ [206] tells us, _that _Phoroneus_ the son of
_Inachus_ was the first who gathered into one community the _Argives_, who
'till then were scattered, and lived every where apart, and the place where
they were first assembled was called _Phoronicum_, the city of
_Phoroneus__: and _Strabo_ [207] observes, _that _Homer_ calls all the
places which he reckons up in _Peloponnesus_, a few excepted, not cities
but regions, because each of them consisted of a convention of many_ Œ¥Œ∑ŒºŒøŒπ,
_free towns, out of which afterward noble cities were built and frequented:
so the _Argives_ composed _Mantin√¶a_ in _Arcadia_ out of five towns, and
_Tegea_ out of nine; and out of so many was _Her√¶a_ built by _Cleombrotus_,
or by _Cleonymus_: so also _√Ügium_ was built out of seven or eight towns,
_Patr√¶_: out of seven, and _Dyme_ out of eight; and so _Elis_ was erected
by the conflux of many towns into one city._

_Pausanias_ [208] tells us, that the _Arcadians_ accounted _Pelasgus_ the
first man, and that he was their first King; and _taught the ignorant
people to built houses, for defending themselves from heat, and cold, and
rain; and to make them garments of skins; and instead of herbs and roots,
which were sometimes noxious, to eat the acorns of the beech tree_; and
that his son _Lycaon_ built the oldest city in all _Greece_: he tells us
also, that in the days of _Lelex_ the _Spartans_ lived in villages apart.
The _Greeks_ therefore began to build houses and villages in the days of
_Pelasgus_ the father of _Lycaon_, and in the days of _Lelex_ the father of
_Myles_, and by consequence about two or three Generations before the Flood
of _Deucalion_, and the coming of _Cadmus_; 'till then [209] they lived in
woods and caves of the earth. The first houses were of clay, 'till the
brothers _Euryalus_ and _Hyperbius_ taught them to harden the clay into
bricks, and to build therewith. In the days of _Ogyges_, _Pelasgus_,
_√Üzeus_, _Inachus_ and _Lelex_, they began to build houses and villages of
clay, _Doxius_ the son of _C≈ìlus_ teaching them to do it; and in the days
of _Lycaon_, _Phoroneus_, _√Ügialeus_, _Phegeus_, _Eurotas_, _Myles_,
_Polycaon_, and _Cecrops_, and their sons, to assemble the villages into
Œ¥Œ∑ŒºŒøŒπ, and the Œ¥Œ∑ŒºŒøŒπ into cities.

When _Oenotrus_ the son of _Lycaon_ carried a Colony into _Italy_, _he_
[210] _found that country for the most part uninhabited; and where it was
inhabited, peopled but thinly: and seizing a part of it, he built towns in
the mountains, little and numerous_, as above: these towns were without
walls; but after this Colony grew numerous, and began to want room, _they
expelled the _Siculi_, compassed many cities with walls, and became possest
of all the territory between the two rivers _Liris_ and _Tibre__: and it is
to be understood that those cities had their Councils and _Prytanea_ after
the manner of the _Greeks_: for _Dionysius_ [211] tells us, that the new
Kingdom of _Rome_, as _Romulus_ left it, consisted of thirty Courts or
Councils, in thirty towns, each with the sacred fire kept in the
_Prytaneum_ of the Court, for the Senators who met there to perform Sacred
Rites, after the manner of the _Greeks_: _but when _Numa_ the successor of
_Romulus_ Reigned, he leaving the several fires in their own Courts,
instituted one common to them all at _Rome__: whence _Rome_ was not a
compleat city before the days of _Numa_.

When navigation was so far improved that the _Ph≈ìnicians_ began to leave
the sea-shore, and sail through the _Mediterranean_ by the help of the
stars, it may be presumed that they began to discover the islands of the
_Mediterranean_, and for the sake of trafic to sail as far as _Greece_: and
this was not long before they carried away _Io_ the daughter of _Inachus_,
from _Argos_. The _Cares_ first infested the _Greek_ seas with piracy, and
then _Minos_ the son of _Europa_ got up a potent fleet, and sent out
Colonies: for _Diodorus_ [212] tells us, that the _Cyclades_ islands, those
near _Crete_, were at first desolate and uninhabited; but _Minos_ having a
potent fleet, sent many Colonies out of _Crete_, and peopled many of them;
and particularly that the island _Carpathus_ was first seized by the
soldiers of _Minos_: _Syme_ lay waste and desolate 'till _Triops_ came
thither with a Colony under _Chthonius_: _Strongyle_ or _Naxus_ was first
inhabited by the _Thracians_ in the days of _Boreas_, a little before the
_Argonautic_ Expedition: _Samsos_ was, at first desert, and inhabited only
by a great multitude of terrible wild beasts, 'till _Macareus_ peopled it,
as he did also the islands _Chius_ and _Cos_. _Lesbos_ lay waste and
desolate 'till _Xanthus_ sailed thither with a Colony: _Tenedos_ lay
desolate 'till _Tennes_, a little before the _Trojan_ war, sailed thither
from _Troas_. _Arist√¶us_, who married _Autonoe_ the daughter of _Cadmus_,
carried a Colony from _Thebes_ into _C√¶a_, an island not inhabited before:
the island _Rhodes_ was at first called _Ophiusa_, being full of serpents,
before _Phorbas_, a Prince of _Argos_, went thither, and made it habitable
by destroying the serpents, which was about the end of _Solomon_'s Reign;
in memory of which he is delineated in the heavens in the Constellation of
_Ophiuchus_. The discovery of this and some other islands made a report
that they rose out of the Sea: _in Asia Delos emersit, & Hiera, & Anaphe, &
Rhodus_, saith [213] _Ammianus_: and [214] _Pliny_; _clar√¶ jampridem
insul√¶, Delos & Rhodos memori√¶ produntur enat√¶, postea minores, ultra Melon
Anaphe, inter Lemnum & Hellespontum Nea, inter Lebedum & Teon Halone_, &c.

_Diodorus_ [215] tells us also, that the seven islands called _√Üolides_,
between _Italy_ and _Sicily_, were desert and uninhabited 'till _Lipparus_
and _√Üolus_, a little before the _Trojan_ war, went thither from _Italy_,
and peopled them: and that _Malta_ and _Gaulus_ or _Gaudus_ on the other
side of _Sicily_, were first peopled by _Ph≈ìnicians_; and so was _Madera_
without the _Straits_: and _Homer_ writes that _Ulysses_ found the Island
_Ogygia_ covered with wood, and uninhabited, except by _Calypso_ and her
maids, who lived in a cave without houses; and it is not likely that _Great
Britain_ and _Ireland_ could be peopled before navigation was propagated
beyond the _Straits_.

The _Sicaneans_ were reputed the first inhabitants of _Sicily_, they built
little Villages or Towns upon hills, and every Town had its own King; and
by this means they spread over the country, before they formed themselves
into larger governments with a common King: _Philistus_ [216] saith that
_they were transplanted into _Sicily_ from the River _Sicanus_ in _Spain__;
and _Dionysius_ [217], that _they were a _Spanish_ people who fled from the
_Ligures_ in _Italy__; he means the _Ligures_ [218] who opposed _Hercules_
when he returned from his expedition against _Geryon_ in _Spain_, and
endeavoured to pass the _Alps_ out of _Gaul_ into _Italy_. _Hercules_ that
year got into _Italy_, and made some conquests there, and founded the city
_Croton_; and [219] after winter, upon the arrival of his fleet from
_Erythra_ in _Spain_, sailed to _Sicily_, and there left the _Sicani_: for
_it was his custom to recruit his army with conquered people, and after
they had assisted him in making new conquests to reward them with new
seats_: this was the _Egyptian Hercules_, who had a potent fleet, and in
the days of _Solomon_ sailed to the _Straits_, and according to his custom
set up pillars there, and conquered _Geryon_, and returned back by _Italy_
and _Sicily_ to _Egypt_, and was by the ancient _Gauls_ called _Ogmius_,
and by _Egyptians_ [220] _Nilus_: for _Erythra_ and the country of _Geryon_
were without the _Straits_. _Dionysius_ [221] represents this _Hercules_
contemporary to _Evander_.

The first inhabitants of _Crete_, according to _Diodorus_ [222] were called
_Eteocretans_; but whence they were, and how they came thither, is not said
in history: then sailed thither a Colony of _Pelasgians_ from _Greece_; and
soon after _Teutamus_, the grandfather of _Minos_, carried thither a Colony
of _Dorians_ from _Laconia_, and from the territory of _Olympia_ in
_Peloponnesus_: and these several Colonies spake several languages, and fed
on the spontaeous fruits of the earth, and lived quietly in caves and huts,
'till the invention of iron tools, in the days of _Asterius_ the son of
_Teutamus_; and at length were reduced into one Kingdom, and one People, by
_Minos_, who was their first law-giver, and built many towns and ships, and
introduced plowing and sowing, and in whose days the _Curetes_ conquered
his father's friends in _Crete_ and _Peloponnesus_. The _Curetes_ [223]
sacrificed children to _Saturn_ and according to _Bochart_ [224] were
_Philistims_; and _Eusebius_ faith that _Crete_ had its name from _Cres_,
one of the _Curetes_ who nursed up _Jupiter_: but whatever was the original
of the island, it seems to have been peopled by Colonies which spake
different languages, 'till the days of _Asterius_ and _Minos_; and might
come thither two or three Generations before, and not above, for want of
navigation in those seas.

The island _Cyprus_ was discovered by the _Ph≈ìnicians_ not long before; for
_Eratosthenes_ [225] tells us, _that _Cyprus_ was at first so overgrown
with wood that it could not be tilled, and that they first cut down the
wood for the melting of copper and silver, and afterwards when they began
to sail safely upon the _Mediterranean__, that is, presently after the
_Trojan_ war, _they built ships and even navies of it: and when they could
not thus destroy the wood, they gave every man leave to cut down what wood
he pleased, and to possess all the ground which he cleared of wood_. So
also _Europe_ at first abounded very much with woods, one of which, called
the _Hercinian_, took up a great part of _Germany_, being full nine days
journey broad, and above forty long, in _Julius C√¶sar_'s days: and yet the
_Europeans_ had been cutting down their woods, to make room for mankind,
ever since the invention of iron tools, in the days of _Asterius_ and
_Minos_.

All these footsteps there are of the first peopling of _Europe_, and its
Islands, by sea; before those days it seems to have been thinly peopled
from the northern coast of the _Euxine-sea_ by _Scythians_ descended from
_Japhet_, who wandered without houses, and sheltered themselves from rain
and wild beasts in thickets and caves of the earth; such as were the caves
in mount _Ida_ in _Crete_, in which _Minos_ was educated and buried; the
cave of _Cacus_, and the _Catacombs_ in _Italy_ near _Rome_ and _Naples_,
afterwards turned into burying-places; the _Syringes_ and many other caves
in the sides of the mountains of _Egypt_; the caves of the _Troglodites_
between _Egypt_ and the _Red Sea_, and those of the _Phaurusii_ in _Afric_,
mentioned by [226] _Strabo_; and the caves, and thickets, and rocks, and
high places, and pits, in which the _Israelites_ hid themselves from the
_Philistims_ in the days of _Saul_, 1 _Sam._ xiii. 6. But of the state of
mankind in _Europe_ in those days there is now no history remaining.

The antiquities of _Libya_ were not much older than those of _Europe_; for
_Diodorus_ [227] tells us, that _Uranus_ the father of _Hyperion_, and
grandfather of _Helius_ and _Selene_, that is _Ammon_ the father of
_Sesac_, _was their first common King, and caused the people, who 'till
then wandered up and down, to dwell in towns_: and _Herodotus_ [228] tells
us, that all _Media_ was peopled by Œ¥Œ∑ŒºŒøŒπ, towns without walls, 'till they
revolted from the _Assyrians_, which was about 267 years after the death of
_Solomon_: and that after that revolt they set up a King over them, and
built _Ecbatane_ with walls for his seat, the first town which they walled
about; and about 72 years after the death of _Solomon_, _Benhadad_ King of
_Syria_ [229] had two and thirty Kings in his army against _Ahab_: and when
_Joshuah_ conquered the land of _Canaan_, every city of the _Canaanites_
had its own King, like the cities of _Europe_, before they conquered one
another; and one of those Kings, _Adonibezek_, the King of _Bezek_ had
conquered seventy other Kings a little before, _Judg._ i. 7. and therefore
towns began to be built in that land not many ages before the days of
_Joshuah_: for the Patriarchs wandred there in tents, and fed their flocks
where-ever they pleased, the fields of _Ph≈ìnicia_ not being yet fully
appropriated, for want of people. The countries first inhabited by mankind,
were in those days so thinly peopled, that [230] four Kings from the coasts
of _Shinar_ and _Elam_ invaded and spoiled the _Rephaims_, and the
inhabitants of the countries of _Moab_, _Ammon_, _Edom_, and the Kingdoms
of _Sodom_, _Gomorrah_, _Admah_ and _Zeboim_; and yet were pursued and
beaten by _Abraham_ with an armed force of only 318 men, the whole force
which _Abraham_ and the princes with him could raise: and _Egypt_ was so
thinly peopled before the birth of _Moses_, that _Pharaoh_ said of the
_Israelites_; [231] _behold the people of the children of _Israel_ are more
and mightier than we_: and to prevent their multiplying and growing too
strong, he caused their male children to be drowned.

These footsteps there are of the first peopling of the earth by mankind,
not long before the days of _Abraham_; and of the overspreading it with
villages, towns and cities, and their growing into Kingdoms, first Smaller
and then greater, until the rise of the Monarchies of _Egypt_, _Assyria_,
_Babylon_, _Media_, _Persia_, _Greece_, and _Rome_, the first great Empires
on this side _India_. _Abraham_ was the fifth from _Peleg_, and all mankind
lived together in _Chaldea_ under the Government of _Noah_ and his sons,
untill the days of _Peleg_: so long they were of one language, one society,
and one religion: and then they divided the earth, being perhaps, disturbed
by the rebellion of _Nimrod_, and forced to leave off building the tower of
_Babel_: and from thence they spread themselves into the several countries
which fell to their shares, carrying along with them the laws, customs and
religion, under which they had 'till those days been educated and governed,
by _Noah_, and his sons and grandsons: and these laws were handed down to
_Abraham_, _Melchizedek_, and _Job_, and their contemporaries, and for some
time were observed by the judges of the eastern countries: so _Job_ [232]
tells us, that adultery was _an heinous crime, yea an iniquity to be
punished by the judges_: and of idolatry he [233] saith, _If I beheld the
sun when it shined, or the moon walking in brightness, and my heart hath
been secretly inticed, or my mouth hath kissed my hand, this also were an
iniquity to be punished by the judge: for I should have denied the God that
is above_: and there being no dispute between _Job_ and his friends about
these matters, it may be presumed that they also with their countrymen were
of the same religion. _Melchizedek_ was a Priest of the most high God, and
_Abraham_ voluntarily paid tythes to him; which he would scarce have done
had they not been of one and the same religion. The first inhabitants of
the land of _Canaan_ seem also to have been originally of the same
religion, and to have continued in it 'till the death of _Noah_, and the
days of _Abraham_; for _Jerusalem_ was anciently [234] called _Jebus_, and
its people _Jebusites_, and _Melchizedek_ was their Priest and King: these
nations revolted therefore after the days of _Melchizedek_ to the worship
of false Gods; as did also the posterity of _Ismael_, _Esau_, _Moab_,
_Ammon_, and that of _Abraham_ by _Keturah_: and the _Israelites_
themselves were very apt to revolt: and one reason why _Terah_ went from
_Ur_ of the _Chaldees_ to _Haran_ in his way to the land of _Canaan_; and
why _Abraham_ afterward left _Haran_, and went into the land of _Canaan_,
might be to avoid the worship of false Gods, which in their days began in
_Chaldea_, and spread every way from thence; but did not yet reach into the
land of _Canaan_. Several of the laws and precepts in which this primitive
religion consisted are mentioned in the book of _Job_, chap. i. ver. 5, and
chap, xxxi, _viz._ _not to blaspheme God, nor to worship the Sun or Moon,
nor to kill, nor steal, nor to commit adultery, nor trust in riches, nor
oppress the poor or fatherless, nor curse your enemies, nor rejoyce at
their misfortunes: but to be friendly, and hospitable and merciful, and to
relieve the poor and needy, and to set up Judges_. This was the morality
and religion of the first ages, still called by the _Jews_, _The precepts
of the sons of _Noah__: this was the religion of _Moses_ and the Prophets,
comprehended in the two great commandments, of _loving the Lord our God
with all our heart and soul and mind, and our neighbour as our selves_:
this was the religion enjoyned by _Moses_ to the uncircumcised stranger
within the gates of _Israel_, as well as to the _Israelites_: and this is
the primitive religion of both _Jews_ and _Christians_, and ought to be the
standing religion of all nations, it being for the honour of God, and good
of mankind: and _Moses_ adds the precept of _being merciful even to brute
beasts, so as not to suck out their blood, nor to cut off their flesh alive
with the blood in it, nor to kill them for the sake of their blood, nor to
strangle them; but in killing them for food, to let out their blood and
spill it upon the ground_, _Gen._ ix. 4, and _Levit_. xvii. 12, 13. This
law was ancienter than the days of _Moses_, being given to _Noah_ and his
sons long before the days of _Abraham_: and therefore when the Apostles and
Elders in the Council at _Jerusalem_ declared that the Gentiles were not
obliged to be circumcised and keep the law of _Moses_, they excepted this
law of _abstaining from blood, and things strangled_ as being an earlier
law of God, imposed not on the sons of _Abraham_ only, but on all nations,
while they lived together in _Shinar_ under the dominion of _Noah_: and of
the same kind is the law of _abstaining from meats offered to Idols or
false Gods, and from fornication_. So then, _the believing that the world
was framed by one supreme God, and is governed by him; and the loving and
worshipping him, and honouring our parents, and loving our neighbour as our
selves, and being merciful even to brute beasts_, is the oldest of all
religions: and the Original of letters, agriculture, navigation, music,
arts and sciences, metals, smiths and carpenters, towns and houses, was not
older in _Europe_ than the days of _Eli_, _Samuel_ and _David_; and before
those days the earth was so thinly peopled, and so overgrown with woods,
that mankind could not be much older than is represented in Scripture.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. II

_Of the Empire of _Egypt_._

The _Egyptians_ anciently boasted of a very great and lasting Empire under
their Kings _Ammon_, _Osiris_, _Bacchus_, _Sesostris_, _Hercules_,
_Memnon_, &c. reaching eastward to the _Indies_, and westward to the
_Atlantic Ocean_; and out of vanity have made this monarchy some thousands
of years older than the world: let us now try to rectify the Chronology of
_Egypt_; by comparing the affairs of _Egypt_ with the synchronizing affairs
of the _Greeks_ and _Hebrews_.

_Bacchus_ the conqueror loved two women, _Venus_ and _Ariadne_: _Venus_ was
the mistress of _Anchises_ and _Cinyras_, and mother of _√Üneas_, who all
lived 'till the destruction of _Troy_; and the sons of _Bacchus_ and
_Ariadne_ were _Argonauts_; as above: and therefore the great _Bacchus_
flourished but one Generation before the _Argonautic_ expedition. This
_Bacchus_ [235] was potent at sea, conquered eastward as far as _India_
returned in triumph, brought his army over the _Hellespont_; conquered
_Thrace_, left music, dancing and poetry there; killed _Lycurgus_ King of
_Thrace_, and _Pentheus_ the grandson of _Cadmus_; gave the Kingdom of
_Lycurgus_ to _Tharops_; and one of his minstrells, called by the _Greeks_
_Calliope_, to _Oeagrus_ the son of _Tharops_; and of _Oeagrus_ and
_Calliope_ was born _Orpheus_, who sailed with the _Argonauts_: this
_Bacchus_ was therefore contemporary to _Sesostris_; and both being Kings
of _Egypt_, and potent at sea, and great conquerors, and carrying on their
conquests into _India_ and _Thrace_, they must be one and the same man.

The antient _Greeks_, who made the fables of the Gods, related that _Io_
the daughter of _Inachus_ was carried into _Egypt_; and there became the
_Egyptian Isis_; and that _Apis_ the son of _Phoroneus_ after death became
the God _Serapis_; and some said that _Epaphus_ was the son of _Io_:
_Serapis_ and _Epaphus_ are _Osiris_, and therefore _Isis_ and _Osiris_, in
the opinion of the ancient _Greeks_ who made the fables of the Gods, were
not above two or three Generations older than the _Argonautic_ expedition.
_Dic√¶archus_, as he is cited by the scholiast upon _Apollonius_, [236]
represents them two Generations older than _Sesostris_, saying that after
_Orus_ the son of _Osiris_ and _Isis_, Reigned _Sesonchosis_. He seems to
have followed the opinion of the people of _Naxus_, who made _Bacchus_ two
Generations older than _Theseus_, and for that end feigned two _Minos's_
and two _Ariadnes_; for by the consent of all antiquity _Osiris_ and
_Bacchus_ were one and the same King of _Egypt_: this is affirmed by the
_Egyptians_, as well as by the _Greeks_; and some of the antient
Mythologists, as _Eumolpus_ and _Orpheus_, [237] called _Osiris_ by the
names of _Dionysus_ and _Sirius_. _Osiris_ was King of all _Egypt_, and a
great conqueror, and came over the _Hellespont_ in the days of
_Triptolemus_, and subdued _Thrace_, and there killed _Lycurgus_; and
therefore his expedition falls in with that of the great _Bacchus_.
_Osiris_, _Bacchus_ and _Sesostris_ lived about the same time, and by the
relation of historians were all of them Kings of all _Egypt_, and Reigned
at _Thebes_, and adorned that city, and were very potent by land and sea:
all three were great conquerors, and carried on their conquests by land
through _Asia_ as far as _India_: all three came over the _Hellespont_ and
were there in danger of losing their army: all three conquered _Thrace_,
and there put a stop to their victories, and returned back from thence into
_Egypt_: all three left pillars with inscriptions in their conquests: and
therefore all three must be one and the same King of _Egypt_; and this King
can be no other than _Sesac_. All _Egypt_, including _Thebais_, _Ethiopia_
and _Libya_, had no common King before the expulsion of the Shepherds who
Reigned in the lower _Egypt_; no Conqueror of _Syria_, _India_, _Asia
minor_ and _Thrace_, before _Sesac_; and the sacred history admits of no
_Egyptian_ conqueror of _Palestine_ before this King.

_Thym√¶tes_ [238] who was contemporary to _Orpheus_, and wrote a poesy
called _Phrygia_, of the actions of _Bacchus_ in very old language and
character, said that _Bacchus_ had _Libyan_ women in his army, amongst whom
was _Minerva_ a woman born in _Libya_, near the river _Triton,_ and that
_Bacchus_ commanded the men and _Minerva_ the women. _Diodorus_ [239] calls
her _Myrina_, and saith that she was Queen of the _Amazons_ in _Libya_, and
there conquered the _Atlantides_ and _Gorgons_, and then made a league with
_Orus_ the son of _Isis_, sent to her by his father _Osiris_ or _Bacchus_
for that purpose, and passing through _Egypt_ subdued the _Arabians_, and
_Syria_ and _Cilicia_, and came through _Phrygia_, _viz._ in the army of
_Bacchus_ to the _Mediterranean_; but palling over into _Europe_, was slain
with many of her women by the _Thracians_ and _Scythians_, under the
conduct of _Sipylus_ a _Scythian_, and _Mopsus_ a _Thracian_ whom
_Lycurgus_ King of _Thrace_ had banished. This was that _Lycurgus_ who
opposed the passage of _Bacchus_ over the _Hellespont_, and was soon after
conquered by him, and slain: but afterwards _Bacchus_ met with a repulse
from the _Greeks_, under the conduct of _Perseus_, who slew many of his
women, as _Pausanias_ [240] relates, and was assisted by the _Scythians_
and _Thracians_ under the conduct of _Sipylus_ and _Mopsus_; which
repulses, together with a revolt of his brother _Danaus_ in _Egypt_; put a
stop to his victories: and in returning home he left part of his men in
_Colchis_ and at _Mount Caucasus_, under _√Üetes_ and _Prometheus_; and his
women upon the river _Thermodon_ near _Colchis_, under their new Queens
_Marthesia_ and _Lampeto_: for _Diodorus_ [241] speaking of the _Amazons_
who were seated at _Thermodon_, saith, that they dwelt originally in
_Libya_, and there Reigned over the _Atlantides_, and invading their
neighbours conquered as far as _Europe_: and _Ammianus_, [242] that the
ancient _Amazons_ breaking through many nations, attack'd the _Athenians_,
and there receiving a great slaughter retired to _Thermodon_: and _Justin_,
[243] that these _Amazons_ had at first, he means at their first coming to
_Thermodon_, two Queens who called themselves daughters of _Mars_; and that
they conquered part of _Europe_, and some cities of _Asia_, _viz._ in the
Reign of _Minerva_, and then sent back part of their army with a great
booty, under their said new Queens; and that _Marthesia_ being afterwards
slain, was succeeded by her daughter _Orithya_, and she by _Penthesilea_;
and that _Theseus_ captivated and married _Antiope_ the sister of
_Orithya_. _Hercules_ made war upon the _Amazons_, and in the Reign of
_Orithya_ and _Penthesilea_ they came to the _Trojan_ war: whence the first
wars of the _Amazons_ in _Europe_ and _Asia_, and their settling at
_Thermodon_, were but one Generation before those actions of _Hercules_ and
_Theseus_, and but two before the _Trojan_ war, and so fell in with the
expedition of _Sesostris_: and since they warred in the days of _Isis_ and
her son _Orus_, and were a part of the army of _Bacchus_ or _Osiris_, we
have here a further argument for making _Osiris_ and _Bacchus_ contemporary
to _Sesostris_, and all three one and the same King with _Sesac_.

The _Greeks_ reckon _Osiris_ and _Bacchus_ to be sons of _Jupiter_, and the
_Egyptian_ name of _Jupiter_ is _Ammon_. _Manetho_ in his 11th and 12th
_Dynasties_, as he is cited by _Africanus_ and _Eusebius_ names these four
Kings of _Egypt_, as reigning in order; _Ammenemes_, _Gesongeses_ or
_Sesonchoris_ the son of _Ammenemes_, _Ammenemes_ who was slain by his
Eunuchs, and _Sesostris_ who subdued all _Asia_ and part of _Europe_.
_Gesongeses_ and _Sesonchoris_ are corruptly written for _Sesonchosis_; and
the two first of these four Kings, _Ammenemes_ and _Sesonchosis_, are the
same with the two last, _Ammenemes_ and _Sesostris_, that is, with _Ammon_
and _Sesac_; for _Diodorus_ saith [244] that _Osiris_ built in _Thebes_ a
magnificent temple to his parents _Jupiter_ and _Juno_, and two other
temples to _Jupiter_, a larger to _Jupiter Uranius_, and a less to his
father _Jupiter Ammon_ who reigned in that city: and [245] _Thym√¶tes_
abovementioned, who was contemporary to _Orpheus_, wrote expresly that the
father of _Bacchus_ was _Ammon_, a King Reigning over part of _Libya_, that
is, a King of _Egypt_ Reigning over all that part of _Libya_, anciently
called _Ammonia_. _Stephanus_ [246] saith Œ†Œ±œÉŒ± ‚ÄõŒ∑ ŒõŒπŒ≤œÖŒ∑ ‚ÄõŒøœÖœÑœâœÇ ŒµŒ∫Œ±ŒªŒµŒπœÑŒø Œ±œÄŒø
ŒëŒºŒºœâŒΩŒøœÇŒá _All _Libya_ was anciently called _Ammonia_ from _Ammon__: this is
that King of _Egypt_ from whom _Thebes_ was called _No-Ammon_, and
_Ammon-no_ the city of _Ammon_, and by the _Greeks Diospolis_, the city of
_Jupiter Ammon_: _Sesostris_ built it sumptuously, and called it by his
father's name, and from the same King the [247] River called _Ammon_, the
people called _Ammonii_, and the [248] promontory _Ammonium_ in _Arabia
f√¶lix_ had their names.

The lower part of _Egypt_ being yearly overflowed by the _Nile_, was scarce
inhabited before the invention of corn, which made it useful: and the King,
who by this invention first peopled it and Reigned over it, perhaps the
King of the city _Mesir_ where _Memphis_ was afterwards built, seems to
have been worshipped by his subjects after death, in the ox or calf, for
this benefaction: for this city stood in the most convenient place to
people the lower _Egypt_, and from its being composed of two parts seated
on each side of the river _Nile_, might give the name of _Mizraim_ to its
founder and people; unless you had rather refer the word to the double
people, those above the _Delta_, and those within it: and this I take to be
the state of the lower _Egypt_, 'till the Shepherds or _Ph≈ìnicians_ who
fled from _Joshuah_ conquered it, and being afterwards conquered by the
_Ethiopians_, fled into _Afric_ and other places: for there was a tradition
that some of them fled into _Afric_; and St. _Austin_ [249] confirms this,
by telling us that the common people of _Afric_ being asked who they were,
replied _Chanani_, that is, _Canaanites_. _Interrogati rustici nostri_,
saith he, _quid sint, Punice respondentes Chanani, corrupta scilicet voce
sicut in talibus solet, quid aliud respondent quam Chanaan√¶i?_ _Procopius_
also [250] tells us of two pillars in the west of _Afric_, with
inscriptions signifying that the people were _Canaanites_ who fled from
_Joshuah_: and _Eusebius_ [251] tells us, that these _Canaanites_ flying
from the sons of _Israel_, built _Tripolis_ in _Afric_; and the _Jerusalem
Gemara_, [252] that the _Gergesites_ fled from _Joshua_, going into
_Afric_: and _Procopius_ relates their flight in this manner. ŒïœÄŒµŒπ Œ¥Œµ ‚ÄõŒ∑ŒºŒ±œÇ
‚ÄõŒø œÑŒ∑œÇ ‚ÄõŒπœÉœÑŒøœÅŒπŒ±œÇ ŒªŒøŒ≥ŒøœÇ ŒµŒΩœÑŒ±œÖŒ∏' Œ∑Œ≥Œ±Œ≥ŒµŒΩ. ŒµœÄŒ±ŒΩŒ±Œ≥Œ∫ŒµœÇ ŒµŒπœÄŒµŒπŒΩ Œ±ŒΩœâŒ∏ŒµŒΩ, ‚ÄõŒøŒ∏ŒµŒΩ œÑŒµ œÑŒ±
ŒúŒ±œÖœÅŒøœÖœÉŒπœâŒΩ ŒµŒ∏ŒΩŒ∑ ŒµœÇ ŒõŒπŒ≤œÖŒ∑ŒΩ Œ∑ŒªŒ∏Œµ, Œ∫Œ±Œπ ‚ÄõŒøœÄœâœÇ œâŒπŒ∫Œ∑œÉŒ±ŒΩœÑŒø. ŒïœÄŒµŒπŒ¥Œ∑ ‚ÄõŒïŒ≤œÅŒ±ŒπŒøŒπ ŒµŒæ
ŒëŒπŒ≥œÖœÄœÑŒøœÖ Œ±ŒΩŒµœáœâœÅŒ∑œÉŒ±ŒΩ, Œ∫Œ±Œπ Œ±Œ≥œáŒπ œÑœâŒΩ Œ†Œ±ŒªŒ±ŒπœÉœÑŒπŒΩŒ∑œÇ ‚ÄõŒøœÅŒπœâŒΩ ŒµŒ≥ŒµŒΩŒøŒΩœÑŒøŒá ŒúœâœÉŒ∑œÇ ŒºŒµŒΩ
œÉŒøœÜŒøœÇ Œ±ŒΩŒ∑œÅ, ‚ÄõŒøœÇ Œ±œÖœÑŒøœÇ œÑŒ∑œÇ ‚ÄõŒøŒ¥ŒøœÖ ‚ÄõŒ∑Œ≥Œ∑œÉŒ±œÑŒø, Œ∏ŒΩŒ∑œÉŒ∫ŒµŒπ. Œ¥ŒπŒ±Œ¥ŒµœáŒµœÑŒ±Œπ Œ¥Œµ œÑŒ∑ŒΩ
‚ÄõŒ∑Œ≥ŒµŒºŒøŒΩŒπŒ±ŒΩ ŒôŒ∑œÉŒøœÖœÇ ‚ÄõŒø œÑŒøœÖ ŒùŒ±œÖŒ∑ œÄŒ±ŒπœÇŒá ‚ÄõŒøœÇ ŒµœÇ œÑŒµ œÑŒ∑ŒΩ Œ†Œ±ŒªŒ±ŒπœÉœÑŒπŒΩŒ∑ŒΩ œÑŒøŒΩ ŒªŒµœâŒΩ
œÑŒøœÖœÑŒøŒΩ ŒµŒπœÉŒ∑Œ≥Œ±Œ≥ŒµŒá Œ∫Œ±Œπ Œ±œÅŒµœÑŒ∑ŒΩ ŒµŒΩ œÑœâŒπ œÄŒøŒªŒµŒºœâŒπ Œ∫œÅŒµŒπœÉœÉœâ ‚ÄõŒ∑ Œ∫Œ±œÑŒ± Œ±ŒΩŒ∏œÅœâœÄŒøœÖ œÜœÖœÉŒπŒΩ
ŒµœÄŒπŒ¥ŒµŒπŒæŒ±ŒºŒµŒΩŒøœÇ, œÑŒ∑ŒΩ œáœâœÅŒ±ŒΩ ŒµœÉœáŒµŒá Œ∫Œ±Œπ œÑŒ± ŒµŒ∏ŒΩŒ∑ ‚ÄõŒ±œÄŒ±ŒΩœÑŒ± Œ∫Œ±œÑŒ±œÉœÑœÅŒµœàŒ±ŒºŒµŒΩŒøœÇ, œÑŒ±œÇ
œÄŒøŒªŒµŒπœÇ ŒµœÖœÄŒµœÑœâœÇ œÄŒ±œÅŒµœÉœÑŒ∑œÉŒ±œÑŒø, Œ±ŒΩŒπŒ∫Œ∑œÑŒøœÇ œÑŒµ œÄŒ±ŒΩœÑŒ±œÄŒ±œÉŒπŒΩ ŒµŒ¥ŒøŒæŒµŒΩ ŒµŒπŒΩŒ±Œπ. œÑŒøœÑŒµ Œ¥Œµ ‚ÄõŒ∑
ŒµœÄŒπŒ∏Œ±ŒªŒ±œÉœÉŒπŒ± œáœâœÅŒ±, ŒµŒ∫ Œ£ŒπŒ¥œâŒΩŒøœÇ ŒºŒµœáœÅŒπ œÑœâŒΩ ŒëŒπŒ≥œÖœÄœÑŒøœÖ ‚ÄõŒøœÅŒπœâŒΩ, Œ¶ŒøŒπŒΩŒπŒ∫Œ∑ ŒæœÖŒºœÄŒ±œÉŒ±
œâŒΩŒøŒºŒ±Œ∂ŒµœÑŒø. Œ≤Œ±œÉŒπŒªŒµœÖœÇ Œ¥Œµ ŒµŒπœÇ œÑŒø œÄŒ±ŒªŒ±ŒπŒøŒΩ ŒµœÜŒµœÉœÑŒ∑Œ∫ŒµŒπŒá ‚ÄõœâœÉœÄŒµœÅ ‚ÄõŒ±œÄŒ±œÉŒπŒΩ
‚ÄõœâŒºŒøŒªŒøŒ≥Œ∑œÑŒ±Œπ, ‚ÄõŒøŒπ Œ¶ŒøŒπŒΩŒπŒ∫œâŒΩ œÑŒ± Œ±œÅœáŒ±ŒπŒøœÑŒ±œÑŒ± Œ±ŒΩŒµŒ≥œÅŒ±œàŒ±ŒΩœÑŒø. ŒµŒΩœÑŒ±œÖŒ∏' œâŒ∫Œ∑ŒΩœÑŒø ŒµŒ∏ŒΩŒ∑
œÄŒøŒªœÖŒ±ŒΩŒ∏œÅœâœÄŒøœÑŒ±œÑŒ±, ŒìŒµœÅŒ≥ŒµœÉŒ±ŒπŒøŒπ œÑŒµ Œ∫Œ±Œπ ŒôŒµŒ≤ŒøœÖœÉŒ±ŒπŒøŒπ, Œ∫Œ±Œπ Œ±ŒªŒªŒ± Œ±œÑœÑŒ± ŒøŒΩŒøŒºŒ±œÑŒ±
ŒµœáŒøŒΩœÑŒ±, ‚ÄõŒøŒπœÇ Œ¥Œ∑ Œ±œÖœÑŒ± ‚ÄõŒ∑ œÑœâŒΩ ‚ÄõŒïŒ≤œÅŒ±ŒπœâŒΩ ‚ÄõŒπœÉœÑŒøœÅŒπŒ± Œ∫Œ±ŒªŒµŒπ. ‚ÄõŒøœÖœÑŒøœÇ ‚ÄõŒø ŒªŒ±ŒøœÇ ŒµœÄŒµŒπ
Œ±ŒºŒ±œáŒøŒΩ œÑŒπ œáœÅŒ∑ŒºŒ± œÑŒøŒΩ ŒµœÄŒ∑ŒªœÖœÑŒ∑ŒΩ œÉœÑœÅŒ±œÑŒ∑Œ≥ŒøŒΩ ŒµŒπŒ¥ŒøŒΩŒá ŒµŒæ Œ∑Œ∏œâŒΩ œÑœâŒΩ œÄŒ±œÑœÅŒπœâŒΩ
ŒµŒæŒ±ŒΩŒ±œÉœÑŒ±ŒΩœÑŒµœÇ, ŒµœÄ' ŒëŒπŒ≥œÖœÄœÑŒøŒΩ ‚ÄõŒøŒºŒøœÅŒøœÖ ŒøœÖœÉŒ∑œÇ ŒµœáœâœÅŒ∑œÉŒ±ŒΩ. ŒµŒΩŒ∏Œ± œáœâœÅŒøŒΩ ŒøœÖŒ¥ŒµŒΩŒ± œÉœÜŒπœÉŒπŒΩ
‚ÄõŒπŒ∫Œ±ŒΩŒøŒΩ ŒµŒΩŒøŒπŒ∫Œ∑œÉŒ±œÉŒ∏Œ±Œπ ‚ÄõŒµœÖœÅŒøŒΩœÑŒµœÇ, ŒµœÄŒµŒπ ŒµŒΩ ŒëŒπŒ≥œÖœÄœÑœâ œÄŒøŒªœÖŒ±ŒΩŒ∏œÅœâœÄŒπŒ± ŒµŒ∫ œÄŒ±ŒªŒ±ŒπŒøœÖ Œ∑ŒΩŒá
ŒµœÇ ŒõŒπŒ≤œÖŒ∑ŒΩ ŒºŒµœáœÅŒπ œÉœÑŒ∑ŒªœâŒΩ œÑœâŒΩ ‚ÄõŒóœÅŒ±Œ∫ŒªŒµŒøœÖœÇ ŒµœÉœáŒøŒΩŒá ŒµŒΩœÑŒ±œÖŒ∏Œ± œÑŒµ Œ∫Œ±Œπ ŒµœÇ ŒµŒºŒµ œÑŒ∑Œπ
Œ¶ŒøŒπŒΩŒπŒ∫œâŒΩ œÜœâŒΩŒ∑Œπ œáœÅœâŒºŒµŒΩŒøŒπ œâŒπŒ∫Œ∑ŒΩœÑŒ±Œπ. _Quando ad Mauros nos historia deduxit,
congruens nos exponere unde orta gens in Africa sedes fixerit. Quo tempore
egressi √Ügypto Hebr√¶i jam prope Palestin√¶ fines venerant, mortuus ibi
Moses, vir sapiens, dux itineris. Successor imperii factus Jesus Nav√¶
filius intra Pal√¶stinam duxit popularium agmen; & virtute usus supra
humanum modum, terram occupavit, gentibusque excisis urbes ditionis su√¶
fecit, & invicti famam tulit. Maritima ora qu√¶ a Sidone ad √Ügypti limitem
extenditur, nomen habet Ph≈ìnices. Rex unus _[Hebr√¶is]_ imperabat ut omnes
qui res Ph≈ìnicias scripsere consentiunt. In eo tractatu numeros√¶ gentes
erant, Gerges√¶i, Jebus√¶i, quosque aliis nominibus Hebr√¶orum annales
memorant. Hi homines ut impares se venienti imperatori videre, derelicto
patri√¶ solo ad finitimam primum venere √Ügyptum, sed ibi capacem tant√¶
multitudinis locum non reperientes, erat enim √Ügyptus ab antiquo f≈ìcunda
populis, in Africam profecti, multis conditis urbibus, omnem eam Herculis
columnas usque, obtinuerunt: ubi ad meam √¶tatem sermone Ph≈ìnicio utentes
habitant_. By the language and extreme poverty of the _Moors_, described
also by _Procopius_ and by their being unacquainted with merchandise and
sea-affairs, you may know that they were _Canaanites_ originally, and
peopled _Afric_ before the _Tyrian_ merchants came thither. These
_Canaanites_ coming from the East, pitched their tents in great numbers in
the lower _Egypt_, in the Reign of _Timaus_, as [253] _Manetho_ writes, and
easily seized the country, and fortifying _Pelusium_, then called _Abaris_,
they erected a Kingdom there, and Reigned long under their own Kings,
_Salatis_, _B≈ìon_, _Apachnas_, _Apophis_, _Janias_, _Assis_, and others
successively: and in the mean time the upper part of _Egypt_ called
_Thebais_, and according to [254] _Herodotus_, _√Ügyptus_, and in Scripture
the land of _Pathros_, was under other Kings, Reigning perhaps at _Coptos_,
and _Thebes_, and _This_, and _Syene_, and [255] _Pathros_, and
_Elephantis_, and _Heracleopolis_, and _Mesir_, and other great cities,
'till they conquered one another, or were conquered by the _Ethiopians_:
for cities grew great in those days, by being the seats of Kingdoms: but at
length one of these Kingdoms conquered the rest, and made a lasting war
upon the Shepherds, and in the Reign of its King _Misphragmuthosis_, and
his son _Amosis_, called also _Tethmosis_, _Tuthmosis_, and _Thomosis_,
drove them out of _Egypt_, and made them fly into _Afric_ and _Syria_, and
other places, and united all _Egypt_ into one Monarchy; and under their
next Kings, _Ammon_ and _Sesac_, enlarged it into a great Empire. This
conquering people worshipped not the Kings of the Shepherds whom they
conquered and expelled, but [256] abolished their religion of sacrificing
men, and after the manner of those ages Deified their own Kings, who
founded their new Dominion, beginning the history of their Empire with the
Reign and great acts of their Gods and Heroes: whence their Gods _Ammon_
and _Rhea_, or _Uranus_ and _Tit√¶a_; _Osiris_ and _Isis_; _Orus_ and
_Bubaste_: and their Secretary _Thoth_, and Generals _Hercules_ and _Pan_;
and Admiral _Japetus_, _Neptune_, or _Typhon_; were all of them _Thebans_,
and flourished after the expulsion of the Shepherds. _Homer_ places
_Thebes_ in _Ethiopia_, and the _Ethiopians_ reported that [257] the
_Egyptians_ were a colony drawn out of them by _Osiris_, and that thence it
came to pass that most of the laws of _Egypt_ were the same with those of
_Ethiopia_, and that the _Egyptians_ learnt from the _Ethiopians_ the
custom of Deifying their Kings.

When _Joseph_ entertained his brethren in _Egypt_, they did eat at a table
by themselves, and he did eat at another table by himself; and the
_Egyptians_ who did eat with him were at another table,  _because the
_Egyptians_ might not eat bread with the _Hebrews_; for that was an
abomination to the _Egyptians__, _Gen._ xliii. 32. These _Egyptians_ who
did eat with _Joseph_ were of the Court of _Pharaoh_; and therefore
_Pharaoh_ and his Court were at this time not Shepherds but genuine
_Egyptians_; and these _Egyptians_ abominated eating bread with the
_Hebrews_, at one and the same table: and of these _Egyptians_ and their
fellow-subjects, it is said a little after, that _every Shepherd is an
abomination to the _Egyptians__: _Egypt_ at this time was therefore under
the government of the genuine _Egyptians_, and not under that of the
Shepherds.

After the descent of _Jacob_ and his sons into _Egypt_, _Joseph_ lived 70
years, and so long continued in favour with the Kings of _Egypt_: and 64
years after his death _Moses_ was born: and between the death of _Joseph_
and the birth of _Moses_, _there arose up a new King over _Egypt_, which
knew not _Joseph__, _Exod._ i. 8. But this King of _Egypt_ was not one of
the Shepherds; for he is called _Pharaoh_, _Exod._ i. 11, 22: and _Moses_
told his successor, that if the people of _Israel_ should sacrifice in the
land of _Egypt_, _they should sacrifice the abomination of the _Egyptians_
before their eyes, and the _Egyptians_ would stone them_, _Exod._ viii. 26.
that is, they should sacrifice sheep or oxen, contrary to the religion of
_Egypt_. The Shepherds therefore did not Reign over _Egypt_ while _Israel_
was there, but either were driven out of _Egypt_ before _Israel_ went down
thither, or did not enter into _Egypt_ 'till after _Moses_ had brought
_Israel_ from thence: and the latter must be true, if they were driven out
of _Egypt_ a little before the building of the temple of _Solomon_, as
_Manetho_ affirms.

_Diodorus_ [258] saith in his 40th book, _that in _Egypt_ there were
formerly multitudes of strangers of several nations, who used foreign rites
and ceremonies in worshipping the Gods, for which they were expelled
_Egypt_; and under _Danaus_, _Cadmus_, and other skilful commanders, after
great hardships, came into _Greece_, and other places; but the greatest
part of them came into _Jud√¶a_, not far from _Egypt_, a country then
uninhabited and desert, being conducted thither by one _Moses_, a wise and
valiant man, who after he had possest himself of the country, among other
things built _Jerusalem_, and the Temple._ _Diodorus_ here mistakes the
original of the _Israelites_, as _Manetho_ had done before, confounding
their flight into the wilderness under the conduct of _Moses_, with the
flight of the Shepherds from _Misphragmuthosis_, and his son _Amosis_, into
_Ph≈ìnicia_ and _Afric_; and not knowing that _Jud√¶a_ was inhabited by
_Canaanites_, before the _Israelites_ under _Moses_ came thither: but
however, he lets us know that the Shepherds were expelled _Egypt_ by
_Amosis_, a little before the building of _Jerusalem_ and the Temple, and
that after several hardships several of them came into _Greece_, and other
places, under the conduct of _Cadmus_, and other Captains, but the most of
them Settled in _Ph≈ìnicia_ next _Egypt_. We may reckon therefore that the
expulsion of the Shepherds by the Kings of _Thebais_, was the occasion that
the _Philistims_ were so numerous in the days of _Saul_; and that so many
men came in those times with colonies out of _Egypt_ and _Ph≈ìnicia_ into
_Greece_; as _Lelex_, _Inachus_, _Pelasgus_, _√Üzeus_, _Cecrops_,
_√Ügialeus_, _Cadmus_, _Ph≈ìnix_, _Membliarius_, _Alymnus_, _Abas_,
_Erechtheus_, _Peteos_, _Phorbas_, in the days of _Eli_, _Samuel_, _Saul_
and _David_: some of them fled in the days of _Eli_, from
_Misphragmuthosis_, who conquered part of the lower _Egypt_; others retired
from his Successor _Amosis_ into _Ph≈ìnicia_, and _Arabia Petr√¶a_, and there
mixed with the old inhabitants; who not long after being conquered by
_David_, fled from him and the _Philistims_ by sea, under the conduct of
_Cadmus_ and other Captains, into _Asia Minor_, _Greece_, and _Libya_, to
seek new seats, and there built towns, erected Kingdoms, and set on foot
the worship of the dead: and some of those who remained in _Jud√¶a_ might
assist _David_ and _Solomon_, in building _Jerusalem_ and the Temple. Among
the foreign rites used by the strangers in _Egypt_, in worshipping the
Gods, was the sacrificing of men; for _Amosis_ abolished that custom at
_Heliopolis_: and therefore those strangers were _Canaanites_, such as fled
from _Joshua_; for the _Canaanites_ gave their seed, that is, their
children, to _Moloch_, _and burnt their sons and their daughters in the
fire to their Gods_, _Deut._ xii. 31. _Manetho_ calls them _Ph≈ìnician_
strangers.

After _Amosis_ had expelled the Shepherds, and extended his dominion over
all _Egypt_, his son and Successor _Ammenemes_ or _Ammon_, by much greater
conquests laid the foundation of the _Egyptian_ Empire: for by the
assistance of his young son _Sesostris_, whom he brought up to hunting and
other laborious exercises, he conquered _Arabia_, _Troglodytica_, and
_Libya_: and from him all _Libya_ was anciently called _Ammonia_: and after
his death, in the temples erected to him at _Thebes_, and in _Ammonia_ and
at _Meroe_ in _Ethiopia_, they set up Oracles to him, and made the people
worship him as the God that acted in them: and these are the oldest Oracles
mentioned in history; the _Greeks_ therein imitating the _Egyptians_: for
the [259] Oracle at _Dodona_ was the oldest in _Greece_, and was set up by
an _Egyptian_ woman, after the example of the Oracle of _Jupiter Ammon_ at
_Thebes_.

In the days of _Ammon_ a body of the _Edomites_ fled from _David_ into
_Egypt_, with their young King _Hadad_, as above; and carried thither their
skill in navigation: and this seems to have given occasion to the
_Egyptians_ to build a fleet on the _Red Sea_ near _Coptos_, and might
ingratiate _Hadad_ with _Pharaoh_: for the _Midianites_ and _Ishmaelites_,
who bordered upon the _Red Sea_, near _Mount Horeb_ on the south-side of
_Edom_, were merchants from the days of _Jacob_ the Patriarch, _Gen._
xxxvii. 28, 36. and by their merchandise the _Midianites_ abounded with
gold in the days of _Moses_, _Numb._ xxxi. 50, 51, 52. and in the days of
the judges of _Israel_, _because they were _Ishmaelites__, _Judg._ viii 24.
The _Ishmaelites_ therefore in those days grew rich by merchandise; they
carried their merchandise on camels through _Petra_ to _Rhinocolura_, and
thence to _Egypt_: and this trafic at length came into the hands of
_David_, by his conquering the _Edomites_, and gaining the ports of the
_Red Sea_ called _Eloth_ and _Ezion-Geber_, as may be understood by the
3000 talents of gold of _Ophir_, which _David_ gave to the Temple, 1
_Chron._ xxix. 4. The _Egyptians_ having the art of making linen-cloth,
they began about this time to build long Ships with sails, in their port on
those Seas near _Coptos_, and having learnt the skill of the _Edomites_,
they began now to observe the positions of the Stars, and the length of the
Solar Year, for enabling them to know the position of the Stars at any
time, and to sail by them at all times, without sight of the shoar: and
this gave a beginning to Astronomy and Navigation: for hitherto they had
gone only by the shoar with oars, in round vessels of burden, first
invented on that shallow sea by the posterity of _Abraham_, and in passing
from island to island guided themselves by the sight of the islands in the
day time, or by the sight of some of the Stars in the night. Their old year
was the Lunisolar year, derived from _Noah_ to all his posterity, 'till
those days, and consisted of twelve months, each of thirty days, according
to their calendar: and to the end of this calendar-year they now added five
days, and thereby made up the Solar year of twelve months and five days, or
365 days.

The ancient _Egyptians_ feigned [260] that _Rhea_ lay secretly with
_Saturn_, and _Sol_ prayed that she might bring forth neither in any month,
nor in the year; and that _Mercury_ playing at dice with _Luna_, overcame,
and took from the Lunar year the 72d part of every day, and thereof
composed five days, and added them to the year of 360 days, that she might
bring forth in them; and that the _Egyptians_ celebrated those days as the
birth-days of _Rhea_'s five children, _Osiris_, _Orus_ senior, _Typhon_,
_Isis_, and _Nephthe_ the wife of _Typhon_: and therefore, according to the
opinion of the ancient _Egyptians_, the five days were added to the
Lunisolar calendar-year, in the Reign of _Saturn_ and _Rhea_, the parents
of _Osiris_, _Isis_, and _Typhon_; that is, in the Reign of _Ammon_ and
_Tit√¶a_, the parents of the _Titans_; or in the latter half of the Reign of
_David_, when those _Titans_ were born, and by consequence soon after the
flight of the _Edomites_ from _David_ into _Egypt_: but the Solstices not
being yet settled, the beginning of this new year might not be fixed to the
Vernal Equinox before the Reign of _Amenophis_ the successor of _Orus_
junior, the Son of _Osiris_ and _Isis_.

When the _Edomites_ fled from _David_ with their young King _Hadad_ into
_Egypt_, it is probable that they carried thither also the use of letters:
for letters were then in use among the posterity of _Abraham_ in _Arabia
Petr√¶a_, and upon the borders of the _Red Sea_, the Law being written there
by _Moses_ in a book, and in tables of stone, long before: for _Moses_
marrying the daughter of the prince of _Midian_, and dwelling with him
forty years, learnt them among the _Midianites_: and _Job_, who lived [261]
among their neighbours the _Edomites_, mentions the writing down or words,
as there in use in his days, _Job._ xix. 23, 24. and there is no instance
of letters for writing down sounds, being in use before the days of
_David_, in any other nation besides the posterity of _Abraham_. The
_Egyptians_ ascribed this invention to _Thoth_, the secretary of _Osiris_;
and therefore Letters began to be in use in _Egypt_ in the days of _Thoth_,
that is, a little after the flight of the _Edomites_ from _David_, or about
the time that _Cadmus_ brought them into _Europe_.

_Helladius_ [262] tells us, that a man called _Oes_, who appeared in the
_Red Sea_ with the tail of a fish, so they painted a sea-man, taught
Astronomy and Letters: and _Hyginus_, [263] that _Euhadnes_, who came out
of the Sea in _Chald√¶a_, taught the _Chald√¶ans_ Astrology the first of any
man; he means Astronomy: and _Alexander Polyhistor_ [264] tells us from
_Berosus_, that _Oannes_ taught the _Chald√¶ans_ Letters, Mathematicks,
Arts, Agriculture, Cohabitation in Cities, and the Construction of Temples;
and that several such men came thither successively. _Oes_, _Euhadnes_, and
_Oannes_, seem to be the same name a little varied by corruption; and this
name seems to have been given in common to several sea-men, who came
thither from time to time, and by consequence were merchants, and
frequented those seas with their merchandise, or else fled from their
enemies: so that Letters, Astronomy, Architecture and Agriculture, came
into _Chald√¶a_ by sea, and were carried thither by sea-men, who frequented
the _Persian Gulph_, and came thither from time to time, after all those
things were practised in other countries whence they came, and by
consequence in the days of _Ammon_ and _Sesac_, _David_ and _Solomon_, and
their successors, or not long before. The _Chald√¶ans_ indeed made _Oannes_
older than the flood of _Xisuthrus_, but the _Egyptians_ made _Osiris_ as
old, and I make them contemporary.

The _Red Sea_ had its name not from its colour, but from _Edom_ and
_Erythra_, the names of _Esau_, which signify that colour: and some [265]
tell us, that King _Erythra_, meaning _Esau_, invented the vessels,
_rates_, in which they navigated that Sea, and was buried in an island
thereof near the _Persian Gulph_: whence it follows, that the _Edomites_
navigated that Sea from the days of _Esau_; and there is no need that the
oldest _Oannes_ should be older. There were boats upon rivers before, such
as were the boats which carried the Patriarchs over _Euphrates_ and
_Jordan_, and the first nations over many other rivers, for peopling the
earth, seeking new seats, and invading one another's territories: and after
the example of such vessels, _Ishhmael_ and _Midian_ the sons of _Abraham_,
and _Esau_ his grandson, might build larger vessels to go to the islands
upon the _Red Sea_, in searching for new seats, and by degrees learn to
navigate that sea, as far as to the _Persian Gulph_: for ships were as old,
even upon the _Mediterranean_, as the days of _Jacob_, _Gen._ xlix. 13.
_Judg._ v. 17. but it is probable that the merchants of that sea were not
forward to discover their Arts and Sciences, upon which their trade
depended: it seems therefore that Letters and Astronomy, and the trade of
Carpenters, were invented by the merchants of the _Red Sea_, for writing
down their merchandise, and keeping their accounts, and guiding their ships
in the night by the Stars, and building ships; and that they were
propagated from _Arabia Petr√¶a_ into _Egypt_, _Chald√¶a_, _Syria_, _Asia
minor_, and _Europe_, much about one and the same time; the time in which
_David_ conquered and dispersed those merchants: for we hear nothing of
Letters before the days of _David_, except among the posterity of
_Abraham_; nothing of Astronomy, before the _Egyptians_ under _Ammon_ and
_Sesac_ applied themselves to that study, except the Constellations
mentioned by _Job_, who lived in _Arabia Petr√¶a_ among the merchants;
nothing of the trade of Carpenters, or good Architecture, before _Solomon_
sent to _Hiram_ King of _Tyre_, to supply him with such Artificers, saying
that _there were none in _Israel_ who could skill to hew timber like the
_Zidonians__.

_Diodorus_ [266] tells us, _that the _Egyptians_ sent many colonies out of
_Egypt_ into other countries; and that _Belus_, the son of _Neptune_ and
_Libya_, carried colonies thence into _Babylonia_, and seating himself on
_Euphrates_, instituted priests free from taxes and publick expences, after
the manner of _Egypt_, who were called _Chald√¶ans_, and who after the
manner of _Egypt_, might observe the Stars_: and _Pausanias_ [267] tells
us, _that the _Belus_ of the _Babylonians_ had his name from _Belus_ an
_Egyptian_, the son of _Libya__: and _Apollodorus_; [268] _that _Belus_ the
son of _Neptune_ and _Libya_, and King of _Egypt_, was the father of
_√Ügyptus_ and _Danaus__, that is, _Ammon_: he tells us also, _that
_Busiris_ the son of _Neptune_ and _Lisianassa_ _[Libyanassa]_ the daughter
of _Epaphus_, was King of _Egypt__; and _Eusebius_ calls this King,
__Busiris_ the son of _Neptune_, and of _Libya_ the daughter of _Epaphus__.
By these things the later _Egyptians_ seem to have made two _Belus's_, the
one the father of _Osiris_, _Isis_, and _Neptune_, the other the son of
_Neptune_, and father of _√Ügyptus_ and _Danaus_: and hence came the opinion
of the people of _Naxus_, that there were two _Minos's_ and two _Ariadnes_,
the one two Generations older than the other; which we have confuted. The
father of _√Ügyptus_ and _Danaus_ was the father of _Osiris_, _Isis_, and
_Typhon_; and _Typhon_ was not the grandfather of _Neptune_, but _Neptune_
himself.

_Sesostris_ being brought up to hard labour by his father _Ammon_, warred
first under his father, being the Hero or _Hercules_ of the _Egyptians_
during his father's Reign, and afterward their King: under his father,
whilst he was very young, he invaded and conquered _Troglodytica_, and
thereby secured the harbour of the _Red Sea_, near _Coptos_ in _Egypt_, and
then he invaded _Ethiopia_, and carried on his conquest southward, as far
as to the region bearing cinnamon: and his father by the assistance of the
_Edomites_ having built a fleet on the _Red Sea_, he put to sea, and
coasted _Arabia F√¶lix_, going to the _Persian Gulph_ and beyond, and in
those countries set up Columns with inscriptions denoting his conquests;
and particularly he Set up a Pillar at _Dira_, a promontory in the straits
of the _Red Sea_, next _Ethiopia_, and two Pillars in _India_, on the
mountains near the mouth of the rivers _Ganges_; so [269] _Dionysius_:

  ŒïŒΩŒ∏Œ± œÑŒµ Œ∫Œ±Œπ œÉœÑŒ∑ŒªŒ±Œπ, ŒòŒ∑Œ≤Œ±ŒπŒ≥ŒµŒΩŒµŒøœÇ ŒîŒπŒøŒΩœÖœÉŒøœÖ
  ‚ÄõŒïœÉœÑŒ±œÉŒπŒΩ œÄœÖŒºŒ±œÑŒøŒπŒø œÄŒ±œÅŒ± ‚ÄõœÅŒøŒøŒΩ Œ©Œ∫ŒµŒ±ŒΩŒøŒπŒø,
  ŒôŒΩŒ¥œâŒΩ ‚ÄõœÖœÉœÑŒ±œÑŒπŒøŒπœÉŒπŒΩ ŒµŒΩ ŒøœÖœÅŒµœÉŒπŒΩŒá ŒµŒΩŒ∏Œ± œÑŒµ ŒìŒ±Œ≥Œ≥Œ∑œÇ
  ŒõŒµœÖŒ∫ŒøŒΩ ‚ÄõœÖŒ¥ŒøœÅ ŒùœÖœÉœÉŒ±ŒπŒøŒΩ ŒµœÄŒπ œÄŒªŒ±œÑŒ±ŒºœâŒΩŒ± Œ∫œÖŒªŒπŒΩŒ¥ŒµŒπ.

  _Ubi etiamnum column√¶ Thebis geniti Bacchi_
  _Stant extremi juxta fluxum Oceani_
  _Indorum ultimis in montibus: ubi & Ganges_
  _Claram aquam Nyss√¶am ad planitiem devolvit_.

After these things he invaded _Libya_, and fought the _Africans_ with
clubs, and thence is painted with a club in his hand: so [270] _Hyginus_;
_Afri & √Ügyptii primum fustibus dimicaverunt, postea Belus Neptuni filius
gladio belligeratus est, unde bellum dictum est_: and after the conquest of
_Libya_, by which _Egypt_ was furnished with horses, and furnished
_Solomon_ and his friends; he prepared a fleet on the _Mediterranean_, and
went on westward upon the coast of _Afric_, to search those countries, as
far as to the Ocean and island _Erythra_ or _Gades_ in _Spain_; as
_Macrobius_ [271] informs us from _Panyasis_ and _Pherecydes_: and there he
conquered _Geryon_, and at the mouth of the _Straits_ set up the famous
Pillars.

  [272] _Venit ad occasum mundique extrema Sesostris._

Then he returned through _Spain_ and the southern coasts of _France_ and
_Italy_, with the cattel of _Geryon_, his fleet attending him by sea, and
left in _Sicily_ the _Sicani_, a people which he had brought from _Spain_:
and after his father's death he built Temples to him in his conquests;
whence it came to pass, that _Jupiter Ammon_ was worshipped in _Ammonia_,
and _Ethiopia_, and _Arabia_, and as far as _India_, according to the [273]
Poet:

  _Quamvis √Üthiopum populis, Arabumque beatis_
  _Gentibus, atque Indis unus sit Jupiter Ammon_.

The _Arabians_ worshipped only two Gods, _C≈ìlus_, otherwise called
_Ouranus_, or _Jupiter Uranius_, and _Bacchus_: and these were _Jupiter
Ammon_ and _Sesac_, as above: and so also the people of _Meroe_ above
_Egypt_ [274] worshipped no other Gods but _Jupiter_ and _Bacchus_, and had
an Oracle of _Jupiter_, and these two Gods were _Jupiter Ammon_ and
_Osiris_, according to the language of _Egypt_.

At length _Sesostris_, in the fifth year of _Rehoboam_, came out of _Egypt_
with a great army of _Libyans_, _Troglodytes_ and _Ethiopians_, and spoiled
the Temple, and reduced _Jud√¶a_ into servitude, and went on conquering,
first eastward toward _India_, which he invaded, and then westward as far
as _Thrace_: for _God had given him the kingdoms of the countries_, 2
_Chron._ xii. 2, 3, 8. In [275] this Expedition he spent nine years,
setting up pillars with inscriptions in all his conquests, some of which
remained in _Syria_ 'till the days of _Herodotus_. He was accompanied with
his son _Orus_, or _Apollo_, and with some singing women, called _the
Muses_, one of which, called _Calliope_, was the mother of _Orpheus_ an
_Argonaut_: and the two tops of the mountain _Parnassus_, which were very
high, were dedicated [276] the one to this _Bacchus_, and the other to his
son _Apollo_: whence _Lucan_; [277]

          _Parnassus gemino petit √¶thera colle,_
  _Mons Ph≈ìbo, Bromioque sacer._

In the fourteenth year of _Rehoboam_ he returned back into _Egypt_; leaving
_√Üetes_ in _Colchis_, and his nephew _Prometheus_ at mount _Caucasus_, with
part of his army, to defend his conquests from the _Scythians_. _Apollonius
Rhodius_ [278] and his scholiast tell us, that _Sesonchosis_ King of all
_Egypt_, that is _Sesac_, invading all _Asia_, and a great part of
_Europe_, peopled many cities which he took; and that _√Üa_, the Metropolis
of _Colchis_, _remained stable ever since his days with the posterity of
those _Egyptians_ which he placed there, and that they preserved pillars or
tables in which all the journies and the bounds of sea and land were
described, for the use of them that were to go any whither_: these tables
therefore gave a beginning to Geography.

_Sesostris_ upon his returning home [279] divided _Egypt_ by measure
amongst the _Egyptians_; and this gave a beginning to Surveying and
Geometry: and [280] _Jamblicus_ derives this division of _Egypt_, and
beginning of Geometry, from the Age of the Gods of _Egypt_. _Sesostris_
also [281] divided _Egypt_ into 36 _Nomes_ or Counties, and dug a canal
from the _Nile_ to the head city of every _Nome_, and with the earth dug
out of it, he caused the ground of the city to be raised higher, and built
a Temple in every city for the worship of the _Nome_, and in the Temples
set up Oracles, some of which remained 'till the days of _Herodotus_: and
by this means the _Egyptians_ of every _Nome_ were induced to worship the
great men of the Kingdom, to whom the _Nome_, the City, and the Temple or
Sepulchre of the God, was dedicated: for every Temple had its proper God,
and modes of worship, and annual festivals, at which the Council and People
of the _Nome_ met at certain times to sacrifice, and regulate the affairs
of the _Nome_, and administer justice, and buy and sell; but _Sesac_ and
his Queen, by the names of _Osiris_ and _Isis_, were worshipped in all
_Egypt_: and because _Sesac_, to render the _Nile_ more useful, dug
channels from it to all the capital cities of _Egypt_; that river was
consecrated to him, and he was called by its names, _√Ügyptus_, _Siris_,
_Nilus_. _Dionysius_ [282] tells us, that the _Nile_ was called _Siris_ by
the _Ethiopians_, and _Nilus_ by the people of _Siene_. From the word
_Nahal_, which signifies a torrent, that river was called _Nilus_; and
_Dionysius_ [283] tells us, that _Nilus_ was that King who cut _Egypt_ into
canals, to make the river useful: in Scripture the river is called
_Schichor_, or _Sihor_, and thence the _Greeks_ formed the words _Siris_,
_Sirius_, _Ser-Apis_, _O-Siris_; but _Plutarch_ [284] tells us, that the
syllable _O_, put before the word _Siris_ by the _Greeks_, made it scarce
intelligible to the _Egyptians_.

I have now told you the original of the _Nomes_ of _Egypt_ and of the
Religions and Temples of the _Nomes_, and of the Cities built there by the
Gods, and called by their names: whence _Diodorus_ [285] tells us, that _of
all the Provinces of the World, there were in _Egypt_ only many cities
built by the ancient Gods, as by _Jupiter_, _Sol_, _Hermes_, _Apollo_,
_Pan_, _Eilithyia_, and, many others_: and _Lucian_ [286] an _Assyrian_,
who had travelled into _Ph≈ìnicia_ and _Egypt_, tells us, that _the Temples
of _Egypt_ were very old, those in _Ph≈ìnicia_ built by _Cinyras_ as old,
and those in _Assyria_ almost as old as the former, but not altogether so
old_: which shews that the Monarchy of _Assyria_ rose up after the Monarchy
of _Egypt_; as is represented in Scripture; and that the Temples of _Egypt_
then standing, were those built by _Sesostris_, about the same time that
the Temples of _Ph≈ìnicia_ and _Cyprus_ were built by _Cinyras_, _Benhadad_,
and _Hiram_. This was not the first original of Idolatry, but only the
erecting of much more sumptuous Temples than formerly to the founders of
new Kingdoms: for Temples at first were very small;

  _Jupiter angusta vix totus stabat in √¶de._
      _Ovid. Fast._ l. 1.

Altars were at first erected without Temples, and this custom continued in
_Persia_ 'till after the days of _Herodotus_: in _Ph≈ìnicia_ they had Altars
with little houses for eating the sacrifices much earlier, and these they
called High Places: such was the High Place where _Samuel_ entertained
_Saul_; such was the House of _Dagon_ at _Ashdod_, into which the
_Philistims_ brought the Ark; and the House of _Baal_, in which _Jehu_ slew
the Prophets of _Baal_; and such were the High Places of the _Canaanites_
which _Moses_ commanded _Israel_ to destroy: he [287] commanded _Israel_ to
destroy the Altars, Images, High Places, and Groves of the _Canaanites_,
but made no mention of their Temples, as he would have done had there been
any in those days. I meet with no mention of sumptuous Temples before the
days of _Solomon_: new Kingdoms begun then to build Sepulchres to their
Founders in the form of Sumptuous Temples; and such Temples _Hiram_ built
in _Tyre_, _Sesac_ in all _Egypt_, and _Benhadad_ in _Damascus_.

For when _David_ [288] smote _Hadad Ezer_ King of _Zobah_, and slew the
_Syrians_ of _Damascus_ who came to assist him, _Rezon_ _the son of
_Eliadah_ fled from his lord _Hadad-Ezer_, and gathered men unto him and
became Captain over a band, and Reigned in _Damascus_, over _Syria__: he is
called _Hezion_, 1 _King._ xv. 18. and his successors mentioned in history
were _Tabrimon_, _Hadad_ or _Ben-hadad_, _Benhadad_ II. _Hazael_,
_Benhadad_ III. * * and _Rezin_ the son of _Tabeah_. _Syria_ became subject
to _Egypt_ in the days of _Tabrimon_, and recovered her liberty under
_Benhadad_ I; and in the days of _Benhadad_ III, until the reign of the
last _Rezin_, they became subject to _Israel_: and in the ninth year of
_Hoshea_ King of _Judah_, _Tiglath-pileser_ King of _Assyria_ captivated
the _Syrians_, and put an end to their Kingdom: now _Josephus_ [289] tells
us, that _the _Syrians_ 'till his days worshipped both _Adar__, that is
_Hadad_ or _Benhadad_, _and his successor _Hazael_ as Gods, for their
benefactions, and for building Temples by which they adorned the city of
_Damascus_: for_, saith he, _they daily celebrate solemnities in honour of
these Kings, and boast their antiquity, not knowing that they are novel,
and lived not above eleven hundred years ago_. It seems these Kings built
sumptuous Sepulchres for themselves, and were worshipped therein. _Justin_
[290] calls the first of these two Kings _Damascus_, saying that _the city
had its name from him, and that the _Syrians_ in honour of him worshipped
his wife _Arathes_ as a Goddess, using her Sepulchre for a Temple_.

Another instance we have in the Kingdom of _Byblus_. In the [291] Reign of
_Minos_ King of _Crete_, when _Rhadamanthus_ the brother of _Minos_ carried
colonies from _Crete_ to the _Greek_ islands, and gave the islands to his
captains, he gave _Lemnos_ to _Thoas_, or _Theias_, or _Thoantes_, the
father of _Hypsipyle_, a _Cretan_ worker in metals, and by consequence a
disciple of the _Id√¶i Dactyli_, and perhaps a _Ph≈ìnician_: for the _Id√¶i
Dactyli_, and _Telchines_, and _Corybantes_ brought their Arts and Sciences
from _Ph≈ìnicia_: and [292] _Suidas_ saith, that he was descended from
_Pharnaces_ King of _Cyprus_; _Apollodorus_, [293] that he was the son of
_Sandochus_ a _Syrian_; and _Apollonius Rhodius_, [294] that __Hypsipyle_
gave _Jason_ the purple cloak which the _Graces_ made for _Bacchus_, who
gave it to his son _Thoas__, the father of _Hypsipyle_, and King of
_Lemnos_: _Thoas_ married [295] _Calycopis_, the mother of _√Üneas_, and
daughter of _Otreus_ King of _Phrygia_, and for his skill on the harp was
called _Cinyras_, and was said to be exceedingly beloved by _Apollo_ or
_Orus_: the great _Bacchus_ loved his wife, and being caught in bed with
her in _Phrygia_ appeased him with wine, and composed the matter by making
him King of _Byblus_ and _Cyprus_; and then came over the _Hellespont_ with
his army, and conquered _Thrace:_ and to these things the poets allude, in
feigning that _Vulcan_ fell from heaven into _Lemnos_, and that _Bacchus_
[296] appeased him with wine, and reduced him back into heaven: he fell
from the heaven of the _Cretan_ Gods, when he went from _Crete_ to _Lemnos_
to work in metals, and was reduced back into heaven when _Bacchus_ made him
King of _Cyprus_ and _Byblus_: he Reigned there 'till a very great age,
living to the times of the _Trojan_ war, and becoming exceeding rich: and
after the death of his wife _Calycopis_, [297] he built Temples to her at
_Paphos_ and _Amathus_, in _Cyprus_; and at _Byblus_ in _Syria_, and
instituted Priests to her with Sacred Rites and lustful _Orgia_; whence she
became the _Dea Cypria_, and the _Dea Syria_: and from Temples erected to
her in these and other places, she was also called _Paphia_, _Amathusia_,
_Byblia_, _Cytherea_ _Salaminia_, _Cnidia_, _Erycina_, _Idalia_. _Fama
tradit a Cinyra sacratum vetustissimum Paphi√¶ Veneris templum, Deamque
ipsam conceptam mari huc appulsam_: _Tacit. Hist._ l. 2. c. 3. From her
sailing from _Phrygia_ to the island _Cythera_, and from thence to be Queen
of _Cyprus_, she was said by the _Cyprians_, to be born of the froth of the
sea, and was painted sailing upon a shell. _Cinyras_ Deified also his son
_Gingris_, by the name of _Adonis_; and for assisting the _Egyptians_ with
armour, it is probable that he himself was Deified by his friends the
_Egyptians_, by the name of _Baal-Canaan_, or _Vulcan_: for _Vulcan_ was
celebrated principally by the _Egyptians_, and was a King according to
_Homer_, and Reigned in _Lemnos_; and _Cinyras_ was an inventor of arts,
[298] and found out copper in _Cyprus_, and the smiths hammer, and anvil,
and tongs, and laver; and imployed workmen in making armour, and other
things of brass and iron, and was the only King celebrated in history for
working in metals, and was King of _Lemnos_, and the husband of _Venus_;
all which are the characters of _Vulcan_: and the _Egyptians_ about the
time of the death of _Cinyras_, _viz._ in the Reign of their King
_Amenophis_, built a very sumptuous Temple at _Memphis_ to _Vulcan_, and
near it a smaller Temple to _Venus Hospita_; not an _Egyptian_ woman but a
foreigner, not _Helena_ but _Vulcan's Venus_: for [299] _Herodotus_ tells
us, that the region round about this Temple was inhabited by _Tyrian
Ph≈ìnicians_, and that [300] _Cambyses_ going into this Temple at _Memphis_,
very much derided the statue of _Vulcan_ for its littleness; _For_, saith
he, _this statue is most like those Gods which the _Ph≈ìnicians_ call
_Pat√¶ci_, and carry about in the fore part of their Ships in the form of
Pygmies_: and [301] _Bochart_ saith of this _Venus Hospita_, _Ph≈ìniciam
Venerem in √Ügypto pro peregrina habitam._

As the _Egyptians_, _Ph≈ìnicians_ and _Syrians_ in those days Deified their
Kings and Princes, so upon their coming into _Asia minor_ and _Greece_,
they taught those nations to do the like, as hath been shewed above. In
those days the writing of the _Thebans_ and _Ethiopians_ was in
hieroglyphicks; and this way of writing seems to have spread into the lower
_Egypt_ before the days of _Moses_: for thence came the worship of their
Gods in the various shapes of Birds, Beasts, and Fishes, forbidden in the
second commandment. Now this emblematical way of writing gave occasion to
the _Thebans_ and _Ethiopians_, who in the days of _Samuel_, _David_,
_Solomon_, and _Rehoboam_ conquered _Egypt_, and the nations round about,
and erected a great Empire, to represent and signify their conquering Kings
and Princes, not by writing down their names, but by making various
hieroglyphical figures; as by painting _Ammon_ with Ram's horns, to signify
the King who conquered _Libya_, a country abounding with sheep; his father
_Amosis_ with a Scithe, to signify that King who conquered the lower
_Egypt_, a country abounding with corn; his Son _Osiris_ by an Ox, because
he taught the conquered nations to plow with oxen; _Bacchus_ with Bulls
horns for the same reason, and with Grapes because he taught the nations to
plant vines, and upon a Tiger because he subdued _India_; _Orus_ the son of
_Osiris_ with a Harp, to signify the Prince who was eminently skilled on
that instrument; _Jupiter_ upon an Eagle to signify the sublimity of his
dominion, and with a Thunderbolt to represent him a warrior; _Venus_ in a
Chariot drawn with two Doves, to represent her amorous and lustful;
_Neptune_ with a Trident, to signify the commander of a fleet composed of
three Squadrons; _√Ügeon_, a Giant, with 50 heads, and an hundred hands, to
signify _Neptune_ with his men in a ship of fifty oars; _Thoth_ with a
Dog's head and wings at his cap and feet, and a _Caduceus_ writhen about
with two Serpents, to signify a man of craft, and an embassador who
reconciled two contending nations; _Pan_ with a Pipe and the legs of a
Goat, to signify a man delighted in piping and dancing; and _Hercules_ with
Pillars and a Club, because _Sesostris_ set up pillars in all his
conquests, and fought against the _Libyans_ with clubs: this is that
_Hercules_ who, according to [302] _Eudoxus_, was slain by _Typhon_; and
according to _Ptolom√¶us Heph√¶stion_ [303] was called _Nilus_, and who
conquered _Geryon_ with his three sons in _Spain_, and set up the famous
pillars at the mouth of the _Straits_: for _Diodorus_ [304] mentioning
three _Hercules_'s, the _Egyptian_, the _Tyrian_, and the son of _Alcmena_,
saith that _the oldest flourished among the _Egyptians_, and having
conquered a great part of the world, set up the pillars in _Afric__: and
_Vas√¶us_, [305] that _Osiris_, called also _Dionysius_, _came into _Spain_
and conquered _Geryon_, and was the first who brought Idolatry into
_Spain__. _Strabo_ [306] tells us, that the _Ethiopians_ called _Megabars_
fought with clubs: and some of the _Greeks_ [307] did so 'till the times of
the _Trojan_ war. Now from this hieroglyphical way of writing it came to
pass, that upon the division of _Egypt_ into _Nomes_ by _Sesostris_, the
great men of the Kingdom to whom the _Nomes_ were dedicated, were
represented in their Sepulchers or Temples of the _Nomes_, by various
hieroglyphicks; as by an _Ox_, a _Cat_, a _Dog_, a _Cebus_, a _Goat_, a
_Lyon_, a _Scarab√¶us_, an _Ichneumon_, a _Crocodile_, an _Hippopotamus_, an
_Oxyrinchus_, an _Ibis_, a _Crow_, a _Hawk,_ a _Leek_, and were worshipped
by the _Nomes_ in the shape of these creatures.

The [308] _Atlantides_, a people upon mount _Atlas_ conquered by the
_Egyptians_ in the Reign of _Ammon_, related that _Uranus_ was their first
King, and reduced them from a savage course of life, and caused them to
dwell in towns and cities, and lay up and use the fruits of the earth, and
that he reigned over a great part of the world, and by his wife _Tit√¶a_ had
eighteen children, among which were _Hyperion_ and _Basilea_ the parents of
_Helius_ and _Selene_; that the brothers of _Hyperion_ slew him, and
drowned his son _Helius_, the _Phaeton_ of the ancients, in the _Nile_, and
divided his Kingdom amongst themselves; and the country bordering upon the
Ocean fell to the lot of _Atlas_, from whom the people were called
_Atlantides_. By _Uranus_ or _Jupiter Uranius_, _Hyperion_, _Basilea_,
_Helius_ and _Selene_, I understand _Jupiter Ammon_, _Osiris_, _Isis_,
_Orus_ and _Bubaste_; and by the sharing of the Kingdom of _Hyperion_
amongst his brothers the _Titans_, I understand the division of the earth
among the Gods mentioned in the Poem of _Solon_.

For _Solon_ having travelled into _Egypt_, and conversed with the Priests
of _Sais_; about their antiquities, wrote a Poem of what he had learnt, but
did not finish it; [309] and this Poem fell into the hands of _Plato_ who
relates out of it, that at the mouth of the _Straits_ near _Hercules_'s
Pillars there was an Island called _Atlantis_, the people of which, nine
thousand years before the days of _Solon_, reigned over _Libya_ as far as
_Egypt_; and over _Europe_ as far as the _Tyrrhene_ sea; and all this force
collected into one body invaded _Egypt_ and _Greece_, and whatever was
contained within the Pillars of _Hercules_, but was resisted and stopt by
the _Athenians_ and other _Greeks_, and thereby the rest of the nations not
yet conquered were preserved: he saith also that in those days the Gods,
having finished their conquests, divided the whole earth amongst
themselves, partly into larger, partly into smaller portions, and
instituted Temples and Sacred Rites to themselves; and that the Island
_Atlantis_ fell to the lot of _Neptune_, who made his eldest Son _Atlas_
King of the whole Island, a part of which was called _Gadir_; and that _in
the history of the said wars mention was made of _Cecrops_, _Erechtheus_,
_Erichthonius_, and others before _Theseus_, and also of the women who
warred with the men, and of the habit and statue of _Minerva_, the study of
war in those days being common to men and women_. By all these
circumstances it is manifest that these Gods were the _Dii magni majorum
gentium_, and lived between the age of _Cecrops_ and _Theseus_; and that
the wars which _Sesostris_ with his brother _Neptune_ made upon the nations
by land and sea, and the resistance he met with in _Greece_, and the
following invasion of _Egypt_ by _Neptune_, are here described; and how the
captains of _Sesostris_ shared his conquests amongst themselves, as the
captains of _Alexander_ the great did his conquests long after, and
instituting Temples and Priests and sacred Rites to themselves, caused the
nations to worship them after death as Gods: and that the Island _Gadir_ or
_Gades_, with all _Libya_, fell to the lot of him who after death was
Deified by the name of _Neptune_. The time therefore when these things were
done is by _Solon_ limited to the age of _Neptune_, the father of _Atlas_;
for _Homer_ tells us, that _Ulysses_ presently after the _Trojan_ war found
_Calypso_ the daughter of _Atlas_ in the _Ogygian_ Island, perhaps _Gadir_;
and therefore it was but two Generations before the _Trojan_ war. This is
that _Neptune_, who with _Apollo_ or _Orus_ fortified _Troy_ with a wall,
in the Reign of _Laomedon_ the father of _Priamus_, and left many natural
children in _Greece_, some of which were _Argonauts_, and others were
contemporary to the _Argonauts_; and therefore he flourished but one
Generation before the _Argonautic_ expedition, and by consequence about 400
years before _Solon_ went into _Egypt_: but the Priests of _Egypt_ in those
400 years had magnified the stories and antiquity of their Gods so
exceedingly, as to make them nine thousand years older than _Solon_, and
the Island _Atlantis_ bigger than all _Afric_ and _Asia_ together, and full
of people; and because in the days of _Solon_ this great Island did not
appear, they pretended that it was sunk into the sea with all its people:
thus great was the vanity of the Priests of _Egypt_ in magnifying their
antiquities.

The _Cretans_ [310] affirmed that _Neptune was the man who set out a fleet,
having obtained this Pr√¶fecture of _his father_ Saturn; whence posterity
reckoned things done in the sea to be under his government, and mariners
honoured him with sacrifices_: the invention of tall Ships with sails [311]
is also ascribed to him. He was first worshipped in _Africa_, as
_Herodotus_ [312] affirms, and therefore Reigned over that province: for
his eldest son _Atlas_, who succeeded him, was not only Lord of the Island
_Atlantis_, but also Reigned over a great part of _Afric_, giving his name
to the people called _Atlantii_, and to the mountain _Atlas_, and the
_Atlantic Ocean_. The [313] outmost parts of the earth and promontories,
and whatever bordered upon the sea and was washed by it, the _Egyptians_
called _Neptys_; and on the coasts of _Marmorica_ and _Cyrene_, _Bochart_
and _Arius Montanus_ place the _Naphthuhim_, a people sprung from
_Mizraim_, _Gen._ x. 13; and thence _Neptune_ and his wife _Neptys_ might
have their names, the words _Neptune_, _Neptys_ and _Naphthuhim_,
signifying the King, Queen, and people of the sea-coasts. The _Greeks_ tell
us that _Japetus_ was the father of _Atlas_, and _Bochart_ derives
_Japetus_ and _Neptune_ from the same original: he and his son _Atlas_ are
celebrated in the ancient fables for making war upon the Gods of _Egypt_;
as when _Lucian_ [314] saith that _Corinth_ being full of fables, tells the
fight of _Sol_ and _Neptune_, that is, of _Apollo_ and _Python_, or _Orus_
and _Typhon_; and where _Agatharcides_ [315] relates how the Gods of
_Egypt_ fled from the Giants, 'till the _Titans_ came in and saved them by
putting _Neptune_ to flight; and where _Hyginus_ [316] tells the war
between the Gods of _√Ügypt_, and the _Titans_ commanded by _Atlas_.

The _Titans_ are the posterity of _Tit√¶a_, some of whom under _Hercules_
assisted the Gods, others under _Neptune_ and _Atlas_ warred against them:
_for which reason_, saith _Plutarch_, [317] _the Priests of _Egypt_
abominated the sea, and had _Neptune_ in no honour_. By _Hercules_, I
understand here the general of the forces of _Thebais_ and _Ethiopia_ whom
the Gods or great men of _Egypt_ called to their assistance, against the
Giants or great men of _Libya_, who had slain _Osiris_ and invaded _Egypt_:
for _Diodorus_ [318] saith that _when _Osiris_ made his expedition over the
world, he left his kinsman _Hercules_ general of his forces over all his
dominions, and _Ant√¶us_ governor of _Libya_ and _Ethiopia__. _Ant√¶us_
Reigned over all _Afric_ to the _Atlantic Ocean_, and built _Tingis_ or
_Tangieres_: _Pindar_ [319] tells us that he Reigned at _Irasa_ a town of
_Libya_, where _Cyrene_ was afterwards built: he invaded _Egypt_ and
_Thebais_; for he was beaten by _Hercules_ and the _Egyptians_ near _Ant√¶a_
or _Ant√¶opolis_, a town of _Thebais_; and _Diodorus_ [320] tells us that
_this town had its name from _Ant√¶us_, whom _Hercules_ slew in the days of
_Osiris__. _Hercules_ overthrew him several times, and every time he grew
stronger by recruits from _Libya_, his mother earth; but _Hercules_
intercepted his recruits, and at length slew him. In these wars _Hercules_
took the _Libyan_ world from _Atlas_, and made _Atlas_ pay tribute out of
his golden orchard, the Kingdom of _Afric_. _Ant√¶us_ and _Atlas_ were both
of them sons of _Neptune_ both of them Reigned over all _Libya_ and
_Afric_, between _Mount Atlas_ and the _Mediterranean_ to the very Ocean;
both of them invaded _Egypt_, and contended with _Hercules_ in the wars of
the Gods, and therefore they are but two names of one and the same man; and
even the name _Atlas_ in the oblique cases seems to have been compounded of
the name _Ant√¶eus_ and some other word, perhaps the word _Atal_, cursed,
put before it: the invasion of _Egypt_ by _Ant√¶us_, _Ovid_ hath relation
unto, where he makes _Hercules_ say,

          _S√¶voque alimenta parentis_
  _Ant√¶o eripui_.

This war was at length composed by the intervention of _Mercury_, who in
memory thereof was said to reconcile two contending serpents, by casting
his Ambassador's rod between them: and thus much concerning the ancient
state of _Egypt_, _Libya_, and _Greece_, described by _Solon_.

The mythology of the _Cretans_ differed in some things from that of _Egypt_
and _Libya_: for in the _Cretan_ mythology, _C≈ìlus_ and _Terra_, or
_Uranus_ and _Tit√¶a_ were the parents of _Saturn_ and _Rhea_, and _Saturn_
and _Rhea_ were the parents of _Jupiter_ and _Juno_; and _Hyperion_,
_Japetus_ and the _Titans_ were one Generation older than _Jupiter_; and
_Saturn_ was expelled his Kingdom and castrated by his son _Jupiter_: which
fable hath no place in the mythology of _Egypt_.

During the Reign of _Sesac_, _Jeroboam_ being in subjection to _Egypt_; set
up the Gods of _Egypt_ in _Dan_ and _Bethel_; and _Israel was without the
true God, and without a teaching Priest and without law: and in those times
there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great
vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the countries; and nation was
destroyed of nation, and city of city: for God did vex them with all
adversity_. 2 _Chron_. xv. 3, 5, 6. But in the fifth year of _Asa_ the land
of _Judah_ became quiet from war, and from thence had quiet ten years; and
_Asa_ took away the altars of strange Gods, and brake down the Images, and
built the fenced cities of _Judah_ with walls and towers and gates and
bars, having rest on every side, and got up an army of 580000 men, with
which in the fifteenth year of his Reign he met _Zerah_ the _Ethiopian_,
who came out against him with an army of a thousand thousand _Ethiopians_
and _Libyans_: the way of the _Libyans_ was through _Egypt_, and therefore
_Zerah_ was now Lord of _Egypt_: they fought at _Mareshah_ near _Gerar_,
between _Egypt_ and _Jud√¶a_, and _Zerah_ was beaten, so that he could not
recover himself: and from all this I seem to gather that _Osiris_ was slain
in the fifth year of _Asa_, and thereupon _Egypt_ fell into civil wars,
being invaded by the _Libyans_, and defended by the _Ethiopians_ for a
time; and after ten years more being invaded by the _Ethiopians_, who slew
_Orus_ the son and successor of _Osiris_, drowning him in the _Nile_, and
seized his Kingdom. By these civil wars of _Egypt_, the land of _Judah_ had
rest ten years. _Osiris_ or _Sesostris_ reigned long, _Manetho_ saith 48
years; and by this reckoning he began to Reign about the 17th year of
_Solomon_; and _Orus_ his son was drowned in the 15th year of _Asa_: for
_Pliny_ [321] tells us, _√Ügyptiorum bellis attrita est √Üthiopia, vicissim
imperitando serviendoque, clara & potens etiam usque ad Trojana bella
Memnone regnante_. _Ethiopia_, served _Egypt_ 'till the death of
_Sesostris_, and no longer; for _Herodotus_ [322] tells us that _he alone
enjoyed the Empire of _Ethiopia__: then the _Ethiopians_ became free, and
after ten years became Lords of _Egypt_ and _Libya_, under _Zerah_ and
_Amenophis_.

When _Asa_ by his victory over _Zerah_ became safe from _Egypt_, he
assembled all the people, and they offered sacrifices out of the spoils,
and entered into a covenant upon oath to seek the Lord; and in lieu of the
vessels taken away by _Sesac_, _he brought into the house of God the things
that his father had dedicated, and that he himself had dedicated, Silver
and Gold, and Vessels_. 2 _Chron._ xv.

When _Zerah_ was beaten, so that he could not recover himself, the people
[323] of the lower _Egypt_ revolted from the _Ethiopians_, and called in to
their assistance two hundred thousand _Jews_ and _Canaanites_; and under
the conduct of one _Osarsiphus_, a Priest of _Egypt_, called _Usorthon_,
_Osorchon_, _Osorchor_, and _Hercules √Ügyptius_ by _Manetho_, caused the
_Ethiopians_ now under _Memnon_ to retire to _Memphis_: and there _Memnon_
turned the river _Nile_ into a new channel, built a bridge over it and
fortified that pass, and then went back into _Ethiopia_: but after thirteen
years, he and his young son _Ramesses_ came down with an army from
_Ethiopia_, conquered the lower _Egypt_, and drove out the _Jews_ and
_Ph≈ìnicians_; and this action the _Egyptian_ writers and their followers
call the second expulsion of the Shepherds, taking _Osarsiphus_ for
_Moses_.

_Tithonus_ a beautiful youth, the elder brother of _Priamus_, went into
_Ethiopia_, being carried thither among many captives by _Sesostris_: and
the _Greeks_, before the days of _Hesiod_, feigned that _Memnon_ was his
son: _Memnon_ therefore, in the opinion of those ancient _Greeks_, was one
Generation younger than _Tithonus_, and was born after the return of
_Sesostris_ into _Egypt_: suppose about 16 or 20 years after the death of
_Solomon_. He is said to have lived very long, and so might die about 95
years after _Solomon_, as we reckoned above: his mother, called _Cissia_ by
_√Üschylus_, in a statue erected to her in _Egypt_, [324] was represented as
the daughter, the wife, and the mother of a King, and therefore he was the
son of a King; which makes it probable that _Zerah_, whom he succeeded in
the Kingdom of _Ethiopia_, was his father.

Historians [325] agree that _Menes_ Reigned in _Egypt_ next after the Gods,
and turned the river into a new channel, and built a bridge over it, and
built _Memphis_ and the magnificent Temple of _Vulcan_: he built _Memphis_
over-against the place where _Grand Cairo_ now stands, called by the
_Arabian_ historians _Mesir_: he built only the body of the Temple of
_Vulcan_, and his successors _Ramesses_ or _Rhampsinitus_, _M≈ìris_,
_Asychis_, and _Psammiticus_ built the western, northern eastern, and
southern portico's thereof: _Psammiticus_, who built the last portico of
this Temple, Reigned three hundred years after the victory of _Asa_ over
_Zerah_, and it is not likely that this Temple could be above three hundred
years in building, or that any _Menes_ could be King of all _Egypt_ before
the expulsion of the Shepherds. The last of the Gods of _Egypt_ was _Orus_,
with his mother _Isis_, and sister _Bubaste_, and secretary _Thoth_, and
unkle _Typhon_; and the King who reigned next after all their deaths, and
turned the river and built a bridge over it, and built _Memphis_ and the
Temple of _Vulcan_, was _Memnon_ or _Amenophis_, called by the _Egyptians_
_Amenoph_; and therefore he is _Menes_: for the names _Amenoph_, or
_Menoph_, and _Menes_ do not much differ; and from _Amenoph_ the city
_Memphis_ built by _Menes_ had its _Egyptian_ names _Moph_, _Noph_,
_Menoph_ or _Menuf_, as it is still called by the _Arabian_ historians: the
necessity of fortifying this place against _Osarsiphus_ gave occasion to
the building of it.

In the time of the revolt of the lower _Egypt_ under _Osarsiphus_, and the
retirement of _Amenophis_ into _Ethiopia_, _Egypt_ being then in the
greatest distraction, the _Greeks_ built the ship _Argo_, and sent in it
the flower of _Greece_ to _√Üetes_ in _Colchis_, and to many other Princes
on the coasts of the _Euxine_ and _Mediterranean_ seas; and this ship was
built after the pattern of an _Egyptian_ ship with fifty oars, in which
_Danaus_ with his fifty daughters a few years before fled from _Egypt_ into
_Greece_, and was the first long ship with sails built by the _Greeks_: and
such an improvement of navigation, with a design to send the flower of
_Greece_ to many Princes upon the sea-coasts of the _Euxine_ and
_Mediterranean_ seas, was too great an undertaking to be set on foot,
without the concurrence of the Princes and States of _Greece_, and perhaps
the approbation of the _Amphictyonic_ Council; for it was done by the
dictate of the Oracle. This Council met every half year upon state-affairs
for the welfare of _Greece_, and therefore knew of this expedition, and
might send the _Argonauts_ upon an embassy to the said Princes; and for
concealing their design might make the fable of the golden fleece, in
relation to the ship of _Phrixus_ whose ensign was a golden ram: and
probably their design was to notify the distraction of _Egypt_, and the
invasion thereof by the _Ethiopians_ and _Israelites_, to the said Princes,
and to persuade them to take that opportunity to revolt from _Egypt_, and
set up for themselves, and make a league with the _Greeks_: for the
_Argonauts_ went through [326] the Kingdom of _Colchis_ by land to the
_Armenians_, and through _Armenia_ to the _Medes_; which could not have
been done if they had not made friendship with the nations through which
they passed: they visited also _Laomedon_ King of the _Trojans_, _Phineus_
King of the _Thracians_, _Cyzicus_ King of the _Doliones_, _Lycus_ King of
the _Mariandyni_, the coasts of _Mysia_ and _Taurica Chersonesus_, the
nations upon the _Tanais_, the people about _Byzantium_, and the coasts of
_Epirus_, _Corsica_, _Melita_, _Italy_, _Sicily_, _Sardinia_, and _Gallia_
upon the _Mediterranean_; and from thence they [327] crossed the sea to
_Afric_, and there conferred with _Euripylus_ King of _Cyrene_: and [328]
_Strabo_ tells us that _in _Armenia_ and _Media_, and the neighbouring
places, there were frequent monuments of the expedition of _Jason_; as also
about _Sinope_, and its sea-coasts, the _Propontis_ and the _Hellespont_,
and in the _Mediterranean__: and a message by the flower of _Greece_ to so
many nations could be on no other account than state-policy; these nations
had been invaded by the _Egyptians_, but after this expedition we hear no
more of their continuing in subjection to _Egypt_.

The [329] _Egyptians_ originally lived on the fruits of the earth, and
fared hardly, and abstained from animals, and therefore abominated
Shepherds: _Menes_ taught them to adorn their beds and tables with rich
furniture and carpets, and brought in amongst them a sumptuous, delicious
and voluptuous way of life: and about a hundred years after his death,
_Gnephacthus_ one of his successors cursed him for it, and to reduce the
luxury of _Egypt_, caused the curse to be entered in the Temple of
_Jupiter_ at _Thebes_; and by this curse the honour of _Menes_ was
diminished among the _Egyptians_.

The Kings of _Egypt_ who expelled the Shepherds and Succeeded them, Reigned
I think first at _Coptos_, and then at _Thebes_, and then at _Memphis_. At
_Coptos_ I place _Misphragmuthosis_ and _Amosis_ or _Thomosis_ who expelled
the Shepherds, and abolished their custom of sacrificing men, and extended
the _Coptic_ language, and the name of ŒëŒπŒ± ŒöŒøœÄœÑŒøœÖ, _Aegyptus_, to the
conquest. Then _Thebes_ became the Royal City of _Ammon_, and from him was
called _No-Ammon,_ and his conquest on the west of _Egypt_ was called
_Ammonia._ After him, in the same city of _Thebes_, Reigned _Osiris_,
_Orus_, _Menes_ or _Amenophis_, and _Ramesses_: but _Memphis_ and her
miracles were not yet celebrated in _Greece_; for _Homer_ celebrates
_Thebes_ as in its glory in his days, and makes no mention of _Memphis_.
After _Menes_ had built _Memphis, M≈ìris_ the successor of _Ramesses_
adorned it, and made it the seat of the Kingdom, and this was almost two
Generations after the _Trojan_ war. _Cinyras_, the _Vulcan_ who married
_Venus_, and under the Kings of _Egypt_ Reigned over _Cyprus_ and part of
_Ph≈ìnicia_, and made armour for those Kings, lived 'till the times of the
_Trojan_ war: and upon his death _Menes_ or _Memnon_ might Deify him, and
found the famous Temple of _Vulcan_ in that city for his worship, but not
live to finish it. In a plain [330] not far from _Memphis_ are many small
Pyramids, said to be built by _Venephes_ or _Enephes_; and I suspect that
_Venephes_ and _Enephes_ have been corruptly written for _Menephes_ or
_Amenophis_, the letters _AM_ being almost worn out in some old manuscript:
for after the example of these Pyramids, the following Kings, _M≈ìris_ and
his successors, built others much larger. The plain in which they were
built was the burying-place of that city, as appears by the Mummies there
found; and therefore the Pyramids were the sepulchral monuments of the
Kings and Princes of that city: and by these and such like works the city
grew famous soon after the days of _Homer_; who therefore flourished in the
Reign of _Ramesses_.

_Herodotus_ [331] is the oldest historian now extant who wrote of the
antiquities of _Egypt_, and had what he wrote from the Priests of that
country: and _Diodorus_, who wrote almost 400 years after him, and had his
relations also from the Priests of _Egypt_, placed many nameless Kings
between those whom _Herodotus_ placed in continual succession. The Priests
of _Egypt_ had therefore, between the days of _Herodotus_ and _Diodorus_,
out of vanity, very much increased the number of their Kings: and what they
did after the days of _Herodotus_, they began to do before his days; for he
tells us that they recited to him out of their books, the names of 330
Kings who Reigned after _Menes_, but did nothing memorable, except
_Nitocris_ and _M≈ìris_ the last of them: all these Reigned at _Thebes_,
'till _M≈ìris_ translated the seat of the Empire from _Thebes_ to _Memphis_.
After _M≈ìris_ he reckons _Sesostris_, _Pheron_, _Proteus_, _Rhampsinitus_,
_Cheops_, _Cephren_, _Mycerinus_, _Asychis_, _Anysis_, _Sabacon_, _Anysis_
again, _Sethon_, twelve contemporary Kings, _Psammitichus_, _Nechus_,
_Psammis_, _Apries_, _Amasis_, and _Psammenitus_. The _Egyptians_ had
before the days of _Solon_ made their monarchy 9000 years old, and now they
reckon'd to _Herodotus_ a succession of 330 Kings Reigning so many
Generations, that is about 11000 years, before _Sesostris_: but the Kings
who Reigned long before _Sesostris_ might Reign over several little
Kingdoms in several parts of _Egypt_, before the rise of their Monarchy;
and by consequence before the days of _Eli_ and _Samuel_, and so are not
under our consideration: and these names may have been multiplied by
corruption; and some of them, as _Athothes_ or _Thoth_, the secretary of
_Osiris_; _Tosorthrus_ or _√Üsculapius_ a Physician who invented building
with square stones; and _Thuor_ or _Polybus_ the husband of _Alcandra_,
were only Princes of _Egypt_. If with _Herodotus_ we omit the names of
those Kings who did nothing memorable, and consider only those whose
actions are recorded, and who left splendid monuments of their having
Reigned over _Egypt_, such as were Temples, Statues, Pyramids, Obelisks,
and Palaces dedicated or ascribed to them, these Kings reduced into good
order will give us all or almost all the Kings of _Egypt_, from the days of
the expulsion of the Shepherds and founding of the Monarchy, downwards to
the conquest of _Egypt_ by _Cambyses_: for _Sesostris_ Reigned in the Age
of the Gods of _Egypt_: being Deified by the names of _Osiris_, _Hercules_
and _Bacchus_, as above; and therefore _Menes_, _Nitocris_, and _M≈ìris_ are
to be placed after him; _Menes_ and his son _Ramesses_ Reigned next after
the Gods, and therefore _Nitocris_ and _M≈ìris_ Reigned after _Ramesses_:
_M≈ìris_ is set down immediately before _Cheops_, three times in the
Dynastys of the Kings of _Egypt_ composed by _Eratosthenes_, and once in
the Dynasties of _Manetho_; and in the same Dynasties _Nitocris_ is set
after the builders of the three great Pyramids, and according to
_Herodotus_ her brother Reigned before her, and was slain, and she revenged
his death; and according to _Syncellus_ she built the third great Pyramid;
and the builders of the Pyramids Reigned at _Memphis_, and by consequence
after _M≈ìris_. Now from these things I gather that the Kings of _Egypt_
mentioned by _Herodotus_ ought to be placed in this order; _Sesostris_,
_Pheron_, _Proteus_, _Menes_, _Rhampsinitus_, _M≈ìris_, _Cheops_, _Cephren_,
_Mycerinus_, _Nitocris_, _Asychis_, _Anysis_, _Sabacon_, _Anysis_ again,
_Sethon_, twelve contemporary Kings, _Psammitichus_, _Nechus_, _Psammis_,
_Apries_, _Amasis_, _Psammenitus_.

_Pheron_ is by _Herodotus_ said to be the son and successor of _Sesostris_.
He was Deified by the name of _Orus_.

_Proteus_ Reigned in the lower _Egypt_ when _Paris_ sailed thither; that is
at the end of the _Trojan_ war, according to [332] _Herodotus_: and at that
time _Amenophis_ was King of _Egypt_ and _Ethiopia_: but in his absence
_Proteus_ might be governor of some part of the lower _Egypt_ under him;
for _Homer_ places _Proteus_ upon the sea-coasts, and makes him a sea God,
and calls him the servant of _Neptune_; and _Herodotus_ saith that he rose
up from among the common people, and that _Proteus_ was his name translated
into _Greek_, and this name in _Greek_ signifies only a Prince or
President. He succeeded _Pheron_, and was succeeded by _Rhampsinitus_
according to _Herodotus_; and so was contemporary to _Amenophis_.

_Amenophis_ Reigned next after _Orus_ and _Isis_ the last of the Gods; he
Reigned at first over all _Egypt_, and then over _Memphis_ and the upper
parts of _Egypt_; and by conquering _Osarsiphus_, who had revolted from
him, became King of all _Egypt_ again, about 51 years after the death of
_Solomon_. He built _Memphis_ and ordered the worship of the Gods of
_Egypt_, and built a Palace at _Abydus_, and the _Memnonia_ at _This_ and
_Susa_, and the magnificent Temple of _Vulcan_ in _Memphis_; the building
with square stones being found out before by _Tosorthrus_, the _√Üsculapius_
of _Egypt_: he is by corruption of his name called _Menes_, _Mines_,
_Min√¶us_, _Mineus_, _Minies_, _Mnevis_, _Enephes_, _Venephes_,
_Phamenophis_, _Osymanthyas_, _Osimandes_, _Ismandes_, _Imandes_, _Memnon_,
_Arminon._

_Amenophis_ was succeeded by his son, called by _Herodotus_,
_Rhampsinitus_, and by others _Ramses_, _Ramises_, _Rameses_, _Ramesses_,
[333] _Ramestes_, _Rhampses_, _Remphis_. Upon an Obelisk erected by this
King in _Heliopolis_, and sent to _Rome_ by the Emperor _Constantius_, was
an inscription, interpreted by _Hermapion_ an _Egyptian_ Priest, expressing
that the King was long lived, and Reigned over a great part of the earth:
and _Strabo_, [334] an eye-witness, tells us, that in the monuments of the
Kings of _Egypt_, above the _Memnonium_ were inscriptions upon Obelisks,
expressing the riches of the Kings, and their Reigning as far as _Scythia_,
_Bactria_, _India_ and _Ionia_: and _Tacitus_ [335] tells us from an
inscription seen at _Thebes_ by _C√¶sar Germanicus,_ and interpreted to him
by the _Egyptian_ Priests, that this King _Ramesses_ had an army of 700000
men, and Reigned over _Libya_, _Ethiopia_, _Media_, _Persia_, _Bactria_,
_Scythia_, _Armenia_, _Cappadocia_, _Bithynia_, and _Lycia_; whence the
Monarchy of _Assyria_ was not yet risen. This King was very covetous, and a
great collector of taxes, and one of the richest of all the Kings of
_Egypt_, and built the western portico of the Temple of _Vulcan_.

_M≈ìris_ inheriting the riches of _Ramesses_, built the northern portico of
that Temple more sumptuously, and made the Lake of _M≈ìris,_ with two great
Pyramids of brick in the midst of it: and for preserving the division of
_Egypt_ into equal shares amongst the soldiers, this King wrote a book of
surveying, which gave a beginning to Geometry. He is called also _Maris_,
_Myris_, _Meres_, _Marres_, _Smarres_; and more corruptly, by changing Œú
into Œë, Œ§, Œí, Œ£, YŒß, Œõ, &c. _Ayres_, _Tyris_, _Byires_, _Soris_,
_Uchoreus_, _Lachares_, _Labaris_, &c.

_Diodorus_ [336] places _Uchoreus_ between _Osymanduas_ and _Myris_, that
is between _Amenophis_ and _M≈ìris_, and saith that he built _Memphis_, and
fortified it to admiration with a mighty rampart of earth, and a broad and
deep trench, which was filled with the water of the _Nile_, and made there
a vast and deep Lake for receiving the water of the _Nile_ in the time of
its overflowing, and built palaces in the city; and that this place was so
commodiously seated that most of the Kings who Reigned after him preferred
it before _Thebes_, and removed the Court from thence to this place, so
that the magnificence of _Thebes_ from that time began to decrease, and
that of _Memphis_ to increase, 'till _Alexander_ King of _Macedon_ built
_Alexandria_. These great works of _Uchoreus_ and those of _M≈ìris_ savour
of one and the same genius, and were certainly done by one and the same
King, distinguished into two by a corruption of the name as above; for this
Lake of _Uchoreus_ was certainly the same with that of _M≈ìris_.

After the example of the two brick Pyramids made by _M≈ìris_, the three next
Kings, _Cheops_, _Cephren_ and _Mycerinus_ built the three great Pyramids
at _Memphis_; and therefore Reigned in that city. _Cheops_ shut up the
Temples of the _Nomes_, and prohibited the worship of the Gods of _Egypt_,
designing no doubt to have been worshipped himself after death: he is
called also _Chembis_, _Chemmis_, _Chemnis_, _Phiops_, _Apathus_,
_Apappus_, _Suphis_, _Saophis_, _Syphoas_, _Syphaosis_, _Soiphis_,
_Syphuris_, _Anoiphis_, _Anoisis_: he built the biggest of the three great
Pyramids which stand together; and his brother _Cephren_ or _Cerpheres_
built the second, and his son _Mycerinus_ founded the third: this last King
was celebrated for clemency and justice; he shut up the dead body of his
daughter in a hollow ox, and caused her to be worshipped daily with odours:
he is called also _Cheres_, _Cherinus_, _Bicheres_, _Moscheres_,
_Mencheres_. He died before the third Pyramid was finished, and his sister
and successor _Nitocris_ finished it.

Then Reigned _Asychis_, who built the eastern portico of the Temple of
_Vulcan_ very splendidly, and among the small Pyramids a large Pyramid of
brick, made of mud dug out of the Lake of _M≈ìris_: and these are the Kings
who Reigned at _Memphis_, and spent their time in adorning that city, until
the _Ethiopians_ and the _Assyrians_ and others revolted, and _Egypt_ lost
all her dominion abroad, and became again divided into several small
Kingdoms.

One of those Kingdoms was I think at _Memphis_, under _Gnephactus_, and his
son and successor _Bocchoris_. _Africanus_ calls _Bocchoris_ a _Saite_; but
_Sais_ at this time had other Kings: _Gnephactus_, otherwise called
_Neochabis_ and _Technatis_, cursed _Menes_ for his luxury, and caused the
curse to be entered in the Temple of _Jupiter_ at _Thebes_; and therefore
Reigned over _Thebais_: and _Bocchoris_ sent in a wild bull upon the God
_Mnevis_ which was worshipped at _Heliopolis_. Another of those Kingdoms
was at _Anysis_, or _Hanes_, _Isa._ xxx. 4. under its King _Anysis_ or
_Amosis_; a third was at _Sais_, under _Stephanathis_, _Nechepsos_, and
_Nechus_; and a fourth was at _Tanis_ or _Zoan_, under _Petubastes_,
_Osorchon_ and _Psammis_: and _Egypt_ being weakened by this division, was
invaded and conquered by the _Ethiopians_ under _Sabacon_, who slew
_Bocchoris_ and _Nechus_, and made _Anysis_ fly. The Olympiads began in the
Reign of _Petubastes_, and the _√Üra_ of _Nabonassar_ in the 22d year of the
Reign of _Bocchoris_, according to _Africanus_; and therefore the division,
of _Egypt_ into many Kingdoms began before the Olympiads, but not above the
length of two Kings Reigns before them.

After the study of Astronomy was set on foot for the use of navigation, and
the _Egyptians_ by the Heliacal Risings and Settings of the Stars had
determined the length of the Solar year of 365 days, and by other
observations had fixed the Solstices, and formed the fixt Stars into
Asterisms, all which was done in the Reign of _Ammon_, _Sesac_, _Orus_, and
_Memnon_; it may be presumed that they continued to observe the motions of
the Planets; for they called them after the names of their Gods; and
_Nechepsos_ or _Nicepsos_ King of _Sais_, by the assistance of _Petosiris_
a Priest of _Egypt_, invented Astrology, grounding it upon the aspects of
the Planets, and the qualities of the men and women to whom they were
dedicated: and in the beginning of the Reign of _Nabonassar_ King of
_Babylon_, about which time the _Ethiopians_ under _Sabacon_ invaded
_Egypt_, those _Egyptians_ who fled from him to _Babylon_, carried thither
the _Egyptian_ year of 365 days, and the study of Astronomy and Astrology,
and founded the _√Üra_ of _Nabonassar_; dating it from the first year of
that King's Reign, which was the 22d year _of Bocchoris_ as above, and
beginning the year on the same day with the _Egyptians_ for the sake of
their calculations. So _Diodorus_ [337]: _they say that the _Chald√¶ans_ in
_Babylon_, being Colonies of the _Egyptians_, became famous for Astrology,
having learnt it from the Priests of _Egypt__: and _Hesti√¶us_, who wrote an
history of _Egypt_, speaking of a disaster of the invaded _Egyptians_,
saith [338] that _the Priests who survived this disaster, taking with them
the _Sacra_ of _Jupiter Enyalius_, came to _Sennaar_ in _Babylonia__. From
the 15th year of _Asa_, in which _Zerah_ was beaten, and _Menes_ or
_Amenophis_ began his Reign, to the beginning of the _√Üra_ of _Nabonassar_,
were 200 years; and this interval of time allows room for about nine or ten
Reigns of Kings, at about twenty years to a Reign one with another; and so
many Reigns there were, according to the account set down above out of
_Herodotus_; and therefore that account, as it is the oldest, and was
received by _Herodotus_ from the Priests of _Thebes_, _Memphis_, and
_Heliopolis_, three principal cities of _Egypt_, agrees also with the
course of nature, and leaves no room for the Reigns of the many nameless
Kings which we have omitted. These omitted Kings Reigned before _M≈ìris_,
and by consequence at _Thebes_; for _M≈ìris_ translated the seat of the
Empire from _Thebes_ to _Memphis_: they Reigned after _Ramesses_; for
_Ramesses_ was the son and successor of _Menes_, who Reigned next after the
Gods. Now _Menes_ built the body of the Temple of _Vulcan_, _Ramesses_ the
first portico, and _M≈ìris_ the second portico thereof; but the _Egyptians_,
for making their Gods and Kingdom look ancient, have inserted between the
builders of the first and second portico of this Temple, three hundred and
thirty Kings of _Thebes_, and supposed that these Kings Reigned eleven
thousand years; as if any Temple could stand so long. This being a manifest
fiction, we have corrected it, by omitting those interposed Kings, who did
nothing, and placing _M≈ìris_ the builder of the second portico, next after
_Ramesses_ the builder of the first.

In the Dynasties of _Manetho_; _Sevechus_ is made the successor of
_Sabacon_, being his son; and perhaps he is the _Sethon_ of _Herodotus_,
who became Priest of _Vulcan_, and neglected military discipline: for
_Sabacon_ is that _So_ or _Sua_ with whom _Hoshea_ King of _Israel_
conspired against the _Assyrians_, in the fourth year of _Hezekiah_, _Anno
Nabonass._ 24. _Herodotus_ tells us twice or thrice, that _Sabacon_ after a
long Reign of fifty years relinquished _Egypt_ voluntarily, and that
_Anysis_ who fled from him, returned and Reigned again in the lower _Egypt_
after him, or rather with him: and that _Sethon_ Reigned after _Sabacon_,
and went to _Pelusium_ against the army of _Sennacherib_, and was relieved
with a great multitude of mice, which eat the bow-strings of the
_Assyrians_; in memory of which the statue of _Sethon_, seen by
_Herodotus_, [339] was made with a Mouse in its hand. A Mouse was the
_Egyptian_ symbol of destruction, and the Mouse in the hand of _Sethon_
signifies only that he overcame the _Assyrians_ with a great destruction.
The Scriptures inform us, that when _Sennacherib_ invaded _Jud√¶a_ and
besieged _Lachish_ and _Libnah_, which was in the 14th year of _Hezekiah_,
_Anno Nabonass._ 34. the King of _Judah_ trusted upon _Pharaoh_ King of
_Egypt_, that is upon _Sethon_, and that _Tirhakah_ King of _Ethiopia_ came
out also to fight against _Sennacherib_, 2 _King._ xviii. 21. & xix. 9.
which makes it probable, that when _Sennacherib_ heard of the Kings of
_Egypt_ and _Ethiopia_ coming against him, he went from _Libnah_ towards
_Pelusium_ to oppose them, and was there surprized and set upon in the
night by them both, and routed with as great a slaughter as if the
bow-strings of the _Assyrians_ had been eaten by mice. Some think that the
_Assyrians_ were smitten by lightning, or by a fiery wind which sometimes
comes from the southern parts of _Chald√¶a_. After this victory _Tirhakah_
succeeding _Sethon_, carried his arms westward through _Libya_ and _Afric_
to the mouth of the _Straits_: but _Herodotus_ tells us, that the Priests
of _Egypt_ reckoned _Sethon_ the last King of _Egypt_, who Reigned before
the division of _Egypt_ into twelve contemporary Kingdoms, and by
consequence before the invasion of _Egypt_ by the _Assyrians_.

For _Asserhadon_ King of _Assyria_, in the 68th year of _Nabonassar_, after
he had Reigned about thirty years over _Assyria_, invaded the Kingdom of
_Babylon_, and then carried into captivity many people from _Babylon_, and
_Cuthah_, and _Ava_, and _Hamath_, and _Sepharvaim_, placing them in the
Regions of _Samaria_ and _Damascus_: and from thence they carried into
_Babylonia_ and _Assyria_ the remainder of the people of _Israel_ and
_Syria_, which had been left there by _Tiglath-pileser_. This captivity was
65 years after the first year of _Ahaz_, _Isa_. vii. 1, 8. & 2. _King._ xv.
37. & xvi. 5. and by consequence in the twentieth year of _Manasseh_, _Anno
Nabonass._ 69. and then _Tartan_ was sent by _Asserhadon_ with an army
against _Ashdod_ or _Azoth_, a town at that time subject to _Jud√¶a_, 2
_Chron._ xxvi. 6. and took it, _Isa._ xx. 1: and this post being secured,
the _Assyrians_ beat the _Jews_, and captivated _Manasseh_, and subdued
_Jud√¶a_: and in these wars, _Isaiah_ was saw'd asunder by the command of
_Manasseh_, for prophesying against him. Then the _Assyrians_ invaded and
subdued _Egypt_ and _Ethiopia_, and carried the _Egyptians_ and
_Ethiopians_ into captivity, and thereby put an end to the Reign of the
_Ethiopians_ over _Egypt_, _Isa._ vii. 18. & viii. 7. & x. 11, 12, & xix.
23. & xx. 4. In this war the city _No-Ammon_ or _Thebes_, which had
hitherto continued in a flourishing condition, was miserably wasted and led
into captivity, as is described by _Nahum_, chap. iii. ver. 8, 9, 10; for
_Nahum_ wrote after the last invasion of _Jud√¶a_ by the _Assyrians_, chap.
i. ver. 15; and therefore describes this captivity as fresh in memory: and
this and other following invasions of _Egypt_ under _Nebuchadnezzar_ and
_Cambyses_, put an end to the glory of that city. _Asserhadon_ Reigned over
the _Egyptians_ and _Ethiopians_ three years, _Isa._ xx. 3, 4. that is
until his death, which was in the year of _Nabonassar_ 81, and therefore
invaded _Egypt_, and put an end to the Reign of the _Ethiopians_ over the
_Egyptians_, in the year of _Nabonassar_ 78; so that the _Ethiopians_ under
_Sabacon_, and his successors _Sethon_ and _Tirhakah_, Reigned over _Egypt_
about 80 years: _Herodotus_ allots 50 years to _Sabacon_, and _Africanus_
fourteen years to _Sethon_, and eighteen to _Tirhakah_.

The division of _Egypt_ into more Kingdoms than one, both before and after
the Reign of the _Ethiopians_, and the conquest of the _Egyptians_ by
_Asserhadon_, the prophet _Isaiah_ [340] seems allude unto in these words:
_I will set_, saith he, _the _Egyptians_ against the _Egyptians_, and they
shall fight every one against his brother, and every one against his
neighbour, city against city, and Kingdom against Kingdom, and the Spirit
of _Egypt_ shall fail.--And the _Egyptians_ will I give over into the hand
of a cruel Lord _[viz. _Asserhadon_]_ and a fierce King shall Reign over
them.--Surely the Princes of _Zoan_ _[Tanis]_ are fools, the counsel of the
wise Councellors of _Pharaoh_ is become brutish: how long say ye unto
_Pharaoh_, I am the son of the ancient Kings.--The Princes of _Zoan_ are be
come fools: the Princes of _Noph_ _[Memphis]_ are deceived,--even they that
were the stay of the tribes thereof.--In that day there shall be a high-way
out of _Egypt_ into _Assyria_, and the _Egyptians_ shall serve the
_Assyrians__.

After the death of _Asserhadon_, _Egypt_ remained subject to twelve
contemporary Kings, who revolted from the _Assyrians_, and Reigned together
fifteen years; including I think the three years of _Asserhadon_, because
the _Egyptians_ do not reckon him among their Kings. They [341] built the
Labyrinth adjoining to the Lake of _M≈ìris_ which was a very magnificent
structure, with twelve Halls in it, for their Palaces: and then
_Psammitichus_, who was one of the twelve, conquered all the rest. He built
the last Portico of the Temple of _Vulcan_, founded by _Menes_ about 260
years before, and Reigned 54 years, including the fifteen years of his
Reign with the twelve Kings. Then Reigned _Nechaoh_ or _Nechus_, 17 years;
_Psammis_ six years; _Vaphres_, _Apries_, _Eraphius_, or _Hophra_, 25
years; _Amasis_ 44 years; and _Psammenitus_ six months, according to
_Herodotus_. _Egypt_ was subdued by _Nebuchadnezzar_ in the last year but
one of _Hophra_, _Anno Nabonass._ 178, and remained in subjection to
_Babylon_ forty years, _Jer._ xliv. 30. & _Ezek._ xxix. 12, 13, 14, 17, 19.
that is, almost all the Reign of _Amasis_, a plebeian set over _Egypt_ by
the conqueror: the forty years ended with the death of _Cyrus_; for he
Reigned over _Egypt_ and _Ethiopia_, according to _Xenophon_. At that time
therefore those nations recovered their liberty; but after four or five
years more they were invaded and conquered by _Cambyses_, _Anno Nabonass._
223 or 224, and have almost ever since remained in servitude, as was
predicted by the Prophets.

The Reigns of _Psammitichus_, _Nechus_, _Psammis_, _Apries_, _Amasis_, and
_Psammenitus_, set down by _Herodotus_, amount unto 146¬Ω years: and so many
years there were from the 78th year of _Nabonassar_, in which the dominion
of the _Ethiopians_ over _Egypt_ came to an end, unto the 224th year of
_Nabonassar_, in which _Cambyses_ invaded _Egypt_, and put an end to that
Kingdom: which is an argument that _Herodotus_ was circumspect and faithful
in his narrations, and has given us a good account of the antiquities of
_Egypt_, so far as the Priests of _Egypt_ at _Thebes_, _Memphis_, and
_Heliopolis_, and the _Carians_ and _Ionians_ inhabiting _Egypt_, were then
able to inform him: for he consulted them all; and the _Cares_ and
_Ionians_ had been in _Egypt_ from the time of the Reign of the twelve
contemporary Kings.

_Pliny_ [342] tells us, that the _Egyptian_ Obelisks were of a sort of
stone dug near _Syene_ in _Thebais_, and that the first Obelisk was made by
_Mitres_, who Reigned in _Heliopolis_; that is, by _Mephres_ the
predecessor of _Misphragmuthosis_; and that afterwards other Kings made
others: _Sochis_, that is _Sesochis_, or _Sesac_, four, each of 48 cubits
in length; _Ramises_, that is _Ramesses_, two; _Smarres_, that is _M≈ìris_,
one of 48 cubits in length; _Eraphius_, or _Hophra_, one of 48; and
_Nectabis_, or _Nectenabis_, one of 80. _Mephres_ therefore extended his
dominion over all the upper _Egypt_, from _Syene_ to _Heliopolis_, and
after him, _Misphragmuthosis_ and _Amosis_, Reigned _Ammon_ and _Sesac_,
who erected the first great Empire in the world: and these four, _Amosis_,
_Ammon_, _Sesac_, and _Orus_, Reigned in the four ages of the great Gods of
_Egypt_; and _Amenophis_ was the _Menes_ who Reigned next after them: he
was Succeeded by _Ramesses_, and _M≈ìris_, and some time after by _Hophra_.

_Diodorus_ [343] recites the same Kings of _Egypt_ with _Herodotus_, but in
a more confused order, and repeats some of them twice, or oftener, under
various names, and omits others: his Kings are these; _Jupiter Ammon_ and
_Juno_, _Osiris_ and _Isis_, _Horus_, _Menes_, _Busiris_ I, _Busiris_ II,
_Osymanduas_, _Uchoreus_, _Myris_, _Sesoosis_ I, _Sesoosis_ II, _Amasis_,
_Actisanes_, _Mendes_ or _Marrus_, _Proteus_, _Remphis_, _Chembis_,
_Cephren_, _Mycerinus_ or _Cherinus_, _Gnephacthus_, _Bocchoris_,
_Sabacon_, twelve contemporary Kings, _Psammitichus_, * * _Apries_,
_Amasis_. Here I take _Sesoosis_ I, and _Sesoosis_ II, _Busiris_ I, and
_Busiris_ II, to be the same Kings with _Osiris_ and _Orus_: also
_Osymanduas_ to be the same with _Amenophis_ or _Menes_: also _Amasis_, and
_Actisanes_, an _Ethiopian_ who conquered him, to be the same with _Anysis_
and _Sabacon_ in _Herodotus_: and _Uchoreus_, _Mendes_, _Marrus_, and
_Myris_, to be only several names of one and the same King. Whence the
catalogue of _Diodorus_ will be reduced to this: _Jupiter Ammon_ and
_Juno_; _Osiris_, _Busiris_ or _Sesoosis_, and _Isis_; _Horus_, _Busiris_
II, or _Sesoosis_ II; _Menes_, or _Osymanduas_; _Proteus_; _Remphis_ or
_Ramesses_; _Uchoreus_, _Mendes_, _Marrus_, or _Myris_; _Chembis_ or
_Cheops_; _Cephren_; _Mycerinus_; * * _Gnephacthus_; _Bocchoris_; _Amasis_,
or _Anysis_; _Actisanes_, or _Sabacon_; * twelve contemporary Kings;
_Psammitichus_; * * _Apries_; _Amasis_: to which, if in their proper places
you add _Nitocris_, _Asychis_, _Sethon_, _Nechus_, and _Psammis,_ you will
have the catalogue of _Herodotus_.

The Dynasties of _Manetho_ and _Eratosthenes_ seem to be filled with many
such names of Kings as _Herodotus_ omitted: when it shall be made appear
that any of them Reigned in _Egypt_ after the expulsion of the Shepherds,
and were different from the Kings described above, they may be inserted in
their proper places.

_Egypt_ was conquered by the _Ethiopians_ under _Sabacon_, about the
beginning of the _√Üra_ of _Nabonassar_, or perhaps three or four years
before, that is, about three hundred years before _Herodotus_ wrote his
history; and about eighty years after that conquest, it was conquered again
by the _Assyrians_ under _Asserhadon_: and the history of _Egypt_ set down
by _Herodotus_ from the time of this last conquest, is right both as to the
number, and order, and names of the Kings, and as to the length of their
Reigns: and therein he is now followed by historians, being the only author
who hath given us so good a history of _Egypt_, for that interval of time.
If his history of the earlier times be less accurate, it was because the
archives of _Egypt_ had suffered much during the Reign of the _Ethiopians_
and _Assyrians_: and it is not likely that the Priests of _Egypt_, who
lived two or three hundred years after the days of _Herodotus_, could mend
the matter: on the contrary, after _Cambyses_ had carried away the records
of _Egypt_, the Priests were daily feigning new Kings, to make their Gods
and nation look ancient; as is manifest by comparing _Herodotus_ with
_Diodorus Siculus_, and both of them with what _Plato_ relates out of the
Poem of _Solon_: which Poem makes the wars of the great Gods of _Egypt_
against the _Greeks_, to have been in the days of _Cecrops_, _Erechtheus_
and _Erichthonius_, and a little before those of _Theseus_; these Gods at
that time instituting Temples and Sacred Rites to themselves. I have
therefore chosen to rely upon the stories related to _Herodotus_ by the
Priests of _Egypt_ in those days, and corrected by the Poem of _Solon_, so
as to make these Gods of _Egypt_ no older than _Cecrops_ and _Erechtheus_,
and their successor _Menes_ no older than _Theseus_ and _Memnon_, and the
Temple of _Vulcan_ not above 280 years in building: rather than to correct
_Herodotus_ by _Manetho_, _Eratosthenes_, _Diodorus_, and others, who lived
after the Priests of _Egypt_ had corrupted their Antiquities much more than
they had done in the days of _Herodotus_.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. III.

_Of the _ASSYRIAN_ Empire._

As the Gods or ancient Deified Kings and Princes of _Greece_, _Egypt_, and
_Syria_ of _Damascus_, have been made much ancienter than the truth, so
have those of _Chald√¶a_ and _Assyria_: for _Diodorus_ [344] tells us, that
when _Alexander_ the great was in _Asia_, the _Chald√¶ans_ reckoned 473000
years since they first began to observe the Stars; and _Ctesias_, and the
ancient _Greek_ and _Latin_ writers who copy from him, have made the
_Assyrian_ Empire as old as _Noah_'s flood within 60 or 70 years, and tell
us the names of all the Kings of _Assyria_ downwards, from _Belus_ and his
feigned son _Ninus_, to _Sardanapalus_ the last King of that Monarchy: but
the names of his Kings, except two or three, have no affinity with the
names of the _Assyrians_ mentioned in Scripture; for the _Assyrians_ were
usually named after their Gods, _Bel_ or _Pul_; _Chaddon_, _Hadon_, _Adon_,
or _Adonis_; _Melech_ or _Moloch_; _Atsur_ or _Assur_; _Nebo_; _Nergal_;
_Merodach_: as in these names, _Pul_, _Tiglath-Pul-Assur_, _Salman-Assur_,
_Adra-Melech_, _Shar-Assur_, _Assur-Hadon_, _Sardanapalus_ or
_Assur-Hadon-Pul_, _Nabonassar_ or _Nebo-Adon-Assur_, _Bel Adon_,
_Chiniladon_ or _Chen-El-Adon_, _Nebo-Pul-Assur_, _Nebo-Chaddon-Assur_,
_Nebuzaradon_ or _Nebo-Assur-Adon_, _Nergal-Assur_, _Nergal-Shar-Assur_,
_Labo-Assur-dach_, _Sheseb-Assur_, _Beltes-Assur_, _Evil-Merodach_,
_Shamgar-Nebo_, _Rabsaris_ or _Rab-Assur_, _Nebo-Shashban_, _Mardocempad_
or _Merodach-Empad_. Such were the _Assyrian_ names; but those in _Ctesias_
are of another sort, except _Sardanapalus_, whose name he had met with in
_Herodotus_. He makes _Semiramis_ as old as the first _Belus_; but
_Herodotus_ tells us, that she was but five Generations older than the
mother of _Labynetus_: he represents that the city _Ninus_ was founded by a
man of the same name, and _Babylon_ by _Semiramis_; whereas either _Nimrod_
or _Assur_ founded those and other cities, without giving his own name to
any of them: he makes the _Assyrian_ Empire continue about 1360 years,
whereas _Herodotus_ tells us that it lasted only 500 years, and the numbers
of _Herodotus_ concerning those ancient times are all of them too long: he
makes _Nineveh_ destroyed by the _Medes_ and _Babylonians_, three hundred
years before the Reign of _Astibares_ and _Nebuchadnezzar_ who destroyed
it, and sets down the names of seven or eight feigned Kings of _Media_,
between the destruction of _Nineveh_ and the Reigns of _Astibares_ and
_Nebuchadnezzar_, as if the Empire of the _Medes_, erected upon the ruins
of the _Assyrian_ Empire, had lasted 300 years, whereas it lasted but 72:
and the true Empire of the _Assyrians_ described in Scripture, whose Kings
were _Pul_, _Tiglath-pilesar_, _Shalmaneser_, _Sennacherib_, _Asserhadon_,
&c. he mentions not, tho' much nearer to his own times; which shews that he
was ignorant of the antiquities of the _Assyrians_. Yet something of truth
there is in the bottom of some of his stories, as there uses to be in
Romances; as, that _Nineveh_ was destroyed by the _Medes_ and
_Babylonians_; that _Sardanapalus_ was the last King of the _Assyrian_
Empire; and that _Astibares_ and _Astyages_ were Kings of the _Medes_: but
he has made all things too ancient, and out of vainglory taken too great a
liberty in feigning names and stories to please his reader.

When the _Jews_ were newly returned from the _Babylonian_ captivity, they
confessed their Sins in this manner, _Now therefore our God, ---- let not
all the trouble seem little before thee that hath come upon us, on our
Kings, on our Princes, and on our Priests, and on our Prophets, and on our
fathers, and on all thy people, since the time of the Kings of _Assyria_,
unto this day_; _Nehem._ ix. 32. that is, since the time of the Kingdom of
_Assyria_, or since the rise of that Empire; and therefore the _Assyrian_
Empire arose when the Kings of _Assyria_ began to afflict the inhabitants
of _Palestine_; which was in the days of _Pul_: he and his successors
afflicted _Israel_, and conquered the nations round about them; and upon
the ruin of many small and ancient Kingdoms erected their Empire,
conquering the _Medes_ as well as other nations: but of these conquests
_Ctesias_ knew not a word, no not so much as the names of the conquerors,
or that there was an _Assyrian_ Empire then standing; for he supposes that
the _Medes_ Reigned at that time, and that the _Assyrian_ Empire was at an
end above 250 years before it began.

However we must allow that _Nimrod_ founded a Kingdom at _Babylon_, and
perhaps extended it into _Assyria_: but this Kingdom was but of small
extent, if compared with the Empires which rose up afterwards; being only
within the fertile plains of _Chald√¶a_, _Chalonitis_ and _Assyria_, watered
by the _Tigris_ and _Euphrates_: and if it had been greater, yet it was but
of short continuance, it being the custom in those early ages for every
father to divide his territories amongst his sons. So _Noah_ was King of
all the world, and _Cham_ was King of all _Afric_, and _Japhet_ of all
_Europe_ and _Asia minor_; but they left no standing Kingdoms. After the
days of _Nimrod_, we hear no more of an _Assyrian_ Empire 'till the days of
_Pul_. The four Kings who in the days of _Abraham_ invaded the southern
coast of _Canaan_ came from the countries where _Nimrod_ had Reigned, and
perhaps were some of his posterity who had shared his conquests. In the
time of the Judges of _Israel_, _Mesopotamia_ was under its own King,
_Judg._ iii. 8. and the King of _Zobah_ Reigned on both sides of the River
_Euphrates_ 'till _David_ conquered him, 2 _Sam._ viii, and x. The Kingdoms
of _Israel_, _Moab_, _Ammon_, _Edom_, _Philistia_, _Zidon_, _Damascus_, and
_Hamath_ the great, continued subject to other Lords than the _Assyrians_
'till the days of _Pul_ and his successors; and so did the house of _Eden_,
_Amos_ i. 5. 2 _Kings_ xix. 12. and _Haran_ or _Carrh√¶_, _Gen._ xii. 2
_Kings_ xix. 12. and _Sepharvaim_ in _Mesopotamia_, and _Calneh_ near
_Bagdad_, _Gen._ x. 10, _Isa._ x. 9, 2 _Kings_ xvii. 31. _Sesac_ and
_Memnon_ were great conquerors, and Reigned over _Chald√¶a_, _Assyria_, and
_Persia_, but in their histories there is not a word of any opposition made
to them by an _Assyrian_ Empire then standing: on the contrary, _Susiana_,
_Media_, _Persia_, _Bactria_, _Armenia_, _Cappadocia_, &c. were conquered
by them, and continued subject to the Kings of _Egypt_ 'till after the long
Reign of _Ramesses_ the son of _Memnon_, as above.

_Homer_ mentions _Bacchus_ and _Memnon_ Kings of _Egypt_ and _Persia_, but
knew nothing of an _Assyrian_ Empire. _Jonah_ prophesied when _Israel_ was
in affliction under the King of _Syria_, and this was in the latter part of
the Reign of _Jehoahaz_, and first part of the Reign of _Joash_, Kings of
_Israel_, and I think in the Reign of _M≈ìris_ the successor of _Ramesses_
King of _Egypt_, and about sixty years before the Reign of _Pul_; and
_Nineveh_ was then a city of large extent, but full of pastures for cattle,
so that it contained but about 120000 persons. It was not yet grown so
great and potent as not to be terrified at the preaching of _Jonah_, and to
fear being invaded by its neighbours and ruined within forty days: it had
some time before got free from the dominion of _Egypt_, and had got a King
of its own; but its King was not yet called King of _Assyria_, but only
King of _Nineveh_, _Jonah_ iii. 6, 7. and his proclamation for a fast was
not published in several nations, nor in all _Assyria_, but only in
_Nineveh_, and perhaps in the villages thereof; but soon after, when the
dominion of _Nineveh_ was established at home, and exalted over all
_Assyria_ properly so called, and this Kingdom began to make war upon the
neighbouring nations, its Kings were no longer called Kings of _Nineveh_
but began to be called Kings of _Assyria_.

_Amos_ prophesied in the Reign of _Jeroboam_ the Son of _Joash_ King of
_Israel_, soon after _Jeroboam_ had subdued the Kingdoms of _Damascus_ and
_Hamath_, that is, about ten or twenty years before the Reign of _Pul_: and
he [345] thus reproves _Israel_ for being lifted up by those conquests; _Ye
which rejoyce in a thing of nought, which say, have we not taken to us
horns by our strength? But behold I will raise up against you a nation, O
house of _Israel_, saith the Lord the God of Hosts, and they shall afflict
you from the entring in of _Hamath_ unto the river of the wilderness_. God
here threatens to raise up a nation against _Israel_; but what nation he
names not; that he conceals 'till the _Assyrians_ should appear and
discover it. In the prophesies of _Isaiah_, _Jeremiah_, _Ezekiel_, _Hosea_,
_Micah_, _Nahum_, _Zephaniah_ and _Zechariah_, which were written after the
Monarchy grew up, it is openly named upon all occasions; but in this of
_Amos_ not once, tho' the captivity of _Israel_ and _Syria_ be the subject
of the prophesy, and that of _Israel_ be often threatned: he only saith in
general that _Syria_ should go into captivity unto _Kir_, and that
_Israel_, notwithstanding her present greatness, should go into captivity
beyond _Damascus_; and that God would raise up a nation to afflict them:
meaning that he would raise up above them from a lower condition, a nation
whom they yet feared not: for so the _Hebrew_ word ◊û◊ß◊ù signifies when
applied to men, as in _Amos_ v. 2. 1 _Sam._ xii. 11. _Psal._ cxiii. 7.
_Jer._ x. 20. l. 32. _Hab._ i. 6. _Zech._ xi. 16. As _Amos_ names not the
_Assyrians_; at the writing of this prophecy they made no great figure in
the world, but were to be raised up against _Israel_, and by consequence
rose up in the days of _Pul_ and his successors: for after _Jeroboam_ had
conquered _Damascus_ and _Hamath_, his successor _Menahem_ destroyed
_Tiphsah_ with its territories upon _Euphrates_, because they opened not to
him: and therefore _Israel_ continued in its greatness 'till _Pul_,
probably grown formidable by some victories, caused _Menahem_ to buy his
peace. _Pul_ therefore Reigning presently after the prophesy of _Amos_, and
being the first upon record who began to fulfill it, may be justly reckoned
the first conqueror and founder of this Empire. For _God stirred up the
spirit of _Pul_, and the spirit of _Tiglath-pileser_ King of _Assyria__, 1
_Chron._ v. 20.

The same Prophet _Amos_, in prophesying against _Israel_, threatned them in
this manner, with what had lately befallen other Kingdoms: _Pass ye_, [346]
saith he, _unto _Calneh_ and see, and from thence go ye to _Hamath_ the
great, then go down to _Gath_ of the _Philistims_. Be they better than
these Kingdoms?_ These Kingdoms were not yet conquered by the _Assyrians_,
except that of _Calneh_ or _Chalonitis_ upon _Tigris_, between _Babylon_
and _Nineveh_. _Gath_ was newly vanquished [347] by _Uzziah_ King of
_Judah_, and _Hamath_ [348] by _Jeroboam_ King of _Israel_: and while the
Prophet, in threatning _Israel_ with the _Assyrians_, instances in
desolations made by other nations, and mentions no other conquest of the
_Assyrians_ than that of _Chalonitis_ near _Nineveh_; it argues that the
King of _Nineveh_ was now beginning his conquests, and had not yet made any
great progress in that vast career of victories, which we read of a few
years after.

For about seven years after the captivity of the ten Tribes, when
_Sennacherib_ warred in _Syria_, which was in the 16th Olympiad, he [349]
sent this message to the King of _Judah_: _Behold, thou hast heard that the
Kings of _Assyria_ have done to all Lands by destroying them utterly, and
shalt thou be delivered? Have the Gods of the nations delivered them which
the Gods of my fathers have destroyed, as _Gozan_ and _Haran_ and _Reseph_,
and the children of _Eden_ which were in _[the Kingdom of] Thelasar_? Where
is the King of _Hamath_, and the King of _Arpad_, and the King of the city
of _Sepharvaim_, and of _Hena_ and _Ivah__? And _Isaiah_ [350] thus
introduceth the King of _Assyria_ boasting: _Are not my Princes altogether
as Kings? Is not _Calno [or _Calneh_]_ as _Carchemish_? Is not _Hamath_ as
_Arpad_? Is not _Samaria_ as _Damascus_? As my hand hath found the Kingdoms
of the Idols, and whose graven Images did excel them of _Jerusalem_ and of
_Samaria_; shall I not as I have done unto _Samaria_ and her Idols, so do
to _Jerusalem_ and her Idols?_ All this desolation is recited as fresh in
memory to terrify the _Jews_, and these Kingdoms reach to the borders of
_Assyria_, and to shew the largeness of the conquests they are called _all
lands_, that is, all round about _Assyria_. It was the custom of the Kings
of _Assyria_, for preventing the rebellion of people newly conquered, to
captivate and transplant those of several countries into one another's
lands, and intermix them variously: and thence it appears [351] that
_Halah_, and _Habor_, and _Hara_, and _Gozan_, and the cities of the
_Medes_ into which _Galilee_ and _Samaria_ were transplanted; and _Kir_
into which _Damascus_ was transplanted; and _Babylon_ and _Cuth_ or the
_Susanchites_, and _Hamath_, and _Ava_, and _Sepharvaim_, and the
_Dinaites_, and the _Apharsachites_, and the _Tarpelites_, and the
_Archevites_, and the _Dehavites_, and the _Elamites_, or _Persians_, part
of all which nations were led captive by _Asserhadon_ and his predecessors
into _Samaria_; were all of them conquered by the _Assyrians_ not long
before.

In these conquests are involved on the west and south side of _Assyria_,
the Kingdoms of _Mesopotamia_, whose royal seats were _Haran_ or _Carrh√¶_,
and _Carchemish_ or _Circutium_, and _Sepharvaim_, a city upon _Euphrates_,
between _Babylon_ and _Nineveh_, called _Sippar√¶_ by _Berosus_, _Abydenus_,
and _Polyhistor_, and _Sipphara_ by _Ptolomy_; and the Kingdoms of _Syria_
seated at _Samaria_, _Damascus_, _Gath_, _Hamath_, _Arpad_, and _Reseph_, a
city placed by _Ptolomy_ near _Thapsacus_: on the south side and south east
side were _Babylon_ and _Calneh_, or _Calno_, a city which was founded by
_Nimrod_, where _Bagdad_ now stands, and gave the name of _Chalonitis_ to a
large region under its government; and _Thelasar_ or _Talatha_, a city of
the children of _Eden_, placed by _Ptolomy_ in _Babylonia_, upon the common
stream of _Tigris_ and _Euphrates_, which was therefore the river of
Paradise; and the _Archevites_ at _Areca_ or _Erech_, a city built by
_Nimrod_ on the east side of _Pasitigris_, between _Apamia_ and the
_Persian Gulph_; and the _Susanchites_ at _Cuth_, or _Susa_, the metropolis
of _Susiana_: on the east were _Elymais_, and some cities of the _Medes_,
and _Kir_, [352] a city and large region of _Media_, between _Elymais_, and
_Assyria_, called _Kirene_ by the _Chaldee_ Paraphrast and _Latin_
Interpreter, and _Carine_ by _Ptolomy_: on the north-east were _Habor_ or
_Chaboras_, a mountainous region between _Assyria_ and _Media_; and the
_Apharsachites_, or men of _Arrapachitis_, a region originally peopled by
_Arphaxad_, and placed by _Ptolomy_ at the bottom of the mountains next
_Assyria_: and on the north between _Assyria_ and the _Gordi√¶an_ mountains
was _Halah_ or _Chalach_, the metropolis of _Calachene_: and beyond these
upon the _Caspian_ sea was _Gozan_, called _Gauzania_ by _Ptolomy_. Thus
did these new conquests extend every way from the province of _Assyria_ to
considerable distances, and make up the great body of that Monarchy: so
that well might the King of _Assyria_ boast how his armies had destroyed
all lands. All these nations [353] had 'till now their several Gods, and
each accounted his God the God of his own land, and the defender thereof,
against the Gods of the neighbouring countries, and particularly against
the Gods of _Assyria_; and therefore they were never 'till now united under
the _Assyrian_ Monarchy, especially since the King of _Assyria_ doth not
boast of their being conquered by the _Assyrians_ oftner than once: but
these being small Kingdoms the King of _Assyria_ easily overflowed them:
_Know ye not_, saith [354] _Sennacherib_ to the _Jews_, _what I and my
fathers have done unto all the People of other lands?--for no God of any
nation or kingdom was able to deliver his people out of mine hand, and out
of the hand of my fathers: how much less shall your God deliver you out of
mine hand?_ He and his fathers therefore, _Pul_, _Tiglath-pileser_, and
_Shalmaneser_, were great conquerors, and with a current of victories had
newly overflowed all nations round about _Assyria_, and thereby set up this
Monarchy.

Between the Reigns of _Jeroboam_ II, and his son _Zachariah_, there was an
interregnum of about ten or twelve years in the Kingdom of _Israel_: and
the prophet _Hosea_ [355] in the time of that interregnum, or soon after,
mentions the King of _Assyria_ by the name of _Jareb_, and another
conqueror by the name of _Shalman_; and perhaps _Shalman_ might be the
first part of the name of _Shalmaneser_, and _Iareb_, or _Irib_, for it may
be read both ways, the last part of the name of his successor
_Sennacherib_: but whoever these Princes were, it appears not that they
Reigned before _Shalmaneser_. _Pul_, or _Belus_, seems to be the first who
carried on his conquests beyond the province of _Assyria_: he conquered
_Calneh_ with its territories in the Reign of _Jerboam_, _Amos_ i. 1. vi.
2. & _Isa._ x. 8, 9. and invaded _Israel_ in the Reign of _Menahem_, 2
_King._ xv. 19. but stayed not in the land, being bought off by _Menahem_
for a thousand talents of silver: in his Reign therefore the Kingdom of
_Assyria_ was advanced on this side _Tigris_: for he was a great warrior,
and seems to have conquered _Haran_, and _Carchemish_, and _Reseph_, and
_Calneh_, and _Thelasar_, and might found or enlarge the city of _Babylon_,
and build the old palace.

_Herodotus_ tells us, that one of the gates of _Babylon_ was [356] called
the gate of _Semiramis_, and than she adorned the walls of the city, and
the Temple of _Belus_, and that she [357] was five Generations older than
_Nitocris_ the mother of _Labynitus_, or _Nabonnedus_, the last King of
_Babylon_; and therefore she flourished four Generations, or about 134
years, before _Nebuchadnezzar_ , and by consequence in the Reign of
_Tiglath-pileser_ the successor of _Pul_: and the followers of _Ctesias_
tell us, that she built _Babylon_, and was the widow of the son and
successor of _Belus_, the founder of the _Assyrian_ Empire; that is, the
widow of one of the sons of _Pul_: but [358] _Berosus_ a _Chald√¶an_ blames
the _Greeks_ for ascribing the building of _Babylon_ to _Semiramis_; and
other authors ascribe the building of this city to _Belus_ himself, that is
to _Pul_; so _Curtius_ [359] tells us; _Semiramis Babylonem condiderat, vel
ut plerique credidere Belus, cujus regia ostenditur_: and _Abydenus_, who
had his history from the ancient monuments of the _Chald√¶ans_, writes,
[360] ŒõŒµŒ≥ŒµœÑŒ±Œπ ŒíŒ∑ŒªŒøŒΩ ŒíŒ±Œ≤œÖŒªœâŒΩŒ± œÑŒµŒπœáŒµŒπ œÄŒµœÅŒπŒ≤Œ±ŒªŒµŒπŒΩŒá œÑœâŒπ œáœÅŒøŒΩœâŒπ Œ¥Œµ œÑœâŒπ
ŒπŒ∫ŒΩŒµœÖŒºŒµŒΩœâŒπ Œ±œÜŒ±ŒΩŒπœÉŒ∏Œ∑ŒΩŒ±Œπ. œÑŒµŒπœáŒπœÉŒ±Œπ Œ¥Œµ Œ±œÖŒ∏ŒπœÇ ŒùŒ±Œ≤ŒøœÖœáŒøŒ¥ŒøŒΩŒøœÉŒøœÅŒøŒΩ, œÑŒø ŒºŒµœáœÅŒπ œÑŒ∑œÇ
ŒúŒ±Œ∫ŒµŒ¥ŒøŒΩŒπœâŒΩ Œ±œÅœáŒ∑œÇ Œ¥ŒπŒ±ŒºŒµŒπŒΩŒ±ŒΩ ŒµŒøŒΩ œáŒ±ŒªŒ∫ŒøœÄœÖŒªŒøŒΩ. _'Tis reported that _Belus_
compassed _Babylon_ with a wall, which in time was abolished: and that
_Nebuchadnezzar_ afterwards built a new wall with brazen gates, which stood
'till the time of the _Macedonian_ Empire_: and so _Dorotheas_ [361] an
ancient Poet of _Sidon_;

  ŒëœÅœáŒ±ŒπŒ∑ ŒíŒ±Œ≤œÖŒªœâŒΩ, Œ§œÖœÅŒπŒøœÖ ŒíŒ∑ŒªŒøŒπŒø œÄŒøŒªŒπœÉŒºŒ±.
  _The ancient city _Babylon_ built by the _Tyrian Belus__;

That is, by the _Syrian_ or _Assyrian_ _Belus_; the words _Tyrian_,
_Syrian_, and _Assyrian_, being anciently used promiscuously for one
another: _Herennius_ [362] tells us, that it was built by the son of
_Belus_; and this son might be _Nabonassar_. After the conquest of
_Calneh_, _Thelasar_, and _Sippare_, _Belus_ might seize _Chald√¶a_, and
begin to build _Babylon_, and leave it to his younger son: for all the
Kings of _Babylon_ in the Canon of _Ptolemy_ are called _Assyrians_, and
_Nabonassar_ is the first of them: and _Nebuchadnezzar_ [363] reckoned
himself descended from _Belus_, that is, from the _Assyrian_ _Pul_: and the
building of _Babylon_ is ascribed to the _Assyrians_ by [364] _Isaiah_:
_Behold_, saith he, _the land of the _Chaldeans_: This people was not 'till
the _Assyrian_ founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness, _[that is,
for the _Arabians_.]_ They set up the towers thereof, they raised up the
palaces thereof_. From all this it seems therefore that _Pul_ founded the
walls and the palaces of _Babylon_, and left the city with the province of
_Chald√¶a_ to his younger son _Nabonassar_; and that _Nabonassar_ finished
what his father began, and erected the Temple of _Jupiter Belus_ to his
father: and that _Semiramis_ lived in those days, and was the Queen of
_Nabonassar_, because one of the gates of _Babylon_ was called the gate of
_Semiramis_, as _Herodotus_ affirms: but whether she continued to Reign
there after her husband's death may be doubted.

_Pul_ therefore was succeeded at _Nineveh_ by his elder son
_Tiglath-pileser_, at the same time that he left _Babylon_ to his younger
son _Nabonassar_. _Tiglath-pileser_, the second King of _Assyria_, warred
in _Ph≈ìnicia_, and captivated _Galilee_ with the two Tribes and an half, in
the days of _Pekah_ King of _Israel_, and placed them in _Halah_, and
_Habor_, and _Hara_, and at the river _Gozan_, places lying on the western
borders of _Media_, between _Assyria_ and the _Caspian_ sea, 2 _King._ xv.
29, &: 1 _Chron._ v. 26. and about the fifth or sixth year of _Nabonassar_,
he came to the assistance of the King of _Judah_ against the Kings of
_Israel_ and _Syria_, and overthrew the Kingdom of _Syria_, which had been
seated at _Damascus_ ever since the days of King _David_, and carried away
the _Syrians_ to _Kir_ in _Media_, as _Amos_ had prophesied, and placed
other nations in the regions of _Damascus_, 2 _King._ xv. 37, & xvi. 5, 9.
_Amos_ i. 5. _Joseph. Antiq._ l. 9. c. 13. whence it seems that the _Medes_
were conquered before, and that the Empire of the _Assyrians_ was now grown
great: for _the God of _Israel_ stirred up the spirit of _Pul_ King of
_Assyria_, and the spirit of _Tiglath-pileser_ King of _Assyria__ to make
war, 1 _Chron._ v. 26.

_Shalmaneser_ or _Salmanasser_, called _Enemessar_ by _Tobit_, invaded
[365] all _Ph≈ìnicia_, took the city of _Samaria_, and captivated _Israel_,
and placed them in _Chalach_ and _Chabor_, by the river _Gozan_, and in the
cities of the _Medes_; and _Hosea_ [366] seems to say that he took
_Arbela_: and his successor _Sennacherib_ said that his fathers had
conquered also _Gozan_, and _Haran_ or _Carrh√¶_, and _Reseph_ or _Resen_,
and the children of _Eden_, and _Arpad_ or the _Aradii_, 2 _King._ xix. 12.

_Sennacherib_ the son of _Shalmaneser_ in the 14th year of _Hezekiah_
invaded _Ph≈ìnicia_, and took several cities of _Judah_, and attempted
_Egypt_; and _Sethon_ or _Sevechus_ King of _Egypt_ and _Tirhakah_ King of
_Ethiopia_ coming against him, he lost in one night 185000 men, as some say
by a plague, or perhaps by lightning, or a fiery wind which blows sometimes
in the neighbouring deserts, or rather by being surprised by _Sethon_ and
_Tirhakah_: for the _Egyptians_ in memory of this action erected a statue
to _Sethon_, holding in his hand a mouse, the _Egyptian_ symbol of
destruction. Upon this defeat _Sennacherib_ returned in haste to _Nineveh_,
and [367] his Kingdom became troubled, so that _Tobit_ could not go into
_Media_, the _Medes_ I think at this time revolting: and he was soon after
slain by two of his sons who fled into _Armenia_, and his son _Asserhadon_
succeeded him. At that time did _Merodach Baladan_ or _Mardocempad_ King of
_Babylon_ send an embassy to _Hezekiah_ King of _Judah_.

_Asserhadon_, [368] called _Sarchedon_ by _Tobit_, _Asordan_ by the LXX,
and _Assaradin_ in _Ptolomy_'s Canon, began his Reign at _Nineveh_, in the
year of _Nabonassar_ 42; and in the year 68 extended it over _Babylon_:
then he carried the remainder of the _Samaritans_ into captivity, and
peopled _Samaria_ with captives brought from several parts of his Kingdom,
the _Dinaites_, the _Apharsachites_, the _Tarpelites_, the _Apharsites_,
the _Archevites_, the _Babylonians_, the _Susanchites_, the _Dehavites_,
the _Elamites_, _Ezra_ iv. 2, 9. and therefore he Reigned over all these
nations. _Pekah_ and _Rezin_ Kings of _Samaria_ and _Damascus_, invaded
_Jud√¶a_ in the first year of _Ahaz_, and within 65 years after, that is in
the 21st year of _Manasseh_, _Anno Nabonass._ 69, _Samaria_ by this
captivity ceased to be a people, _Isa._ vii. 8. Then _Asserhadon_ invaded
_Jud√¶a_, took _Azoth_, carried _Manasseh_ captive to _Babylon_, and [369]
captivated also _Egypt_, _Thebais_, and _Ethiopia_ above _Thebais_: and by
this war he seems to have put an end to the Reign of the _Ethiopians_ over
_Egypt_, in the year of _Nabonassar_ 77 or 78.

In the Reign of _Sennacherib_ and _Asserhadon_, the _Assyrian_ Empire seems
arrived at its greatness, being united under one Monarch, and containing
_Assyria_, _Media_, _Apolloniatis_, _Susiana_, _Chald√¶a_, _Mesopotamia_,
_Cilicia_, _Syria_, _Ph≈ìnicia_, _Egypt_, _Ethiopia_, and part of _Arabia_,
and reaching eastward into _Elymais_, and _Par√¶tacene_, a province of the
_Medes_: and if _Chalach_ and _Chabor_ be _Colchis_ and _Iberia_, as some
think, and as may seem probable from the circumcision used by those nations
'till the days of _Herodotus_, we are also to add these two Provinces, with
the two _Armenia's_, _Pontus_ and _Cappadocia_, as far as to the river
_Halys_: for [370] _Herodotus_ tells us, that the people of _Cappadocia_ as
far as to that river were called _Syrians_ by the _Greeks_, both before and
after the days or _Cyrus_, and that the _Assyrians_ were also called
_Syrians_ by the _Greeks_.

Yet the _Medes_ revolted from the _Assyrians_ in the latter end of the
Reign of _Sennacherib_, I think upon the slaughter of his army near _Egypt_
and his flight to _Nineveh_: for at that time the estate of _Sennacherib_
was troubled, so that _Tobit_ could not go into _Media_ as he had done
before, _Tobit_ i. 15. and some time after, _Tobit_ advised his son to go
into _Media_ where he might expect peace, while _Nineveh_, according to the
prophesy of _Jonah_, should be destroyed. _Ctesias_ wrote that _Arbaces_ a
_Mede_ being admitted to see _Sardanapalus_ in his palace, and observing
his voluptuous life amongst women, revolted with the _Medes_, and in
conjunction with _Belesis_ a _Babylonian_ overcame him, and caused him to
set fire to his palace and burn himself: but he is contradicted by other
authors of better credit; for _Duris_ and [371] many others wrote that
_Arbaces_ upon being admitted into the palace of _Sardanapalus_, and seeing
his effeminate life, slew himself; and _Cleitarchus_, that _Sardanapalus_
died of old age, after he had lost his dominion over _Syria_: he lost it by
the revolt of the western nations; and _Herodotus_ [372] tells us, that the
_Medes_ revolted first, and defended their liberty by force of arms against
the _Assyrians_, without conquering them; and at their first revolting had
no King, but after some time set up _Dejoces_ over them, and built
_Ecbatane_ for his residence; and that _Dejoces_ Reigned only over _Media_,
and had a peaceable Reign of 54 years, but his son and successor
_Phraortes_ made war upon his neighbours, and conquered _Persia_; and that
the _Syrians_ also, and other western nations, at length revolted from the
_Assyrians_, being encouraged thereunto by the example of the _Medes_; and
that after the revolt of the western nations, _Phraortes_ invaded the
_Assyrians_, but was slain by them in that war, after he had Reigned twenty
and two years. He was succeeded by _Astyages_.

Now _Asserhadon_ seems to be the _Sardanapalus_ who died of old age after
the revolt of _Syria_, the name _Sardanapalus_ being derived from
_Asserhadon-Pul_. _Sardanapalus_ was the [373] son of _Anacyndaraxis_,
_Cyndaraxis_, or _Anabaxaris_, King of _Assyria_; and this name seems to
have been corruptly written for _Sennacherib_ the father of _Asserhadon_.
_Sardanapalus_ built _Tarsus_ and _Anchiale_ in one day, and therefore
Reigned over _Cilicia_, before the revolt of the western nations: and if he
be the same King with _Asserhadon_, he was succeeded by _Saosduchinus_ in
the year of _Nabonassar_ 81; and by this revolution _Manasseh_ was set at
liberty to return home and fortify _Jerusalem_: and the _Egyptians_ also,
after the _Assyrians_ had harrassed _Egypt_ and _Ethiopia_ three years,
_Isa._ xx. 3, 4. were set at liberty, and continued under twelve
contemporary Kings of their own nation, as above. The _Assyrians_ invaded
and conquered the _Egyptians_ the first of the three years, and Reigned
over them two years more: and these two years are the interregnum which
_Africanus_, from _Manetho_, places next before the twelve Kings. The
_Scythians_ of _Touran_ or _Turquestan_ beyond the river _Oxus_ began in
those days to infest _Persia_, and by one of their inroads might give
occasion to the revolt of the western nations.

In the year of _Nabonassar_ 101, _Saosduchinus_, after a Reign of twenty
years, was succeeded at _Babylon_ by _Chyniladon_, and I think at _Nineveh_
also, for I take _Chyniladon_ to be that _Nabuchodonosor_ who is mentioned
in the book of _Judith_; for the history of that King suits best with these
times: for there it is said that __Nabuchodonosor_ King of the _Assyrians_
who Reigned at _Nineveh_, that great city, in the twelfth year of his Reign
made war upon _Arphaxad_ King of the _Medes__, and was then left alone by a
defection of the auxiliary nations of _Cilicia_, _Damascus_, _Syria_,
_Ph≈ìnicia_, _Moab_, _Ammon_, and _Egypt_; and without their help routed the
army of the _Medes_, and slew _Arphaxad_: and _Arphaxad_ is there said to
have built _Ecbatane_ and therefore was either _Dejoces_, or his son
_Phraortes_, who might finish the city founded by his father: and
_Herodotus_ [374] tells the same story of a King of _Assyria_, who routed
the _Medes_, and slew their King _Phraortes_; and saith that in the time of
this war the _Assyrians_ were left alone by the defection of the auxiliary
nations, being otherwise in good condition: _Arphaxad_ was therefore the
_Phraortes_ of _Herodotus_, and by consequence was slain near the beginning
of the Reign of _Josiah_: for this war was made after _Ph≈ìnicia_, _Moab_,
_Ammon_, and _Egypt_ had been conquered and revolted, _Judith_ i. 7, 8, 9.
and by consequence after the Reign of _Asserhadon_ who conquered them: it
was made when the _Jews_ were newly returned from captivity, _and the
Vessels and Altar and Temple were sanctified after the profanation_,
_Judith_ iv. 3. that is soon after _Manasseh_ their King had been carried
captive to _Babylon_ by _Asserhadon_; and upon the death of that King, or
some other change in the _Assyrian_ Empire, had been released with the
_Jews_ from that captivity, and had repaired the Altar, and restored the
sacrifices and worship of the Temple, 2 _Chron._ xxxiii. 11, 16. In the
_Greek_ version of the book of _Judith_, chap. v. 18. it is said, that _the
Temple of God was cast to the ground_; but this is not said in _Jerom_'s
version; and in the _Greek_ version, chap. iv. 3, and chap. xvi. 20, it is
said, that _the vessels, and the altar, and the house were sanctified after
the prophanation_, and in both versions, chap. iv. 11, the Temple is
represented standing.

After this war _Nabuchodonosor_ King of _Assyria_, in the 13th year of his
Reign, according to the version of _Jerom_, sent his captain _Holofernes_
with a great army to avenge himself on all the west country; because they
had disobeyed his commandment: and _Holofernes_ went forth with an army of
12000 horse, and 120000 foot of _Assyrians_, _Medes_ and _Persians_, and
reduced _Cilicia_, _Mesopotamia_, and _Syria_, and _Damascus_, and part of
_Arabia_, and _Ammon_, and _Edom_, and _Madian_, and then came against
_Jud√¶a_: and this was done when the government was in the hands of the
High-Priest and Antients of _Israel_, _Judith_ iv. 8. and vii. 23. and by
consequence not in the Reign of _Manasseh_ or _Amon_, but when _Josiah_ was
a child. In times of prosperity the children of _Israel_ were apt to go
after false Gods, and in times of affliction to repent and turn to the
Lord. So _Manasseh_ a very wicked King, being captivated by the
_Assyrians_, repented; and being released from captivity restored the
worship of the true God: So when we are told that _Josiah in the eighth
year of his Reign, while he was yet young, began to seek after the God of
_David_ his father, and in the twelfth year of his Reign began to purge
_Judah_ and _Jerusalem_ from Idolatry, and to destroy the High Places, and
Groves, and Altars and Images of Baalim_, 2 _Chron_. xxxiv. 3. we may
understand that these acts of religion were occasioned by impending
dangers, and escapes from danger. When _Holofernes_ came against the
western nations, and spoiled them, then were the _Jews_ terrified, and they
fortified _Jud√¶a_, and _cryed unto God with great fervency, and humbled
themselves in sackcloth, and put ashes on their heads, and cried unto the
God of _Israel_ that he would not give their wives and their children and
cities for a prey, and the Temple for a profanation: and the High-priest,
and all the Priests put on sackcloth and ashes, and offered daily burnt
offerings with vows and free gifts of the people_, _Judith_ iv. and then
began _Josiah_ to seek after the God of his father _David_: and after
_Judith_ had slain _Holofernes_, and the _Assyrians_ were fled, and the
_Jews_ who pursued them were returned to _Jerusalem_, _they worshipped the
Lord, and offered burnt offerings and gifts, and continued feasting before
the sanctuary for the space of three months_, _Judith_ xvi. 18, and then
did _Josiah_ purge _Judah_ and _Jerusalem_ from Idolatry. Whence it seems
to me that the eighth year of _Josiah_ fell in with the fourteenth or
fifteenth of _Nabuchodonosor_, and that the twelfth year of
_Nabuchodonosor_, in which _Phraortes_ was slain, was the fifth or sixth of
_Josiah_. _Phraortes_ Reigned 22 years according to _Herodotus_, and
therefore succeeded his father _Dejoces_ about the 40th year of _Manasseh_,
_Anno Nabonass._ 89, and was slain by the _Assyrians_, and succeeded by
_Astyages_, _Anno Nabonass._ 111. _Dejoces_ Reigned 53 years according to
_Herodotus_, and these years began in the 16th year of _Hezekiah_; which
makes it probable that the _Medes_ dated them from the time of their
revolt: and according to all this reckoning, the Reign of _Nabuchodonosor_
fell in with that of _Chyniladon_; which makes it probable that they were
but two names of one and the same King.

Soon after the death of _Phraortes_ [375] the _Scythians_ under _Madyes_ or
_Medus_ invaded _Media_, and beat the _Medes_ in battle, _Anno Nabonass._
113, and went thence towards _Egypt_, but were met in _Ph≈ìnicia_ by
_Psammitichus_ and bought off, and returning Reigned over a great part of
_Asia_: but in the end of about 28 years were expelled; many of their
Princes and commanders being slain in a feast by the _Medes_ under the
conduct of _Cyaxeres_, the successor of _Astyages_, just before the
destruction of _Nineveh_, and the rest being soon after forced to retire.

In the year of _Nabonassar_ 123, [376] _Nabopolassar_ the commander of the
forces of _Chyniladon_ the King of _Assyria_ in _Chald√¶a_ revolted from
him, and became King of _Babylon_; and _Chyniladon_ was either then, or
soon after, succeeded at _Nineveh_ by the last King of _Assyria_, called
_Sarac_ by _Polyhistor_: and at length _Nebuchadnezzar_, the son of
_Nabopolassar_, married _Amyite_ the daughter of _Astyages_ and sister of
_Cyaxeres_; and by this marriage the two families having contracted
affinity, they conspired against the _Assyrians_; and _Nabopolasser_ being
now grown old, and _Astyages_ being dead, their sons _Nebuchadnezzar_ and
_Cyaxeres_ led the armies of the two nations against _Nineveh_, slew
_Sarac_, destroyed the city, and shared the Kingdom of the _Assyrians_.
This victory the _Jews_ refer to the _Chald√¶ans_; the _Greeks_ to the
_Medes_; _Tobit_, _Polyhistor_, _Josephus_, and _Ctesias_ to both. It gave
a beginning to the great successes of _Nebuchadnezzar_ and _Cyaxeres_, and
laid the foundation of the two collateral Empires of the _Babylonians_ and
_Medes_; these being branches of the _Assyrian_ Empire: and thence the time
of the fall of the _Assyrian_ Empire is determined, the conquerors being
then in their youth. In the Reign of _Josiah_, when _Zephaniah_ prophesied,
_Nineveh_ and the Kingdom of _Assyria_ were standing, and their fall was
predicted by that Prophet, _Zeph._ i. 1, and ii. 13. and in the end of his
Reign _Pharaoh Nechoh_ King of _Egypt_, the successor of _Psammitichus_,
went up against the King of _Assyria_ to the river _Euphrates_, to fight
against _Carchemish_ or _Circutium_, and in his way thither slew _Josiah_,
2 _Kings_ xxiii. 29. 2 _Chron._ xxxv. 20. and therefore the last King of
_Assyria_ was not yet slain. But in the third and fourth year of
_Jehoiakim_ the successor of _Josiah_, the two conquerors having taken
_Nineveh_ and finished their war in _Assyria_, prosecuted their conquests
westward, and leading their forces against the King of _Egypt_, as an
invader of their right of conquest, they beat him at _Carchemish_, and
[377] took from him whatever he had newly taken from the _Assyrians_: and
therefore we cannot err above a year or two, if we refer the destruction of
_Nineveh_, and fall of the _Assyrian_ Empire, to the second year of
_Jehoiakim_, _Anno Nabonass._ 140. The name of the last King _Sarac_ might
perhaps be contracted from _Sarchedon_, as this name was from _Asserhadon_,
_Asserhadon-Pul_, or _Sardanapalus_.

While the _Assyrians_ Reigned at _Nineveh_, _Persia_ was divided into
several Kingdoms; and amongst others there was a Kingdom of _Elam_, which
flourished in the days of _Hezekiah_, _Manasseh_, _Josiah_, and _Jehoiakim_
Kings of _Judah_, and fell in the days of _Zedekiah_, _Jer._ xxv. 25, and
xlix. 34, and _Ezek._ xxxii. 24. This Kingdom seems to have been potent,
and to have had wars with the King of _Touran_ or _Scythia_ beyond the
river _Oxus_ with various success, and at length to have been subdued by
the _Medes_ and _Babylonians_, or one of them. For while _Nebuchadnezzar_
warred in the west, _Cyaxeres_ recovered the _Assyrian_ provinces of
_Armenia_, _Pontus_, and _Cappadocia_, and then they went eastward against
the provinces of _Persia_ and _Parthia_. Whether the _Pischdadians_, whom
the _Persians_ reckon to have been their oldest Kings, were Kings of the
Kingdom of _Elam_, or of that of the _Assyrians_, and whether _Elam_ was
conquered by the _Assyrians_ at the same time with _Babylonia_ and
_Susiana_ in the Reign of _Asserhadon_, and soon after revolted, I leave to
be examined.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. IV.

_Of the two Contemporary Empires of the _Babylonians_ and _Medes_._

By the fall of the _Assyrian_ Empire the Kingdoms of the _Babylonians_ and
_Medes_ grew great and potent. The Reigns of the Kings of _Babylon_ are
stated in _Ptolemy's_ Canon: for understanding of which you are to note
that every King's Reign in that Canon began with the last _Thoth_ of his
predecessor's Reign, as I gather by comparing the Reigns of the _Roman_
Emperors in that Canon with their Reigns recorded in years, months, and
days, by other Authors: whence it appears from that Canon that _Asserhadon_
died in the year of _Nabonassar_ 81, _Saosduchinus_ his successor in the
year 101, _Chyniladon_ in the year 123, _Nabopolassar_ in the year 144, and
_Nebuchadnezzar_ in the year 187. All these Kings, and some others
mentioned in the Canon, Reigned successively over _Babylon_, and this last
King died in the 37th year of _Jechoniah_'s captivity, 2 _Kings_ xxv. 27.
and therefore _Jechoniah_ was captivated in the 150th year of _Nabonassar_.

This captivity was in the eighth year of _Nebuchadnezzar_'s Reign, 2
_Kings_ xxiv. 12. and eleventh of _Jehoiakim_'s: for the first year of
_Nebuchadnezzar_'s Reign was the fourth of _Jehoiakim_'s, _Jer._ xxv. i.
and _Jehoiakim_ Reigned eleven years before this captivity, 2 _Kings_
xxiii. 36. 2 _Chron._ xxxvi. 5, and _Jechoniah_ three months, ending with
the captivity; and the tenth year of _Jechoniah_'s captivity, was the
eighteenth year of _Nebuchadnezzar_'s Reign, _Jer._ xxxii. 1. and the
eleventh year of _Zedekiah_, in which _Jerusalem_ was taken, was the
nineteenth of _Nebuchadnezzar_, _Jer._ lii. 5, 12. and therefore
_Nebuchadnezzar_ began his Reign in the year of _Nabonassar_ 142, that is,
two years before the death of his father _Nabopolassar_, he being then made
King by his father; and _Jehoiakim_ succeeded his father _Josiah_ in the
year of _Nabonassar_ 139; and _Jerusalem_ was taken and the Temple burnt in
the year of _Nabonassar_ 160, about twenty years after the destruction of
_Nineveh_.

The Reign of _Darius Hystaspis_ over _Persia_, by the Canon and the consent
of all Chronologers, and by several Eclipses of the Moon, began in spring
in the year of _Nabonassar_ 227: and _in the fourth year of King _Darius_,
in the 4th day of the ninth month, which is the month _Chisleu_, when the
_Jews_ had sent unto the house of God, saying, should I weep in the fifth
month as I have done these so many years? the word of the Lord came unto
_Zechariah_, saying, speak to all the people of the Land, and to the
Priests, saying; when ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month
even those seventy years, did ye at all fast unto me?_ _Zech._ vii. Count
backwards those seventy years in which they fasted in the fifth month for
the burning of the Temple, and in the seventh for the death of _Gedaliah_;
and the burning of the Temple and death of _Gedaliah_, will fall upon the
fifth and seventh _Jewish_ months, in the year of _Nabonassar_ 160, as
above.

As the _Chald√¶an_ Astronomers counted the Reigns of their Kings by the
years of _Nabonassar_, beginning with the month _Thoth_, so the _Jews_, as
their Authors tell us, counted the Reigns of theirs by the years of
_Moses_, beginning every year with the month _Nisan_: for if any King began
his Reign a few days before this month began, it was reckoned to him for a
whole year, and the beginning of this month was accounted the beginning of
the second year of his Reign; and according to this reckoning the first
year of _Jehojakim_ began with the month _Nisan_, _Anno Nabonass._ 139,
tho' his Reign might not really begin 'till five or six months after; and
the fourth year of _Jehoiakim_, and first of _Nebuchadnezzar_, according to
the reckoning of the _Jews_, began with the month _Nisan_, _Anno Nabonass._
142; and the first year of _Zedekiah_ and of _Jeconiah_'s captivity, and
ninth year of _Nebuchadnezzar_, began with the month _Nisan_, in the year
of _Nabonassar_ 150; and the tenth year of _Zedekiah_, and 18th of
_Nebuchadnezzar_, began with the month _Nisan_ in the year of _Nabonassar_
159. Now in the ninth year of _Zedekiah_, _Nebuchadnezzar_ invaded _Jud√¶a_
and the cities thereof and in the tenth month of that year, and tenth day
of the month, he and his host besieged _Jerusalem_, 2 _Kings_ xxv. 1.
_Jer._ xxxiv. 1, xxxix. 1, and lii. 4. From this time to the tenth month in
the second year of _Darius_ are just seventy years, and accordingly, _upon
the 24th day of the eleventh month of the second year of _Darius_, the word
of the Lord came unto _Zechariah_,--and the Angel of the Lord said, Oh Lord
of Hosts, how long wilt thou not have mercy on _Jerusalem_, and on the
cities of _Judah_, against which thou hast had indignation, these
threescore and ten years_, _Zech._ i. 7, 12. So then the ninth year of
_Zedekiah_, in which this indignation against _Jerusalem_ and the cities of
_Judah_ began, commenced with the month _Nisan_ in the year of _Nabonassar_
158; and the eleventh year of _Zedekiah_, and nineteenth of
_Nebuchadnezzar_, in which the city was taken and the Temple burnt,
commenced with the month _Nisan_ in the year of _Nabonassar_ 160, as above.

By all these characters the years of _Jehoiakim_, _Zedekiah_, and
_Nebuchadnezzar_, seem to be sufficiently determined, and thereby the
Chronology of the _Jews_ in the Old Testament is connected with that of
later times: for between the death of _Solomon_ and the ninth year of
_Zedekiah_ wherein _Nebuchadnezzar_ invaded _Jud√¶a_, and began the Siege of
_Jerusalem_, there were 390 years, as is manifest both by the prophesy of
_Ezekiel_, chap. iv, and by summing up the years of the Kings of _Judah_;
and from the ninth year of _Zedekiah_ inclusively to the vulgar _√Üra_ of
_Christ_, there were 590 years: and both these numbers, with half the Reign
of _Solomon_, make up a thousand years.

In the [378] end of the Reign of _Josiah_, _Anno Nabonass._ 139, _Pharaoh
Nechoh_, the successor of _Psammitichus_, came with a great army out of
_Egypt_ against the King of _Assyria_, and being denied passage through
_Jud√¶a_, beat the _Jews_ at _Megiddo_ or _Magdolus_ before _Egypt_, slew
_Josiah_ their King, marched to _Carchemish_ or _Circutium_, a town of
_Mesopotamia_ upon _Euphrates_, and took it, possest himself of the cities
of _Syria_, sent for _Jehoahaz_ the new King of _Judah_ to _Riblah_ or
_Antioch_, deposed him there, made _Jehojakim_ King in the room of
_Josiah_, and put the Kingdom of _Judah_ to tribute: but the King of
_Assyria_ being in the mean time besieged and subdued, and _Nineveh_
destroyed by _Assuerus_ King of the _Medes_, and _Nebuchadnezzar_ King of
_Babylon_, and the conquerors being thereby entitled to the countries
belonging to the King of _Assyria_, they led their victorious armies
against the King of _Egypt_ who had seized part of them. For
_Nebuchadnezzar_, assisted [379] by _Astibares_, that is, by _Astivares_,
_Assuerus_, _Acksweres_, _Axeres_, or _Cy-Axeres_, King of the _Medes_, in
the [380] third year of _Jehoiakim_, came with an army of _Babylonians_,
_Medes_, _Syrians_, _Moabites_ and _Ammonites_, to the number of 10000
chariots, and 180000 foot, and 120000 horse, and laid waste _Samaria_,
_Galilee_, _Scythopolis_, and the _Jews_ in _Galaaditis_, and besieged
_Jerusalem_, and took King _Jehoiakim_ alive, and [381] bound him in chains
for a time, and carried to _Babylon_ _Daniel_ and others of the people, and
part of what Gold and Silver and Brass they found in the Temple: and in
[382] the fourth year of _Jehoiakim_, which was the twentieth of
_Nabopolassar_, they routed the army of _Pharaoh Nechoh_ at _Carchemish_,
and by pursuing the war took from the King of _Egypt_ whatever pertained to
him from the river of _Egypt_ to the river of _Euphrates_. This King of
_Egypt_ is called by _Berosus_, [383] the _Satrapa_ of _Egypt_,
_C≈ìle-Syria_, and _Ph≈ìnicia_; and this victory over him put an end to his
Reign in _C≈ìle-Syria_ and _Ph≈ìnicia_, which he had newly invaded, and gave
a beginning to the Reign of _Nebuchadnezzar_ there: and by the conquests
over _Assyria_ and _Syria_ the small Kingdom of _Babylon_ was erected into
a potent Empire.

Whilst _Nebuchadnezzar_ was acting in _Syria_, [384] his father
_Nabopolassar_ died, having Reigned 21 years; and _Nebuchadnezzar_ upon the
news thereof, having ordered his affairs in _Syria_ returned to _Babylon_,
leaving the captives and his army with his servants to follow him: and from
henceforward he applied himself sometimes to war, conquering _Sittacene_,
_Susiana_, _Arabia_, _Edom_, _Egypt_, and some other countries; and
sometimes to peace, adorning the Temple of _Belus_ with the spoils that he
had taken; and the city of _Babylon_ with magnificent walls and gates, and
stately palaces and pensile gardens, as _Berosus_ relates; and amongst
other things he cut the new rivers _Naarmalcha_ and _Pallacopas_ above
_Babylon_ and built the city of _Teredon_.

_Jud√¶a_ was now in servitude under the King of _Babylon_, being invaded and
subdued in the third and fourth years of _Jehoiakim_, _and _Jehoiakim_
served him three years, and then turned and rebelled_, 2 _King._ xxiv. 1.
While _Nebuchadnezzar_ and the army of the _Chald√¶ans_ continued in
_Syria_, _Jehojakim_ was under compulsion; after they returned to
_Babylon_, _Jehojakim_ continued in fidelity three years, that is, during
the 7th, 8th and 9th years of his Reign, and rebelled in the tenth:
whereupon in the return or end of the year, that is in spring, he sent
[385] and besieged _Jerusalem_, captivated _Jeconiah_ the son and successor
of _Jehoiakim_, spoiled the Temple, and carried away to _Babylon_ the
Princes, craftsmen, smiths, and all that were fit for war: and, when none
remained but the poorest of the people, made [386] _Zedekiah_ their King,
and bound him upon oath to serve the King of _Babylon_: this was in spring
in the end of the eleventh year of _Jehoiakim_, and beginning of the year
of _Nabonassar_ 150.

_Zedekiah_ notwithstanding his oath [387] revolted, and made a covenant
with the King of _Egypt_, and therefore _Nebuchadnezzar_ in the ninth year
of _Zedekiah_ [388] invaded _Jud√¶a_ and the cities thereof, and in the
tenth _Jewish_ month of that year besieged _Jerusalem_ again, and in the
eleventh year of _Zedekiah_, in the 4th and 5th months, after a siege of
one year and an half, took and burnt the City and Temple.

_Nebuchadnezzar_ after he was made King by his father Reigned over
_Ph≈ìnicia_ and _C≈ìle-Syria_ 45 years, and [389] after the death of his
father 43 years, and [390] after the captivity of _Jeconiah_ 37; and then
was succeeded by his son _Evilmerodach_, called _Iluarodamus_ in
_Ptolemy_'s Canon. _Jerome_ [391] tells us, that _Evilmerodach_ Reigned
seven years in his father's life-time, while his father did eat grass with
oxen, and after his father's restoration was put in prison with _Jeconiah_
King of _Judah_ 'till the death of his father, and then succeeded in the
Throne. In the fifth year of _Jeconiah_'s captivity, _Belshazzar_ was next
in dignity to his father _Nebuchadnezzar_, and was designed to be his
successor, _Baruch_ i. 2, 10, 11, 12, 14, and therefore _Evilmerodach_ was
even then in disgrace. Upon his coming to the Throne [392] he brought his
friend and companion _Jeconiah_ out of prison on the 27th day of the
twelfth month; so that _Nebuchadnezzar_ died in the end of winter, _Anno
Nabonass._ 187.

_Evilmerodach_ Reigned two years after his father's death, and for his lust
and evil manners was slain by his sister's husband _Neriglissar_, or
_Nergalassar_, _Nabonass._ 189, according to the Canon.

_Neriglissar_, in the name of his young son _Labosordachus_, or
_Laboasserdach_, the grand-child of _Nebuchadnezzar_ by his daughter,
Reigned four years, according to the Canon and _Berosus_, including the
short Reign of _Laboasserdach_ alone: for _Laboasserdach_, according to
_Berosus_ and _Josephus_, Reigned nine months after the death of his
father, and then for his evil manners was slain in a feast, by the
conspiracy of his friends with _Nabonnedus_ a _Babylonian_, to whom by
consent they gave the Kingdom: but these nine months are not reckoned apart
in the Canon.

_Nabonnedus_ or _Nabonadius_, according to the Canon, began his Reign in
the year of _Nabonassar_ 193, Reigned seventeen years, and ended his Reign
in the year of _Nabonassar_ 210, being then vanquished and _Babylon_ taken
by _Cyrus_.

_Herodotus_ calls this last King of _Babylon_, _Labynitus_, and says that
he was the son of a former _Labynitus_, and of _Nitocris_ an eminent Queen
of _Babylon_: by the father he seems to understand that _Labynitus_, who,
as he tells us, was King of _Babylon_ when the great Eclipse of the Sun
predicted by _Thales_ put an end to the five years war between the _Medes_
and _Lydians_; and this was the great _Nebuchadnezzar_. _Daniel_ [393]
calls the last King of _Babylon_, _Belshazzar_, and saith that
_Nebuchadnezzar_ was his father: and _Josephus_ tells us, [394] that the
last King of _Babylon_ was called _Naboandel_ by the _Babylonians_, and
Reigned seventeen years; and therefore he is the same King of _Babylon_
with _Nabonnedus_ or _Labynitus_; and this is more agreeable to sacred writ
than to make _Nabonnedus_ a stranger to the royal line: for all _nations
were to serve _Nebuchadnezzar_ and his posterity, till the very time of his
land should come, and many nations should serve themselves of him_, _Jer._
xxvii. 7. _Belshazzar_ was born and lived in honour before the fifth year
of _Jeconiah_'s captivity, which was the eleventh year of
_Nebuchadnezzar_'s Reign; and therefore he was above 34 years old at the
death of _Evilmerodach_, and so could be no other King than _Nabonnedus_:
for _Laboasserdach_ the grandson of _Nebuchadnezzar_ was a child when he
Reigned.

_Herodotus_ [395] tells us, that there were two famous Queens of _Babylon_,
_Semiramis_ and _Nitocris_; and that the latter was more skilful: she
observing that the Kingdom of the _Medes_, having subdued many cities, and
among others _Nineveh_, was become great and potent, intercepted and
fortified the passages out of _Media_ into _Babylonia_; and the river which
before was straight, she made crooked with great windings, that it might be
more sedate and less apt to overflow: and on the side of the river above
_Babylon_, in imitation of the Lake of _M≈ìris_ in _Egypt_, she dug a Lake
every way forty miles broad, to receive the water of the river, and keep it
for watering the land. She built also a bridge over the river in the middle
of _Babylon_, turning the stream into the Lake 'till the bridge was built.
_Philostratus_ saith, [396] that she made a bridge under the river two
fathoms broad, meaning an arched vault over which the river flowed, and
under which they might walk cross the river: he calls her ŒúŒ∑Œ¥ŒµŒπŒ±, a _Mede_.

_Berosus_ tells us, that _Nebuchadnezzar_ built a pensile garden upon
arches, because his wife was a _Mede_ and delighted in mountainous
prospects, such as abounded in _Media_, but were wanting in _Babylonia_:
she was _Amyite_ the daughter of _Astyages_, and sister of _Cyaxeres_,
Kings of the _Medes_. _Nebuchadnezzar_ married her upon a league between
the two families against the King of _Assyria_: but _Nitocris_ might be
another woman who in the Reign of her son _Labynitus_, a voluptuous and
vicious King, took care of his affairs, and for securing his Kingdom
against the _Medes_, did the works above mentioned. This is that Queen
mentioned in _Daniel_, chap. v. ver. 10.

_Josephus_ [397] relates out of the _Tyrian_ records, that in the Reign of
_Ithobalus_ King of _Tyre_, that city was besieged by _Nebuchadnezzar_
thirteen years together: in the end of that siege _Ithobalus_ their King
was slain, _Ezek._ xxviii. 8, 9, 10. and after him, according to the
_Tyrian_ records, Reigned _Baal_ ten years, _Ecnibalus_ and _Chelbes_ one
year, _Abbarus_ three months, _Mytgonus_ and _Gerastratus_ six years,
_Balatorus_ one year, _Merbalus_ four years, and _Iromus_ twenty years: and
in the fourteenth year of _Iromus_, say the _Tyrian_ records, the Reign of
_Cyrus_ began in _Babylonia_; therefore the siege of _Tyre_ began 48 years
and some months before the Reign of _Cyrus_ in _Babylonia_: it began when
_Jerusalem_ had been newly taken and burnt, with the Temple, _Ezek._ xxvi
and by consequence after the eleventh year of _Jeconiah_'s captivity, or
160th year of _Nabonassar_, and therefore the Reign of _Cyrus_ in
_Babylonia_ began after the year of _Nabonassar_ 208: it ended before the
eight and twentieth year of _Jeconiah_'s captivity, or 176th year of
_Nabonassar_, _Ezek._ xxix. 17. and therefore the Reign of _Cyrus_ in
_Babylonia_ began before the year of _Nabonassar_ 211. By this argument the
first year of _Cyrus_ in _Babylonia_ was one of the two intermediate years
209, 210. _Cyrus_ invaded _Babylonia_ in the year of _Nabonassar_ 209;
[398] _Babylon_ held out, and the next year was taken, _Jer._ li. 39, 57.
by diverting the river _Euphrates_, and entring the city through the
emptied channel, and by consequence after midsummer: for the river, by the
melting of the snow in _Armenia_, overflows yearly in the beginning of
summer, but in the heat of dimmer grows low. [399] _And that night was the
King of _Babylon_ slain, and _Darius_ the _Mede_, or King of the _Medes_,
took the Kingdom being about threescore and two years old_: so then
_Babylon_ was taken a month or two after the summer solstice, in the year
of _Nabonassar_ 210; as the Canon also represents.

The Kings of the _Medes_ before _Cyrus_ were _Dejoces_, _Phraortes_,
_Astyages_, _Cyaxeres_, or _Cyaxares_, and _Darius_: the three first
Reigned before the Kingdom grew great, the two last were great conquerors,
and erected the Empire; for _√Üschylus_, who flourished in the Reigns of
_Darius Hystaspis_, and _Xerxes_, and died in the 76th Olympiad, introduces
_Darius_ thus complaining of those who persuaded his son _Xerxes_ to invade
_Greece_; [400]

  Œ§ŒøŒπŒ≥Œ±œÅ œÉœÜŒπŒΩ ŒµœÅŒ≥ŒøŒΩ ŒµœÉœÑŒπŒΩ ŒµŒæŒµŒπœÅŒ≥Œ±œÉŒºŒµŒΩŒøŒΩ
  ŒúŒµŒ≥ŒπœÉœÑŒøŒΩ, Œ±ŒπŒµŒπŒºŒΩŒ∑œÉœÑŒøŒΩ ‚ÄõŒøŒπŒøŒΩ ŒøœÖŒ¥ŒµœÄœâ,
  Œ§Œø Œ¥' Œ±œÉœÑœÖ Œ£ŒøœÖœÉœâŒΩ ŒµŒæŒµŒ∫ŒµŒπŒΩœâœÉŒµŒΩ œÄŒµœÉŒøŒΩŒá
  ŒïŒæ ‚ÄõŒøœÖœÑŒµ œÑŒπŒºŒ∑ŒΩ ŒñŒµœÖœÇ Œ±ŒΩŒ±Œæ œÑŒ∑ŒΩŒ¥' œâœÄŒ±œÉŒµŒΩ
  ŒïŒΩ Œ±ŒΩŒ¥œÅŒ± œÄŒ±œÉŒ∑œÇ ŒëœÉŒπŒ±Œ¥ŒøœÇ ŒºŒ∑ŒªŒøœÑœÅŒøœÜŒøœÖ
  Œ§Œ±Œ≥ŒµŒπŒΩ, ŒµœáŒøŒΩœÑŒ± œÉŒ∫Œ∑œÄœÑœÅŒøŒΩ ŒµœÖŒ∏œÖŒΩœÑŒ∑œÅŒπŒøŒΩ
  ŒúŒ∑Œ¥ŒøœÇ Œ≥Œ±œÅ Œ∑ŒΩ ‚ÄõŒø œÄœÅœâœÑŒøœÇ ‚ÄõŒ∑Œ≥ŒµŒºœâŒΩ œÉœÑœÅŒ±œÑŒøœÖŒá
  ŒëŒªŒªŒøœÇ Œ¥' ŒµŒ∫ŒµŒπŒΩŒøœÖ œÄŒ±ŒπœÇ œÑŒøŒ¥' ŒµœÅŒ≥ŒøŒΩ Œ∑ŒΩœÖœÉŒµŒá
  Œ¶œÅŒµŒΩŒµœÇ Œ≥Œ±œÅ Œ±œÖœÑŒøœÖ Œ∏œÖŒºŒøŒΩ ŒøŒπŒ±Œ∫ŒøœÉœÑœÅŒøœÜŒøœÖŒΩ.
  Œ§œÅŒπœÑŒøœÇ Œ¥' Œ±œÄ' Œ±œÖœÑŒøœÖ ŒöœÖœÅŒøœÇ, ŒµœÖŒ¥Œ±ŒπŒºœâŒΩ Œ±ŒΩŒ∑œÅ, &c.

  _They have done a work_
  _The greatest, and most memorable, such as never happen'd,_
  _For it has emptied the falling _Sufa_:_
  _From the time that King_ Jupiter _granted this honour,_
  _That one man should Reign over all fruitful _Asia_,_
  _Having the imperial Scepter._
  _For he that first led the Army was a _Mede_;_
  _The next, who was his son, finisht the work,_
  _For prudence directed his soul;_
  _The third was _Cyrus_, a happy man_, &c.

The Poet here attributes the founding of the _Medo-Persian_ Empire to the
two immediate predecessors of _Cyrus_, the first of which was a _Mede_, and
the second was his son: the second was _Darius_ the _Mede_, the immediate
predecessor of _Cyrus_, according to _Daniel_; and therefore the first was
the father of _Darius_, that is, _Achsuerus_, _Assuerus_, _Oxyares_,
_Axeres_, Prince _Axeres_, or _Cy-Axeres_, the word _Cy_ signifying a
Prince: for _Daniel_ tells us, that _Darius_ was the son of _Achsuerus_, or
_Ahasuerus_, as the _Masoretes_ erroneously call him, of the seed of the
_Medes_, that is, of the seed royal: this is that _Assuerus_ who together
with _Nebuchadnezzar_ took and destroyed _Nineveh_, according to _Tobit_:
which action is by the _Greeks_ ascribed to _Cyaxeres_, and by _Eupolemus_
to _Astibares_, a name perhaps corruptly written for _Assuerus_. By this
victory over the _Assyrians_, and subversion of their Empire seated at
_Nineveh_, and the ensuing conquests of _Armenia_, _Cappadocia_ and
_Persia_, he began to extend the Reign of one man over all _Asia_; and his
son _Darius_ the _Mede_, by conquering the Kingdoms of _Lydia_ and
_Babylon_, finished the work: and the third King was _Cyrus_, a happy man
for his great successes under and against _Darius_, and large and peaceable
dominion in his own Reign.

_Cyrus_ lived seventy years, according to _Cicero_, and Reigned nine years
over _Babylon_, according to _Ptolemy_'s Canon, and therefore was 61 years
old at the taking of _Babylon_; at which time _Darius_ the _Mede_ was 62
years old, according to _Daniel_: and therefore _Darius_ was two
Generations younger than _Astyages_, the grandfather of _Cyrus_: for
_Astyages_, according to both [401] _Herodotus_ and _Xenophon_, gave his
daughter _Mandane_ to _Cambyses_ a Prince of _Persia_, and by them became
the grandfather of _Cyrus_; and _Cyaxeres_ was the son of _Astyages_,
according [402] to _Xenophon_, and gave his Daughter to _Cyrus_. This
daughter, [403] saith _Xenophon_, was reported to be very handsome, and
used to play with _Cyrus_ when they were both children, and to say that she
would marry him: and therefore they were much of the same age. _Xenophon_
saith that _Cyrus_ married her after the taking of _Babylon_; but she was
then an old woman: it's more probable that he married her while she was
young and handsome, and he a young man; and that because he was the
brother-in-law of _Darius_ the King, he led the armies of the Kingdom until
he revolted: so then _Astyages_, _Cyaxeres_ and _Darius_ Reigned
successively over the _Medes_; and _Cyrus_ was the grandson of _Astyages_,
and married the sister of _Darius_, and succeeded him in the Throne.

_Herodotus_ therefore [404] hath inverted the order of the Kings _Astyages_
and _Cyaxeres_, making _Cyaxeres_ to be the son and successor of
_Phraortes_, and the father and predecessor of _Astyages_ the father of
_Mandane_, and grandfather of _Cyrus_, and telling us, that this _Astyages_
married _Ariene_ the daughter of _Alyattes_ King of _Lydia_, and was at
length taken prisoner and deprived of his dominion by _Cyrus_: and
_Pausanias_ hath copied after _Herodotus_, in telling us that _Astyages_
the son of _Cyaxeres_ Reigned in _Media_ in the days of _Alyattes_ King of
_Lydia_. _Cyaxeres_ had a son who married _Ariene_ the daughter of
_Alyattes_; but this son was not the father of _Mandane_, and grandfather
of _Cyrus_, but of the same age with _Cyrus_: and his true name is
preserved in the name of the _Darics_, which upon the conquest of _Cr≈ìsus_
by the conduct of his General _Cyrus_, he coyned out of the gold and silver
of the conquered _Lydians_: his name was therefore _Darius_, as he is
called by _Daniel_; for _Daniel_ tells us, that this _Darius_ was a _Mede_,
and that his father's name was _Assuerus_, that is _Axeres_ or _Cyaxeres_,
as above: considering therefore that _Cyaxeres_ Reigned long, and that no
author mentions more Kings of _Media_ than one called _Astyages_, and that
_√Üschylus_ who lived in those days knew but of two great Monarchs of
_Media_ and _Persia_, the father and the son, older than _Cyrus_; it seems
to me that _Astyages_, the father of _Mandane_ and grandfather of _Cyrus_,
was the father and predecessor of _Cyaxeres_; and that the son and
successor of _Cyaxeres_ was called _Darius_. _Cyaxeres_, [405] according to
_Herodotus_, Reigned 40 years, and his successor 35, and _Cyrus_, according
to _Xenophon_, seven: _Cyrus_ died _Anno Nabonass._ 219, according to the
Canon, and therefore _Cyaxeres_ died _Anno Nabonass._ 177, and began his
Reign _Anno Nabonass._ 137, and his father _Astyages_ Reigned 26 years,
beginning his Reign at the death of _Phraortes_, who was slain by the
_Assyrians_, _Anno Nabonass._ 111, as above.

Of all the Kings of the _Medes_, _Cyaxeres_ was greatest warrior.
_Herodotus_ [406] saith that he was much more valiant than his ancestors,
and that he was the first who divided the Kingdom into provinces, and
reduced the irregular and undisciplined forces of the _Medes_ into
discipline and order: and therefore by the testimony of _Herodotus_ he was
that King of the _Medes_ whom _√Üschylus_ makes the first conqueror and
founder of the Empire; for _Herodotus_ represents him and his son to have
been the two immediate predecessors of _Cyrus_, erring only in the name of
the son. _Astyages_ did nothing glorious: in the beginning of his Reign a
great body of _Scythians_ commanded by _Madyes_, [407] invaded _Media_ and
_Parthia_, as above, and Reigned there about 28 years; but at length his
son _Cyaxeres_ circumvented and slew them in a feast, and made the rest fly
to their brethren in _Parthia_; and immediately after, in conjunction with
_Nebuchadnezzar_, invaded and subverted the Kingdom of _Assyria_, and
destroyed _Nineveh_.

In the fourth year of _Jehoiakim_, which the _Jews_ reckon to be the first
of _Nebuchadnezzar_, dating his Reign from his being made King by his
father, or from the month _Nisan_ preceding, when the victors had newly
shared the Empire of the _Assyrians_, and in prosecuting their victory were
invading _Syria_ and _Ph≈ìnicia_, and were ready to invade the nations round
about; God [408] threatned that _he would take all the families of the
North, _that is, the armies of the _Medes_,_ and _Nebuchadnezzar_ the King
of _Babylon_, and bring them against _Jud√¶a_ and against the nations round
about, and utterly destroy those nations, and make them an astonishment and
lasting desolations, and cause them all to drink the wine-cup of his fury_;
and in particular, he names _the Kings of _Judah_ and _Egypt_, and those of
_Edom_, and _Moab_, and _Ammon_, and _Tyre_, and _Zidon_, and the Isles of
the Sea, and _Arabia_, and _Zimri_, and all the Kings of _Elam_, and all
the Kings of the _Medes_, and all the Kings of the North, and the King of
_Sesac_; and that after seventy years, he would also punish the King of
_Babylon__. Here, in numbering the nations which should suffer, he omits
the _Assyrians_ as fallen already, and names the Kings of _Elam_ or
_Persia_, and _Sesac_ or _Susa_, as distinct from those of the _Medes_ and
_Babylonians_; and therefore the _Persians_ were not yet subdued by the
_Medes_, nor the King of _Susa_ by the _Chald√¶ans_; and as by the
punishment of the King of _Babylon_ he means the conquest of _Babylon_ by
the _Medes_; so by the punishment of the _Medes_ he seems to mean the
conquest of the _Medes_ by _Cyrus_.

After this, in the beginning of the Reign of _Zedekiah_, that is, in the
ninth year of _Nebuchadnezzar,_ God threatned that _he would give the
Kingdoms of _Edom_, _Moab_, and _Ammon_, and _Tyre_ and _Zidon_, into the
hand of _Nebuchadnezzar_ King of _Babylon_, and that all the nations should
serve him, and his son, and his son's son until the very time of his land
should come, and many nations and great Kings should serve themselves of
him_, Jer. xxvii. And at the same time God thus predicted the approaching
conquest of the _Persians_ by the _Medes_ and their confederates: _Behold_,
saith he, _I will break the bow of _Elam_, the chief of their might: and
upon _Elam_ will I bring the four winds from the four quarters of heaven,
and will scatter them towards all those winds, and there shall be no nation
whither the outcasts of _Elam_ shall not come: for I will cause _Elam_ to
be dismayed before their enemies, and before them that seek their life; and
I will bring evil upon them, even my fierce anger, saith the Lord; and I
will send the sword after them 'till I have consumed them; and I will set
my throne in _Elam_, and will destroy from thence the King and the Princes,
saith the Lord: but it shall come to pass in the latter days, _viz. in the
Reign of _Cyrus_,_ that I will bring again the captivity of _Elam_, saith
the Lord._ Jer. xlix. 35, _&c._ The _Persians_ were therefore hitherto a
free nation under their own King, but soon after this were invaded,
subdued, captivated, and dispersed into the nations round about, and
continued in servitude until the Reign of _Cyrus_: and since the _Medes_
and _Chald√¶ans_ did not conquer the _Persians_ 'till after the ninth year
of _Nebuchadnezzar_, it gives us occasion to enquire what that active
warrior _Cyaxeres_ was doing next after the taking of _Nineveh_.

When _Cyaxeres_ expelled the _Scythians_, [409] some of them made their
peace with him, and staid in _Media_, and presented to him daily some of
the venison which they took in hunting: but happening one day to catch
nothing, _Cyaxeres_ in a passion treated them with opprobrious language:
this they resented, and soon after killed one of the children of the
_Medes_, dressed it like venison, and presented it to _Cyaxeres_, and then
fled to _Alyattes_ King of _Lydia_; whence followed a war of five years
between the two Kings _Cyaxeres_ and _Alyattes_: and thence I gather that
the Kingdoms of the _Medes_ and _Lydians_ were now contiguous, and by
consequence that _Cyaxeres_, soon after the conquest of _Nineveh_, seized
the regions belonging to the _Assyrians_, as far as to the river _Halys_.
In the sixth year of this war, in the midst of a battel between the two
Kings, there was a total Eclipse of the Sun, predicted by _Thales_; [410]
and this Eclipse fell upon the 28th of _May_, _Anno Nabonass._ 163, forty
and seven years before the taking of _Babylon_, and put an end to the
battel: and thereupon the two Kings made peace by the mediation of
_Nebuchadnezzar_ King of _Babylon_, and _Syennesis_ King of _Cilicia_; and
the peace was ratified by a marriage, between _Darius_ the son of
_Cyaxeres_ and _Ariene_ the daughter of _Alyattes_: _Darius_ was therefore
fifteen or sixteen years old at the time of this marriage; for he was 62
years old at the taking of _Babylon_.

In the eleventh year of _Zedekiah's_ Reign, the year in which
_Nebuchadnezzar_ took _Jerusalem_ and destroyed the Temple, _Ezekiel_
comparing the Kingdoms of the East to trees in the garden of _Eden_, thus
mentions their being conquered by the Kings of the _Medes_ and _Chald√¶ans:
Behold_, saith he, _the_ Assyrian _was a Cedar in_ Lebanon _with fair
branches,--his height was exalted above all the trees of the field,--and
under his shadow dwelt all great nations,--not any tree in the garden of
God was like unto him in his beauty:--but I have delivered him into the
hand of the mighty one of the heathen,--I made the nations to shake at the
sound of his fall, when I cast him down to the grave with them that descend
into the pit: and all the trees of _Eden_, the choice and best of
_Lebanon_, all that drink water, shall be comforted in the nether parts of
the earth: they also went down into the grave with him, unto them that be
slain with the sword, and they that were his arm, that dwelt under his
shadow in the midst of the heathen,_ Ezek. xxxi.

The next year _Ezekiel_, in another prophesy, thus enumerates the principal
nations who had been subdued and slaughtered by the conquering sword of
_Cyaxeres_ and _Nebuchadnezzar_. __Asthur_ is there and all her company,
_viz. in _Hades_ or the lower parts of the earth, where the dead bodies lay
buried_, his graves are about him; all of them slain, fallen by the sword,
which caused their terrour in the land of the living. There is _Elam_, and
all her multitude round about her grave, all of them slain, fallen by the
sword, which are gone down uncircumcised into the nether parts of the
earth, which caused their terrour in the land of the living: yet have they
born their shame with them that go down into the pit.--There is _Meshech_,
_Tubal_, and all her multitude [411]; her graves are round about him: all
of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword, though they caused their terrour
in the land of the living.--There is _Edom_, her Kings, and all her
Princes, which with their might are laid by them that were slain by the
sword.--There be the Princes of the North all of them, and all the
_Zidonians_, which with their terrour are gone down with the slain_, Ezek.
xxxii. Here by the Princes of the North I understand those on the north of
_Jud√¶a_, and chiefly the Princes of _Armenia_ and _Cappadocia_, who fell in
the wars which _Cyaxeres_ made in reducing those countries after the taking
of _Nineveh_. _Elam_ or _Persia_ was conquered by the _Medes_, and
_Susiana_ by the _Babylonians_, after the ninth, and before the nineteenth
year of _Nebuchadnezzar_: and therefore we cannot err much if we place
these conquests in the twelfth or fourteenth year of _Nebuchadnezzar_: in
the nineteenth, twentieth, and one and twentieth year of this King, he
invaded and [412] conquered _Jud√¶a_, _Moab_, _Ammon_, _Edom_, the
_Philistims_ and _Zidon_; and [413] the next year he besieged _Tyre_, and
after a siege of thirteen years he took it, in the 35th year of his Reign;
and then he [414] invaded and conquered _Egypt_, _Ethiopia_ and _Libya_;
and about eighteen or twenty years after the death of this King, _Darius_
the _Mede_ conquered the Kingdom of _Sardes_; and after five or six years
more he invaded and conquered the Empire of _Babylon_: and thereby finished
the work of propagating the _Medo-Persian_ Monarchy over all _Asia_, as
_√Üschylus_ represents.

Now this is that _Darius_ who coined a great number of pieces of pure gold
called _Darics_, or _Stateres Darici:_ for _Suidas_, _Harpocration_, and
the Scholiast of _Aristophanes_> [415] tell us, that these were coined not
by the father of _Xerxes_, but by an earlier _Darius_, by _Darius_ the
first, by the first King of the _Medes_ and _Persians_ who coined gold
money. They were stamped on one side with the effigies of an Archer, who
was crowned with a spiked crown, had a bow in his left hand, and an arrow
in his right, and was cloathed with a long robe; I have seen one of them in
gold, and another in silver: they were of the same weight and value with
the _Attic Stater_ or piece of gold money weighing two _Attic_ drachms.
_Darius_ seems to have learnt the art and use of money from the conquered
Kingdom of the _Lydians_, and to have recoined their gold: for the _Medes_,
before they conquered the _Lydians_, had no money. _Herodotus_ [416] tells
us, that _when_ Cr≈ìsus _was preparing to invade_ Cyrus, _a certain _Lydian_
called _Sandanis_ advised him, that he was preparing an expedition against
a nation who were cloathed with leathern breeches, who eat not such
victuals as they would, but such as their barren country afforded; who
drank no wine, but water only, who eat no figs nor other good meat, who had
nothing to lose, but might get much from the _Lydians__: _for the
_Persians__, saith _Herodotus_, _before they conquered the _Lydians_, had
nothing rich or valuable_: and [417] _Isaiah_ tells us, that _the _Medes_
regarded not silver, nor delighted in gold_; but the _Lydians_ and
_Phrygians_ were exceeding rich, even to a proverb: _Midas & Cr≈ìsus_, saith
[418] _Pliny, infinitum possederant. Jam Cyrus devicta Asia_ [auri] _pondo
xxxiv millia invenerat, pr√¶ter vasa aurea aurumque factum, & in eo folia ac
platanum vitemque. Qua victoria argenti quingenta millia talentorum
reportavit, & craterem Semiramidis cujus pondus quindecim talentorum
colligebat. Talentum autem √Ügyptium pondo octoginta capere Varro tradit._
What the conqueror did with all this gold and silver appears by the
_Darics_. The _Lydians_, according to [419] _Herodotus_, were the first who
coined gold and silver, and _Cr≈ìsus_ coined gold monies in plenty, called
_Cr≈ìsei_; and it was not reasonable that the monies of the Kings of _Lydia_
should continue current after the overthrow of their Kingdom, and therefore
_Darius_ recoined it with his own effigies, but without altering the
current weight and value: he Reigned then from before the conquest of
_Sardes_ 'till after the conquest of _Babylon_.

And since the cup of _Semiramis_ was preserved 'till the conquest of
_Cr≈ìsus_ by _Darius_, it is not probable that she could be older than is
represented by _Herodotus_.

This conquest of the Kingdom of _Lydia_ put the _Greeks_ into fear of the
_Medes_: for _Theognis_, who lived at _Megara_ in the very times of these
wars, writes thus, [420]

  Œ†ŒπŒΩœâŒºŒµŒΩ, œáŒ±œÅŒπŒµŒΩœÑŒ± ŒºŒµœÑ' Œ±ŒªŒªŒ∑ŒªŒøŒπœÉŒπ ŒªŒµŒ≥ŒøŒΩœÑŒµœÇ,
    ŒúŒ∑Œ¥ŒµŒΩ œÑŒøŒΩ ŒúŒ∑Œ¥œâŒΩ Œ¥ŒµŒπŒ¥ŒπŒøœÑŒµœÇ œÄŒøŒªŒµŒºŒøŒΩ.

  _Let us drink, talking pleasant things with one another,_
    _Not fearing the war of the _Medes_._

And again, [421]

  ŒëœÖœÑŒøœÇ Œ¥Œµ œÉœÑœÅŒ±œÑŒøŒΩ ‚ÄõœÖŒ≤œÅŒπœÉœÑŒ∑ŒΩ ŒúŒ∑Œ¥œâŒΩ Œ±œÄŒµœÅœÖŒ∫Œµ
    Œ§Œ∑œÉŒ¥Œµ œÄŒøŒªŒµœÖœÇ, ‚ÄõŒπŒΩŒ± œÉŒøŒπ ŒªŒ±ŒøŒπ ŒµŒΩ ŒµœÖœÜœÅŒøœÉœÖŒΩŒ∑Œπ
  ŒóœÅŒøœÇ ŒµœÄŒµœÅœáŒøŒºŒµŒΩŒøœÖ Œ∫ŒªŒµŒπœÑŒ±œÇ œÄŒµŒºœÄœâœÉ' ‚ÄõŒµŒ∫Œ±œÑŒøŒºŒ≤Œ±œÇ,
    Œ§ŒµœÅœÄŒøŒºŒµŒΩŒøŒπ Œ∫ŒπŒ∏Œ±œÅŒ∑ Œ∫Œ±Œπ ŒµœÅŒ±œÑŒ∑Œπ Œ∏Œ±ŒªŒπŒ∑Œπ,
  Œ†Œ±ŒπŒ±ŒΩœâŒΩœÑŒµ œáŒøœÅŒøŒπœÇ, ŒπŒ±œáœâœÉŒπ œÑŒµ, œÉŒøŒΩ œÄŒµœÅŒπ Œ≤œâŒºŒøŒΩ.
    Œó Œ≥Œ±œÅ ŒµŒ≥œâŒ≥Œµ Œ¥ŒµŒ¥ŒøŒπŒ∫', Œ±œÜœÅŒ±Œ¥ŒπŒ∑ŒΩ ŒµœÉŒøœÅœâŒΩ
  ŒöŒ±Œπ œÉœÑŒ±œÉŒπŒΩ ‚ÄõŒïŒªŒªŒ∑ŒΩœâŒΩ ŒªŒ±ŒøœÜŒ∏ŒøœÅŒøŒΩŒá Œ±ŒªŒªŒ± œÉœÖ Œ¶ŒøŒπŒ≤Œµ,
    ‚ÄõŒôŒªŒ±ŒøœÇ ‚ÄõŒ∑ŒºŒµœÑŒµœÅŒ∑ŒΩ œÑŒ∑ŒΩŒ¥Œµ œÜœÖŒªŒ±œÉœÉŒµ œÄŒøŒªŒπŒΩ.

  _Thou _Apollo_ drive away the injurious army of the _Medes__
    _From this city, that the people may with joy_
  _Send thee choice hecatombs in the spring,_
    _Delighted with the harp and chearful feasting,_
  _And chorus's of _P≈ìans_ and acclamations about thy altar_.
    _For truly I am afraid, beholding the folly_
  _And sedition of the _Greeks_, which corrupts the people: but thou
      _Apollo_,_
    _Being propitious, keep this our city._

The Poet tells us further that discord had destroyed _Magnesia_,
_Colophon_, and _Smyrna_, cities of _Ionia_ and _Phrygia_, and would
destroy the _Greeks_; which is as much as to say that the _Medes_ had then
conquered those cities.

The _Medes_ therefore Reigned 'till the taking of _Sardes_: and further,
according to _Xenophon_ and the Scriptures, they Reigned 'till the taking
of _Babylon_: for _Xenophon_ [422] tells us, that after the taking of
_Babylon_, _Cyrus_ went to the King of the _Medes_ at _Ecbatane_ and
succeeded him in the Kingdom: and _Jerom_, [423] _that _Babylon_ was taken
by _Darius_ King of the _Medes_ and his kinsman _Cyrus__: and the
Scriptures tell us, that _Babylon_ was destroyed by _a nation out of the
north_, _Jerem_. l. 3, 9, 41. by _the Kingdoms of _Ararat Minni, or
_Armenia__, and _Ashchenez, or _Phrygia minor___, _Jer_. li. 27. by the
_Medes_, _Isa._ xiii. 17, 19. _by the Kings of the _Medes_ and the captains
and rulers thereof, and all the land of his dominion_, _Jer_. li. 11, 28.
The Kingdom of _Babylon_ was _numbred and finished and broken and given to
the _Medes_ and _Persians__, _Dan._ v. 26. 28. first to the _Medes_ under
_Darius_, and then to the _Persians_ under _Cyrus_: for _Darius_ Reigned
over _Babylon_ like a conqueror, not observing the laws of the
_Babylonians_, but introducing the immutable laws of the conquering
nations, the _Medes_ and _Persians_, _Dan._ vi. 8, 12, 15; and the _Medes_
in his Reign are set before the _Persians_, _Dan._ ib. & v. 28, & viii. 20.
as the _Persians_ were afterwards in the Reign of _Cyrus_ and his
successors set before the _Medes_, _Esther_ i. 3, 14, 18, 19. _Dan._ x. 1,
20. and xi. 2. which shews that in the Reign of _Darius_ the _Medes_ were
uppermost.

You may know also by the great number of provinces in the Kingdom of
_Darius_, that he was King of the _Medes_ and _Persians_: for upon the
conquest of _Babylon_, he set over the whole Kingdom an hundred and twenty
Princes, _Dan._ vi. 1. and afterwards when _Cambyses_ and _Darius
Hystaspis_ had added some new territories, the whole contained but 127
provinces.

The extent of the _Babylonian_ Empire was much the same with that of
_Nineveh_ after the revolt of the _Medes_. _Berosus_ saith that
_Nebuchadnezzar_ held _Egypt_, _Syria_, _Ph≈ìnicia_ and _Arabia_: and
_Strabo_ adds _Arbela_ to the territories of _Babylon_; and saying that
_Babylon_ was anciently the metropolis of _Assyria_, he thus describes the
limits of this _Assyrian_ Empire. _Contiguous_, [424] saith he, _to
_Persia_ and _Susiana_ are the _Assyrians_: for so they call _Babylonia_,
and the greatest part of the region about it: part of which is _Arturia_,
wherein is _Ninus [_or_ Nineveh;]_ and _Apolloniatis_, and the _Elym√¶ans_,
and the _Par√¶tac√¶_, and _Chalonitis_ by the mountain _Zagrus_, and the
fields near _Ninus_, and _Dolomene_, and _Chalachene_, and _Chazene_, and
_Adiabene_, and the nations of _Mesopotamia_ near the _Gordy√¶ans_, and the
_Mygdones_ about _Nisibis_, unto _Zeugma_ upon _Euphrates_; and a large
region on this side _Euphrates_ inhabited by the _Arabians_ and _Syrians_
properly so called, as far as _Cilicia_ and _Ph≈ìnicia_ and _Libya_ and the
sea of _Egypt_ and the _Sinus Issicus__: and a little after describing the
extent of the _Babylonian_ region, he bounds it on the north, with the
_Armenians_ and _Medes_ unto the mountain _Zagrus_; on the east side, with
_Susa_ and _Elymais_ and _Par√¶tacene_, inclusively; on the south, with the
_Persian Gulph_ and _Chald√¶a_; and on the west, with the _Arabes Scenit√¶_
as far as _Adiabene_ and _Gordy√¶a_: afterwards speaking of _Susiana_ and
_Sitacene_, a region between _Babylon_ and _Susa_, and of _Par√¶tacene_ and
_Coss√¶a_ and _Elymais_, and of the _Sagapeni_ and _Siloceni_, two little
adjoining Provinces, he concludes, [425] _and these are the nations which
inhabit _Babylonia_ eastward: to the north are _Media_ and _Armenia_,
_exclusively_, and westward are _Adiabene_ and _Mesopotamia_,
_inclusively_; the greatest part of _Adiabene_ is plain, the same being
part of _Babylonia_: in same places it borders on _Armenia_: for the
_Medes_, _Armenians_ and _Babylonians_ warred frequently on one another_.
Thus far _Strabo_.

When _Cyrus_ took _Babylon_, he changed the Kingdom into a Satrapy or
Province: whereby the bounds were long after known: and by this means
_Herodotus_ [426] gives us an estimate of the bigness of this Monarchy in
proportion to that of the _Persians_, telling us that _whilst every region
over which the King of _Persia_ Reigned in his days, was distributed for
the nourishment of his army, besides the tributes, the _Babylonian_ region
nourished him four months of the twelve in the year, and all the rest of
_Asia_ eight: so the power of the region_, saith he, _is equivalent to the
third part of _Asia_, and its Principality, which the _Persians_ call a
_Satrapy_, is far the best of all the Provinces_.

_Babylon_ [427] was a square city of 120 furlongs, or 15 miles on every
side, compassed first with a broad and deep ditch, and then with a wall
fifty cubits thick, and two hundred high. _Euphrates_ flowed through the
middle of it southward, a few leagues on this side _Tigris_: and in the
middle of one half westward stood the King's new Palace, built by
_Nebuchadnezzar_; and in the middle of the other half stood the Temple of
_Belus_, with the old Palace between that Temple and the river: this old
Palace was built by the _Assyrians_, according to [428] _Isaiah_, and by
consequence, by _Pul_ and his son _Nabonassar_, as above: _they founded the
city for the _Arabians_, and set up the towers thereof, and raised the
Palaces thereof_: and at that time _Sabacon_ the _Ethiopian_ invaded
_Egypt_, and made great multitudes of _Egyptians_ fly from him into
_Chald√¶a_, and carry thither their Astronomy, and Astrology, and
Architecture, and the form of their year, which they preserved there in the
_√Üra_ of _Nabonassar_: for the practice of observing the Stars began in
_Egypt_ in the days of _Ammon_, as above, and was propagated from thence in
the Reign of his son _Sesac_ into _Afric_, _Europe_, and _Asia_ by
conquest; and then _Atlas_ formed the Sphere of the _Libyans_, and _Chiron_
that of the _Greeks_, and the _Chald√¶ans_ also made a Sphere of their own.
But Astrology was invented in _Egypt_ by _Nichepsos_, or _Necepsos_, one of
the Kings of the lower _Egypt_, and _Petosiris_ his Priest, a little before
the days of _Sabacon_, and propagated thence into _Chald√¶a_, where
_Zoroaster_ the Legislator of the _Magi_ met with it: so _Paulinus_,

  _Quique magos docuit mysteria vana Necepsos_:

And _Diodorus_, [429] _they say that the _Chald√¶ans_ in _Babylonia_ are
colonies of the _Egyptians_, and being taught by the Priests of _Egypt_
became famous for Astrology_. By the influence of the same colonies, the
Temple of _Jupiter Belus_ in _Babylon_ seems to have been erected in the
form of the _Egyptian_ Pyramids: for [430] this Temple was a solid Tower or
Pyramid a furlong square, and a furlong high, with seven retractions, which
made it appear like eight towers standing upon one another, and growing
less and less to the top: and in the eighth tower was a Temple with a bed
and a golden table, kept by a woman, after the manner of the _Egyptians_ in
the Temple of _Jupiter Ammon_ at _Thebes_; and above the Temple was a place
for observing the Stars: they went up to the top of it by steps on the
outside, and the bottom was compassed with a court, and the court with a
building two furlongs in length on every side.

The _Babylonians_ were extreamly addicted to Sorcery, Inchantments,
Astrology and Divinations, _Isa._ xlvii. 9, 12, 13. _Dan._ ii. 2, & v. 11.
and to the worship of Idols, _Jer._ l. 2, 40. and to feasting, wine and
women. _Nihil urbis ejus corruptius moribus, nec ad irritandas
illiciendasque immodicas voluptates instructius. Liberos conjugesque cum
hospitibus stupro coire, modo pretium flagitii detur, parentes maritique
patiuntur. Convivales ludi tota Perside regibus purpuratisque cordi sunt:
Babylonii maxime in vinum & qu√¶ ebrietatem sequuntur effusi sunt. F√¶minarum
convivia ineuntium in principio modestus est habitus; dein summa qu√¶que
amicula exuunt, paulatimque pudorem profanant: ad ultimum, honos auribus
sit, ima corporum velamenta projiciunt. Nec meretricum hoc dedecus est, sed
matronarum virginumque, apud quas comitas habetur vulgati corporis
vilitas._ _Q. Curtius_, lib. v. cap. 1. And this lewdness of their women,
coloured over with the name of civility, was encouraged even by their
religion: for it was the custom for their women once in their life to sit
in the Temple of _Venus_ for the use of strangers; which Temple they called
_Succoth Benoth_, the Temple of Women: and when any woman was once sat
there, she was not to depart 'till some stranger threw money into her
bosom, took her away and lay with her; and the money being for sacred uses,
she was obliged to accept of it how little soever, and follow the stranger.

The _Persians_ being conquered by the _Medes_ about the middle of the Reign
of _Zedekiah_, continued in subjection under them 'till the end of the
Reign of _Darius_ the _Mede_: and _Cyrus_, who was of the Royal Family of
the _Persians_, might be _Satrapa_ of _Persia_, and command a body of their
forces under _Darius_; but was not yet an absolute and independant King:
but after the taking of _Babylon_, when he had a victorious army at his
devotion, and _Darius_ was returned from _Babylon_ into _Media_, he
revolted from _Darius_, in conjunction with the _Persians_ under him; [431]
they being incited thereunto by _Harpagus_ a _Mede_, whom _Xenophon_ calls
_Artagerses_ and _Atabazus_, and who had assisted _Cyrus_ in conquering
_Cr≈ìsus_ and _Asia minor_, and had been injured by _Darius_. _Harpagus_ was
sent by _Darius_ with an army against _Cyrus_, and in the midst of a battel
revolted with part of the army to _Cyrus_: _Darius_ got up a fresh army,
and the next year the two armies fought again: this last battel was fought
at _Pasargad√¶_ in _Persia_, according to [432] _Strabo_; and there _Darius_
was beaten and taken Prisoner by _Cyrus_, and the Monarchy was by this
victory translated to the _Persians_. The last King of the _Medes_ is by
_Xenophon_ called _Cyaxares_, and by _Herodotus_, _Astyages_ the father of
_Mandane_: but these Kings were dead before, and _Daniel_ lets us know that
_Darius_ was the true name of the last King, and _Herodotus_, [433] that
the last King was conquered by _Cyrus_ in the manner above described; and
the _Darics_ coined by the last King testify that his name was _Darius_.

This victory over _Darius_ was about two years after the taking of
_Babylon_: for the Reign or _Nabonnedus_ the last King of the _Chaldees_,
whom _Josephus_ calls _Naboandel_ and _Belshazzar_, ended in the year of
_Nabonassar_ 210, nine years before the death of _Cyrus_, according to the
Canon: but after the translation of the Kingdom of the _Medes_ to the
_Persians_, _Cyrus_ Reigned only seven years, according to [434]
_Xenophon_; and spending the seven winter months yearly at _Babylon_, the
three spring months yearly at _Susa_, and the two Summer months at
_Ecbatane_, he came the seventh time into _Persia_, and died there in the
spring, and was buried at _Pasargadae_. By the Canon and the common consent
of all Chronologers, he died in the year of _Nabonassar_ 219, and therefore
conquered _Darius_ in the year of _Nabonassar_ 212, seventy and two years
after the destruction of _Nineveh_, and beat him the first time in the year
of _Nabonassar_ 211, and revolted from him, and became King of the
_Persians_, either the same year, or in the end of the year before. At his
death he was seventy years old according to _Herodotus_, and therefore he
was born in the year of _Nabonassar_ 149, his mother _Mandane_ being the
sister of _Cyaxeres_, at that time a young man, and also the sister of
_Amyite_ the wife of _Nebuchadnezzar_, and his father _Cambyses_ being of
the old Royal Family of the _Persians_.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. V.

_A Description of the _TEMPLE_ of _Solomon_._

[435] The Temple of _Solomon_ being destroyed by the _Babylonians_, it may
not be amiss here to give a description of that edifice.

This [436] Temple looked eastward, and stood in a square area, called the
_Separate Place_: and [437] before it stood the _Altar_, in the center of
another square area, called the _Inner Court_, or _Court of the Priests_:
and these two square areas, being parted only by a marble rail, made an
area 200 cubits long from west to east, and 100 cubits broad: this area was
compassed on the west with a wall, and [438] on the other three sides with
a pavement fifty cubits broad, upon which stood the buildings for the
Priests, with cloysters under them: and the pavement was faced on the
inside with a marble rail before the cloysters: the whole made an area 250
cubits long from west to east, and 200 broad, and was compassed with an
outward Court, called also the _Great Court_, or _Court of the People_,
[439] which was an hundred cubits on every side; for there were but two
Courts built by _Solomon_: and the outward Court was about four cubits
lower than the inward, and was compassed on the west with a wall, and on
the other three sides [440] with a pavement fifty cubits broad, upon which
stood the buildings for the People. All this was the [441] _Sanctuary_, and
made a square area 500 cubits long, and 500 broad, and was compassed with a
walk, called the _Mountain of the House_: and this walk being 50 cubits
broad, was compassed with a wall six cubits broad, and six high, and six
hundred long on every side: and the cubit was about 21¬Ω, or almost 22
inches of the _English_ foot, being the sacred cubit of the _Jews_, which
was an hand-breadth, or the sixth part of its length bigger than the common
cubit.

The _Altar_ stood in the center of the whole; and in the buildings of [442]
both Courts over against the middle of the _Altar_, eastward, southward,
and northward, were gates [443] 25 cubits broad between the buildings, and
40 long; with porches of ten cubits more, looking towards the _Altar
Court_, which made the whole length of the gates fifty cubits cross the
pavements. Every gate had two doors, one at either [444] end, ten cubits
wide, and twenty high, with posts and thresholds six cubits broad: within
the gates was an area 28 cubits long between the thresholds, and 13 cubits
wide: and on either side of this area were three posts, each six cubits
square, and twenty high, with arches five cubits wide between them: all
which posts and arches filled the 28 cubits in length between the
thresholds; and their breadth being added to the thirteen cubits, made the
whole breadth of the gates 25 cubits. These posts were hollow, and had
rooms in them with narrow windows for the porters, and a step before them a
cubit broad: and the walls of the porches being six cubits thick, were also
hollow for several uses. [445] At the east gate of the _Peoples Court_,
called the _King's gate_, [446] were six porters, at the south gate were
four, and at the north gate were four: the people [447] went in and out at
the south and north gates: the [448] east gate was opened only for the
King, and in this gate he ate the Sacrifices. There were also four gates or
doors in the western wall of the _Mountain of the House_: of these [449]
the most northern, called _Shallecheth_, or the _gate of the causey_, led
to the King's palace, the valley between being filled up with a causey: the
next gate, called _Parbar_, led to the suburbs _Millo_: the third and
fourth gates, called _Asuppim_, led the one to _Millo_, the other to the
city of _Jerusalem_, there being steps down into the valley and up again
into the city. At the gate _Shallecheth_ were four porters; at the other
three gates were six porters, two at each gate: the house of the porters
who had the charge of the north gate of the _People's Court_, had also the
charge of the gates _Shallecheth_ and _Parbar_: and the house of the
porters who had the charge of the south gate of the _People s Court_, had
also the charge of the other two gates called _Asuppim_.

They came through the four western gates into the _Mountain of the House_,
and [450] went up from the _Mountain of the House_, to the gates of the
_People's Court_ by seven steps, and from the _People's Court_ to the gates
of the _Priest's Court_ by eight steps: [451] and the arches in the sides
of the gates of both courts led into cloysters [452] under a double
building, supported by three rows of marble pillars, which butted directly
upon the middles of the square posts, ran along from thence upon the
pavements towards the corners of the Courts: the axes of the pillars in the
middle row being eleven cubits distant from the axes of the pillars in the
other two rows on either hand; and the building joining to the sides of the
gates: the pillars were three cubits in diameter below, and their bases
four cubits and an half square. The gates and buildings of both Courts were
alike, and [453] faced their Courts: the cloysters of all the buildings,
and the porches of all the gates looking towards the _Altar_. The row of
pillars on the backsides of the cloysters adhered to marble walls, which
bounded the cloysters and supported the buildings: [454] these buildings
were three stories high above the cloysters, and [455] were supported in
each of those stories by a row of cedar beams, or pillars of cedar,
standing above the middle row of the marble pillars: the buildings on
either side of every gate of the _People's Court_, being 187¬Ω cubits long,
were distinguished into five chambers on a floor, running in length from
the gates to the corners or the Courts: there [456] being in all thirty
chambers in a story, where the People ate the Sacrifices, or thirty
exhedras, each of which contained three chambers, a lower, a middle, and an
upper: every exhedra was 37¬Ω cubits long, being supported by four pillars
in each row, [457] whose bases were 4¬Ω cubits square, and the distances
between their bases 6¬Ω cubits, and the distances between the axes of the
pillars eleven cubits: and where two [458] exhedras joyned, there the bases
of their pillars joyned; the axes of those two pillars being only 4¬Ω cubits
distant from one another: and perhaps for strengthning the building, the
space between the axes of these two pillars in the front was filled up with
a marble column 4¬Ω cubits square, the two pillars standing half out on
either side of the square column. At the ends of these buildings [459] in
the four corners of the _Peoples Court_, were little Courts fifty cubits
square on the outside of their walls, and forty on the inside thereof, for
stair-cases to the buildings, and kitchins to bake and boil the Sacrifices
for the People, the kitchin being thirty cubits broad, and the stair-case
ten. The buildings on either side of the gates of the _Priests Court_ were
also 37¬Ω cubits long, and contained each of them one great chamber in a
story, subdivided into smaller rooms, for the Great Officers of the Temple,
and Princes of the Priests: and in the south-east and north-east corners of
this court, at the ends of the buildings, were kitchins and stair-cases for
the Great Officers; and perhaps rooms for laying up wood for the _Altar_.

In the eastern gate of the _Peoples Court_, sat a Court of Judicature,
composed of 23 Elders. The eastern gate of the _Priests Court_, with the
buildings on either side, was for the High-Priest, and his deputy the
_Sagan_, and for the _Sanhedrim_ or Supreme Court of Judicature, composed
of seventy Elders. [460] The building or exhedra on the eastern side of the
southern gate, was for the Priests who had the oversight of the charge of
the _Sanctuary_ with its treasuries: and these were, first, two
_Catholikim_, who were High-Treasurers and Secretaries to the High-Priest,
and examined, stated, and prepared all acts and accounts to be signed and
sealed by him; then seven _Amarcholim_, who kept the keys of the seven
locks of every gate of the _Sanctuary_, and those also of the treasuries,
and had the oversight, direction, and appointment of all things in the
_Sanctuary_; then three or more _Gisbarim_, or Under-Treasurers, or
Receivers, who kept the Holy Vessels, and the Publick Money, and received
or disposed of such sums as were brought in for the service of the Temple,
and accounted for the same. All these, with the High-Priest, composed the
Supreme Council for managing the affairs of the Temple.

The Sacrifices [461] were killed on the northern side of the _Altar_, and
flea'd, cut in pieces and salted in the northern gate of the Temple; and
therefore the building or exhedra on the eastern side of this gate, was for
the Priests who had the oversight of the charge of the _Altar_, and Daily
Service: and these Officers were, He that received money of the People for
purchasing things for the Sacrifices, and gave out tickets for the same; He
that upon sight of the tickets delivered the wine, flower and oyl
purchased; He that was over the lots, whereby every Priest attending on the
_Altar_ had his duty assigned; He that upon sight of the tickets delivered
out the doves and pigeons purchased; He that administred physic to the
Priests attending; He that was over the waters; He that was over the times,
and did the duty of a cryer, calling the Priests or Levites to attend in
their ministeries; He that opened the gates in the morning to begin the
service, and shut them in the evening when the service was done, and for
that end received the keys of the _Amarcholim_, and returned them when he
had done his duty; He that visited the night-watches; He that by a Cymbal
called the Levites to their stations for singing; He that appointed the
Hymns and set the Tune; and He that took care of the Shew-Bread: there were
also Officers who took care of the Perfume, the Veil, and the Wardrobe of
the Priests.

The exhedra on the western side of the south gate, and that on the western
side of the north gate, were for the Princes of the four and twenty courses
of the Priests, one exhedra for twelve of the Princes, [462] and the other
exhedra for the other twelve: and upon the pavement on either side of the
_Separate Place_ [463] were other buildings without cloysters, for the four
and twenty courses of the Priests to eat the Sacrifices, and lay up their
garments and the most holy things: each pavement being 100 cubits long, and
50 broad, had buildings on either side of it twenty cubits broad, with a
walk or alley ten cubits broad between them: the building which bordered
upon the _Separate Place_ was an hundred cubits long, and that next the
_Peoples Court_ but fifty, the other fifty cubits westward [464] being for
a stair-case and kitchin: these buildings [465] were three stories high,
and the middle story was narrower in the front than the lower story, and
the upper story still narrower, to make room for galleries; for they had
galleries before them, and under the galleries were closets for laying up
the holy things, and the garments of the Priests, and these galleries were
towards the walk or alley, which ran between the buildings.

They went up from the _Priests Court_ to the Porch of the Temple by ten
steps: and the [466] House of the Temple was twenty cubits broad, and sixty
long within; or thirty broad, and seventy long, including the walls; or
seventy cubits broad, and 90 long, including a building of
treasure-chambers which was twenty cubits broad on three sides of the
House; and if the Porch be also included, the Temple was [467] an hundred
cubits long. The treasure-chambers were built of cedar, between the wall of
the Temple, and another wall without: they were [468] built in two rows
three stories high, and opened door against door into a walk or gallery
which ran along between them, and was five cubits broad in every story; So
that the breadth of the chambers on either side of the gallery, including
the breadth of the wall to which they adjoined, was ten cubits; and the
whole breadth of the gallery and chambers, and both walls, was five and
twenty cubits: the chambers [469] were five cubits broad in the lower
story, six broad in the middle story, and seven broad in the upper story;
for the wall of the Temple was built with retractions of a cubit, to rest
the timber upon. _Ezekiel_ represents the chambers a cubit narrower, and
the walls a cubit thicker than they were in _Solomon_'s Temple: there were
[470] thirty chambers in a story, in all ninety chambers, and they were
five cubits high in every story. The [471] Porch of the Temple was 120
cubits high, and its length from south to north equalled the breadth of the
House: the House was three stories high, which made the height of the _Holy
Place_ three times thirty cubits, and that of the _Most Holy_ three times
twenty: the upper rooms were treasure-chambers; they [472] went up to the
middle chamber by winding stairs in the southern shoulder of the House, and
from the middle into the upper.

Some time after this Temple was built, the _Jews_ [473] added a _New
Court_, on the eastern side of the _Priests Court_, before the _King's
gate_, and therein built [474] a covert for the Sabbath: this Court was not
measured by _Ezekiel_, but the dimensions thereof may be gathered from
those of the _Womens Court_, in the second Temple, built after the example
thereof: for when _Nebuchadnezzar_ had destroyed the first Temple,
_Zerubbabel_, by the commissions of _Cyrus_ and _Darius_, built another
upon the same area, excepting the _Outward Court_, which was left open to
the _Gentiles_: and this Temple [475] was sixty cubits long, and sixty
broad, being only two stories in height, and having only one row of
treasure-chambers about it: and on either side of the _Priests Court_ were
double buildings for the Priests, built upon three rows of marble pillars
in the lower story, with a row of cedar beams or pillars in the stories
above: and the cloyster in the lower story looked towards the _Priests
Court_: and the _Separate Place_, and _Priests Court_, with their buildings
on the north and south sides, and the _Womens Court_, at the east end, took
up an area three hundred cubits long, and two hundred broad, the _Altar_
standing in the center of the whole. The _Womens Court_ was so named,
because the women came into it as well as the men: there were galleries for
the women, and the men worshipped upon the ground below: and in this state
the second Temple continued all the Reign of the _Persians_; but afterwards
suffered some alterations, especially in the days of _Herod_.

This description of the Temple being taken principally from _Ezekiel_'s
Vision thereof; and the ancient _Hebrew_ copy followed by the Seventy,
differing in some readings from the copy followed by the editors of the
present _Hebrew_, I will here subjoin that part of the Vision which relates
to the _Outward Court_, as I have deduced it from the present _Hebrew_, and
the version of the Seventy compared together.

Ezekiel chap. xl. ver. 5, &c.

[476] _And behold a wall on the outside of the House round about_, at the
distance of fifty cubits from it, aabb: _and in the man's hand a measuring
reed six cubits long by the cubit, and an hand-breadth: so he measured the
breadth of the building, _or wall_, one reed, and the height one reed.
_[477]_ Then came he unto the gate _of the House_, which looketh towards
the east, and went up the seven steps thereof, _AB_, and measured the
threshold of the gate, _CD_, which was one reed broad, and the _Porters_
little chamber, _EFG_, one reed long, and one reed broad; and the arched
passage between the little chambers, _FH_, five cubits: and the second
little chamber, _HIK_, a reed broad and a reed long; and the arched
passage, _IL_, five cubits: and the third little chamber _LMN_, a reed long
and a reed broad: and the threshold of the gate next the porch of the gate
within, _OP_, one reed: and he measured the porch of the gate, _QR_, eight
cubits; and the posts thereof _ST_, _st_, two cubits; and the porch of the
gate, _QR_, was inward, _or toward the inward court_; and the little
chambers, _EF_, _HI_, _LM_, _ef_, _hi_, _lm_, were _outward, or_ to the
east; three on this side, and three on that side _of the gate_. There was
one measure of the three, and one measure of the posts on this side, and on
that side; and he measured the breadth of the door of the gate, _Cc_, or
_Dd_, ten cubits; and the breadth of the gate _within between the little
chambers, Ee or Ff_, thirteen cubits; and the limit, or margin, or step
before the little chambers, _EM_, one cubit on this side, and the step,
_em_, one cubit on the other side; and the little chambers, _EFG_, _HIK_,
_LMN_, _efg_, _hik_, _lmn_, were six cubits _broad_ on this side, and six
cubits _broad_ on that side: and he measured _the whole breadth of_ the
gate, from the _further_ wall of one little chamber to the _further_ wall
of another little chamber: the breadth, _Gg, or Kk, or Nn_, was twenty and
five cubits _through_; door, _FH_, against door, _fh_: and he measured the
posts, _EF_, _HI_, and _LM_, _ef_, _hi_, and _lm_, twenty cubits _high_;
and at the posts there were gates, _or arched passages, FH, IL, fh, il_,
round about; and from the _eastern_ face of the gate at the entrance, _Cc_,
to the _western_ face of the porch of the gate within, _Tt_, were fifty
cubits: and there were narrow windows to the little chambers, and to the
porch within the gate, round about, and likewise to the posts; even windows
were round about within: and upon each post were palm trees._

_Then he brought me into the Outward Court, and lo there were chambers, and
a pavement with pillars upon it in the court round about, _[478]_ thirty
chambers _in length_ upon the pavement, supported by the pillars, _ten
chambers on every side, except the western_: and the pavement butted upon
the shoulders or sides of the gates below, _every gate having five chambers
or exhedr√¶ on either side_. And he measured the breadth _of the Outward
Court_, from the fore-front of the lower-gate, to the fore-front of the
inward court, an hundred cubits eastward._

_Then he brought me northward, and there was a gate that looked towards the
north; he measured the length thereof, and the breadth thereof, and the
little chambers thereof, three on this side, and three on that side, and
the posts thereof, and the porch thereof, and it was according to the
measures of the first gate; its length was fifty cubits, and its breadth
was five and twenty: and the windows thereof, and the porch and the
palm-trees thereof _were_ according to the measures of the gate which
looked to the east, and they went up to it by seven steps: and its porch
was before them, _that is inward_. And there was a gate of the inward court
over against _this_ gate of the north, as _in the gates_ to the eastward:
and he measured from gate to gate an hundred cubits._

       *       *       *       *       *

_A Description of THE TEMPLE OF SOLOMON_

[Illustration: _Plate_ I. _p. 346._]

ABCD. _The Separate Place in which stood the Temple._

ABEF. _The Court of y^{e} Priests._

G. _The Altar._

DHLKICEFD. _A Pavement compassing three sides of the foremention'd Courts,
and upon which stood the Buildings for the Priests, with Cloysters under
them._

MNOP. _The Court of the People._

MQTSRN. _A Pavement compassing three sides of the Peoples Court, upon which
stood the Buildings for the People, with Cloysters under them._

UXYZ. _The Mountain of the House._

aabb._ A Wall enclosing the whole._

c. _The Gate Shallecheth._

d. _The Gate Parbar._

ef. _The two Gates Assupim._

g. _The East Gate of the Peoples Court, call'd the Kings Gate._

hh. _The North and South Gates of the same Court._

iiii. _The chambers over the Cloysters of the Peoples Court where the
People ate the Sacrifices, 30 Chambers in each Story._

kkkk. _Four little Courts serving for Stair Cases and Kitchins for the
People._

l. _The Eastern Gate of the Priests Court, over which sate the Sanhedrin._

m. _The Southern Gate of the Priests Court._

n. _The Northern Gate of the same Court, where the Sacrifices were flea'd
&c._

opqrst. _The Buildings over the Cloysters for the Priests, viz six large
Chambers (subdivided) in each Story, whereof _o_ and _p_ were for the High
Priest and Sagan, _q_ for the Overseers of the Sanctuary and Treasury, _r_
for the Overseers of the Altar and Sacrifice and _s_ and _t_ for the
Princes of the twenty four Courses of Priests._

uu. _Two Courts in which were Stair Cases and Kitchins for the Priests._

x. _The House or Temple which (together with the Treasure Chambers _y_, and
Buildings _zz_ on each side of the Separate Place) is more particularly
describ'd on the second Plate._

       *       *       *       *       *

_A Description of the Inner Court & Buildings for the Priests in Solomons
Temple._

[Illustration: _Plate_ II. _p. 346._]

ABCD. _The Separate Place._

ABEF. _The Inner Court, or Court of the Priests, parted from the Separate
Place, and and Pavement on the other three sides, by a marble rail._

G. _The Altar._

HHH. _The East, South, & North Gates of the Priests Court._

III. _&c. The Cloysters supporting the Buildings for the Priests._

KK. _Two Courts in which were Stair Cases and Kitchins for the Priests._

L. _Ten Steps to the Porch of the Temple._

M. _The Porch of the Temple._

N. _The Holy Place._

O. _The most Holy Place._

PPPP. _Thirty Treasure-Chambers, in two rows, opening into a gallery, door
against door, and compassing three sides of the Holy & most Holy Places._

Q. _The Stairs leading to the Middle Chamber._

RRRR. _&c. The buildings for the four and twenty Courses of Priests, upon
the Pavement on either side of the Separate Place, three Stories high
without Cloysters, but the upper Stories narrower than the lower, to make
room for Galleries before them. There were 24 Chambers in each Story and
they opend into a walk or alley, _SS._ between the Buildings._

TT. _Two Courts in which were Kitchins for the Priests of the twenty four
Courses._

       *       *       *       *       *

_A Particular Description of one of the Gates of the Peoples Court, with
part of the Cloyster adjoyning._

[Illustration: _Plate_ III. _p. 346._]

uw. _The inner margin of the Pavement compassing three sides of the Peoples
Court._

xxx. _&c. The Pillars of the Cloyster supporting the Buildings for the
People._

yyyy. _Double Pillars where two Exhedr√¶ joyned, and whose interstices in
the front _zz_ were filled up with a square Column of Marble._

Note _The preceding letters of this Plate refer to the description in pag.
344 345._

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAP. VI.

_Of the Empire of the _Persians_._

_Cyrus_ having translated the Monarchy to the _Persians_, and Reigned seven
years, was succeeded by his son _Cambyses_, who Reigned seven years and
five months, and in the three last years of his Reign subdued _Egypt_: he
was succeeded by _Mardus_, or _Smerdis_ the _Magus_, who feigned himself to
be _Smerdis_ the brother of _Cambyses_.

_Smerdis_ Reigned seven months, and in the eighth month being discovered,
was slain, with a great number of the _Magi_; so the _Persians_ called
their Priests, and in memory of this kept an anniversary day, which they
called, _The slaughter of the _Magi__. Then Reigned _Maraphus_ and
_Artaphernes_ a few days, and after them _Darius_ the son of _Hystaspes_,
the son of _Arsamenes_, of the family of _Ach√¶menes_, a _Persian_, being
chosen King by the neighing of his horse: before he Reigned his [479] name
was _Ochus_. He seems on this occasion to have reformed the constitution of
the _Magi_, making his father _Hystaspes_ their Master, or _Archimagus_;
for _Porphyrius_ tells us, [480] that _the _Magi_ were a sort of men so
venerable amongst the _Persians_, that _Darius_ the son of _Hystaspes_
wrote on the monument of his father_, amongst other things, _that he had
been the Master of the _Magi__. In this reformation of the _Magi_,
_Hystaspes_ was assisted by _Zoroastres_: so _Agathias_; _The _Persians_ at
this day say simply that _Zoroastres_ lived under _Hystaspes__: and
_Apuleius_; _Pythagoram, aiunt, inter captivos Cambys√¶ Regis _[ex √Ügypto
Babylonem abductos]_ doctores habuisse Persarum Magos, & pr√¶cipue
Zoroastrem, omnis divini arcani Antistitem_. By _Zoroastres_'s conversing
at _Babylon_ he seems to have borrowed his skill from the _Chald√¶ans_; for
he was skilled in Astronomy, and used their year: so _Q. Curtius_; [481]
_Magi proximi patrium carmen canebant: Magos trecenti & sexaginta quinque
juvenes sequebantur, puniceis amiculis velati, diebus totius anni pares
numero_: and _Ammianus_; _Scienti√¶ multa ex Chald√¶orum arcanis Bactrianus
addidit Zoroastres_. From his conversing in several places he is reckoned a
_Chald√¶an_, an _Assyrian_, a _Mede_, a _Persian_, a _Bactrian_. _Suidas_
calls him [482] a _Perso-Mede_, and saith that he was _the most skilful of
Astronomers, and first author of the name of the _Magi_ received among
them_. This skill in Astronomy he had doubtless from the _Chald√¶ans_, but
_Hystaspes_ travelled into _India_, to be instructed by the
_Gymnosophists_: and these two conjoyning their skill and authority,
instituted a new set of Priests or _Magi_, and instructed them in such
ceremonies and mysteries of Religion and Philosophy as they thought fit to
establish for the Religion and Philosophy of that Empire; and these
instructed others, 'till from a small number they grew to a great
multitude: for _Suidas_ tells us, that _Zoroastres gave a beginning to the
name of the _Magi__: and _Elmacinus_; that _he reformed the religion of the
_Persians_, which before was divided into many sects_: and _Agathias_; that
_he introduced the religion of the _Magi_ among the _Persians_, changing
their ancient sacred rites, and bringing in several opinions_: and
_Ammianus_ [483] tells us, _Magiam esse divinorum incorruptissimum cultum,
cujus scienti√¶ seculis priscis multa ex Chald√¶orum arcanis Bactrianus
addidit Zoroastres: deinde Hystaspes Rex prudentissimus Darii pater; qui
quum superioris Indi√¶ secreta fidentius penetraret, ad nemorosam quamdam
venerat solitudinem, cujus tranquillis silentiis pr√¶celsa Brachmanorum
ingenia potiuntur; eorumque monitu rationes mundani motus & siderum,
purosque sacrorum ritus quantum colligere potuit eruditus, ex his qu√¶
didicit, aliqua sensibus Magorum infudit; qu√¶ illi cum disciplinis
pr√¶sentiendi futura, per suam quisque progeniem, posteris √¶tatibus tradunt.
Ex eo per s√¶cula multa ad pr√¶sens, una eademque prosapia multitudo creata,
Deorum cultibus dedicatur. Feruntque, si justum est credi, etiam ignem
c≈ìlitus lapsum apud se sempiternis foculis custodiri, cujus portionem
exiguam ut faustam pr√¶isse quondam Asiaticis Regibus dicunt: Hujus originis
apud veteres numerus erat exilis, ejusque mysteriis Persic√¶ potestates in
faciendis rebus divinis solemniter utebantur. Eratque piaculum aras adire,
vel hostiam contrectare, antequam Magus conceptis precationibus libamenta
diffunderet pr√¶cursoria. Verum aucti paullatim, in amplitudinem gentis
solid√¶ concesserunt & nomen: villasque inhabitantes nulla murorum
firmitudine communitas & legibus suis uti permissi, religionis respectu
sunt honorati_. So this Empire was at first composed of many nations, each
of which had hitherto its own religion: but now _Hystaspes_ and
_Zoroastres_ collected what they conceived to be best, established it by
law, and taught it to others, and those to others, 'till their disciples
became numerous enough for the Priesthood of the whole Empire; and instead
of those various old religions, they set up their own institutions in the
whole Empire, much after the manner that _Numa_ contrived and instituted
the religion of the _Romans_: and this religion of the _Persian_ Empire was
composed partly of the institutions of the _Chald√¶ans_, in which
_Zoroastres_ was well skilled; and partly of the institutions of the
ancient _Brachmans_, who are supposed to derive even their name from the
_Abrahamans_, or sons of _Abraham_, born of his second wife _Keturah_,
instructed by their father in the worship of ONE GOD without images, and
sent into the east, where _Hystaspes_ was instructed by their successors.
About the same time with _Hystapes_ and _Zoroastres_, lived also _Ostanes_,
another eminent _Magus_: _Pliny_ places him under _Darius Hystaspis_, and
_Suidas_ makes him the follower of _Zoroastres_: he came into _Greece_ with
_Xerxes_, and seems to be the _Otanes_ of _Herodotus_, who discovered
_Smerdis_, and formed the conspiracy against him, and for that service was
honoured by the conspirators, and exempt from subjection to _Darius_.

In the sacred commentary of the _Persian_ rites these words are ascribed to
_Zoroastres_; [484] ‚ÄõŒü ŒòŒµŒøœÇ ŒµœÉœÑŒπ Œ∫ŒµœÜŒ±ŒªŒ∑ŒΩ ŒµœáœâŒΩ ‚ÄõŒπŒµœÅŒ±Œ∫ŒøœÇ. ‚ÄõŒøœÖœÑŒøœÇ ŒµœÉœÑŒπŒΩ ‚ÄõŒø
œÄœÅœâœÑŒøœÇ, Œ±œÜŒ∏Œ±œÅœÑŒøœÇ, Œ±ŒπŒ¥ŒπŒøœÇ, Œ±Œ≥ŒµŒΩŒ∑œÑŒøœÇ, Œ±ŒºŒµœÅŒ∑œÇ, Œ±ŒΩŒøŒºŒøŒπŒøœÑŒ±œÑŒøœÇ, ‚ÄõŒ∑ŒΩŒπŒøœáŒøœÇ œÄŒ±ŒΩœÑŒøœÇ
Œ∫Œ±ŒªŒøœÖ, Œ±Œ¥œâœÅŒøŒ¥ŒøŒ∫Œ∑œÑŒøœÇ, Œ±Œ≥Œ±Œ∏œâŒΩ Œ±Œ≥Œ±Œ∏œâœÑŒ±œÑŒøœÇ, œÜœÅŒøŒΩŒπŒºœâŒΩ œÜœÅŒøŒΩŒπŒºœâœÑŒ±œÑŒøœÇŒá ŒµœÉœÑŒπ Œ¥Œµ Œ∫Œ±Œπ
œÄŒ±œÑŒ∑œÅ ŒµœÖŒΩŒøŒºŒπŒ±œÇ Œ∫Œ±Œπ Œ¥ŒπŒ∫Œ±ŒπŒøœÉœÖŒΩŒ∑œÇ, Œ±œÖœÑŒøŒ¥ŒπŒ¥Œ±Œ∫œÑŒøœÇ, œÜœÖœÉŒπŒ∫ŒøœÇ, Œ∫Œ±Œπ œÑŒµŒªŒµŒπŒøœÇ, Œ∫Œ±Œπ
œÉŒøœÜŒøœÇ, Œ∫Œ±Œπ ‚ÄõŒπŒµœÅŒøœÖ œÜœÖœÉŒπŒ∫ŒøœÖ ŒºŒøŒΩŒøœÇ ‚ÄõŒµœÖœÅŒµœÑŒ∑œÇ. _Deus est accipitris capite: hic
est primus, incorruptibilis, √¶ternus, ingenitus, sine partibus, omnibus
aliis dissimillimus, moderator omnis boni, donis non capiendus, bonorum
optimus, prudentium prudentissimus, legum √¶quitatis ac justiti√¶ parens,
ipse sui doctor, physicus & perfectus & sapiens & sacri physici unicus
inventor_: and the same was taught by _Ostanes_, in his book called
_Octateuchus_. This was the Antient God of the _Persian Magi_, and they
worshipped him by keeping a perpetual fire for Sacrifices upon an Altar in
the center of a round area, compassed with a ditch, without any Temple in
the place, and without paying any worship to the dead, or any images. But
in a short time they declined from the worship of this Eternal, Invisible
God, to worship the Sun, and the Fire, and dead men, and images, as the
_Egyptians_, _Ph≈ìnicians_, and _Chald√¶ans_ had done before: and from these
superstitions, and the pretending to prognostications, the words _Magi_ and
_Magia_, which signify the Priests and Religion of the _Persians_, came to
be taken in an ill sense.

_Darius_, or _Darab_, began his Reign in spring, in the sixteenth year of
the Empire of the _Persians_, _Anno Nabonass._ 227, and Reigned 36 years,
by the unanimous consent of all Chronologers. In the second year of his
Reign the _Jews_ began to build the Temple, by the prophesying of _Haggai_
and _Zechariah_, and finished it in the sixth. He fought the _Greeks_ at
_Marathon_ in _October_, _Anno Nabonass._ 258, ten years before the battel
at _Salamis_, and died in the fifth year following, in the end of winter,
or beginning of spring, _Anno Nabonass._ 263. The years of _Cambyses_ and
_Darius_ are determined by three Eclipses of the Moon recorded by
_Ptolemy_, so that they cannot be disputed: and by those Eclipses, and the
Prophesies of _Haggai_ and _Zechariah_ compared together, it is manifest
that the years of _Darius_ began after the 24th day of the eleventh
_Jewish_ month, and before the 24th day of _April_, and by consequence in
_March_ or _April_.

_Xerxes_, _Achschirosch_, _Achsweros_, or _Oxyares_, succeeded his father
_Darius_, and spent the first five years of his Reign, and something more,
in preparations for his Expedition against the _Greeks_: and this
Expedition was in the time of the Olympic Games, in the beginning of the
first year of the 75th Olympiad, _Callias_ being _Archon_ at _Athens_; as
all Chronologers agree. The great number of people which he drew out of
_Susa_ to invade _Greece_, made _√Üschylus_ the Poet say [485]:

  Œ§Œø Œ¥' Œ±œÉœÑœÖ Œ£ŒøœÖœÉœâŒΩ ŒµŒæŒµŒ∫ŒµŒπŒΩœâœÉŒµŒΩ œÄŒµœÉŒøŒΩ.
  _It emptied the falling city of _Susa_._

The passage of his army over the _Hellespont_ began in the end of the
fourth year of the 74th Olympiad, that is in _June_, _Anno Nabonass._ 268,
and took up a month; and in autumn, after three months more, on the 16th
day of the month _Munychion_, at the full moon, was the battel at
_Salamis_; and a little after that an Eclipse of the Moon, which by the
calculation fell on _Octob._ 2. His first year therefore began in spring,
_Anno Nabonass._ 263, as above: he Reigned almost twenty one years by the
consent of all writers, and was murdered by _Artabanus_, captain of his
guards; towards the end of winter, _Anno Nabonass._ 284.

_Artabanus_ Reigned seven months, and upon suspicion of treason against
_Xerxes_, was slain by _Artaxerxes Longimanus_, the son of _Xerxes_.

_Artaxerxes_ began his Reign in the autumnal half year, between the 4th and
9th _Jewish_ months, _Nehem._ i. 1. & ii. 1, & v. 14. and _Ezra_ vii. 7, 8,
9. and his 20th year fell in with the 4th year of the 83d Olympiad, as
_Africanus_ [486] informs us, and therefore his first year began within a
month or two or the autumnal Equinox, _Anno Nabonass._ 284. _Thucydides_
relates that the news of his death came to _Athens_ in winter, in the
seventh year of the _Peloponnesian_ war, that is _An._ 4. Olymp. 88. and by
the Canon he Reigned forty one years, including the Reign of his
predecessor _Artabanus_, and died about the middle of winter, _Anno
Nabonass._ 325 _ineunte_: the _Persians_ now call him _Ardschir_ and
_Bahaman_, the Oriental Christians _Artahascht_.

Then Reigned _Xerxes_, two months, and _Sogdian_ seven months, and _Darius
Nothus_, the bastard son of _Artaxerxes_, nineteen years wanting four or
five months; and _Darius_ died in summer, a little after the end of the
_Peloponnesian_ war, and in the same Olympic year, and by consequence in
_May_ or _June_, _Anno Nabonass._ 344. The 13th year of his Reign was
coincident in winter with the 20th of the _Peloponnesian_ war, and the
years of that war are stated by indisputable characters, and agreed on by
all Chronologers: the war began in spring, _Ann._ 1. Olymp. 87, lasted 27
years, and ended _Apr._ 14. _An._ 4. Olymp. 93.

The next King was _Artaxerxes Mnemon_, the son of _Darius_: he Reigned
forty six years, and died _Anno Nabonass._ 390. Then Reigned _Artaxerxes
Ochus_ twenty one years; _Arses_, or _Arogus_, two years, and _Darius
Codomannus_ four years, unto the battel of _Arbela_, whereby the _Persian_
Monarchy was translated to the _Greeks_, _Octob._ 2. _An. Nabonass._ 417;
but _Darius_ was not slain untill a year and some months after.

I have hitherto stated the times of this Monarchy out of the _Greek_ and
_Latin_ writers: for the _Jews_ knew nothing more of the _Babylonian_ and
_Medo-Persian_ Empires than what they have out of the sacred books of the
old Testament; and therefore own no more Kings, nor years of Kings, than
they can find in those books: the Kings they reckon are only
_Nebuchadnezzar_, _Evilmerodach_, _Belshazzar_, _Darius_ the _Mede_,
_Cyrus_, _Ahasuerus_, and _Darius_ the _Persian_; this last _Darius_ they
reckon to be the _Artaxerxes_, in whose Reign _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_ came to
_Jerusalem_, accounting _Artaxerxes_ a common name of the _Persian_ Kings:
_Nebuchadnezzar_, they say, Reigned forty five years, 2 _King._ xxv. 27.
_Belshazzar_ three years, _Dan._ viii. 1. and therefore _Evilmerodach_
twenty three, to make up the seventy years captivity; excluding the first
year of _Nebuchadnezzar_, in which they say the Prophesy of the seventy
years was given. To _Darius_ the _Mede_ they assign one year, or at most
but two, _Dan._ ix. 1. to _Cyrus_ three years incomplete, _Dan._ x. 1. to
_Ahasuerus_ twelve years 'till the casting of _Pur_, _Esth._ iii. 7. one
year more 'till the _Jews_ smote their enemies, _Esth._ ix. 1. and one year
more 'till _Esther_ and _Mordecai_ wrote the second letter for the keeping
of _Purim_, _Esth._ ix. 29. in all fourteen years: and to _Darius_ the
_Persian_ they allot thirty two or rather thirty six years, _Nehem._ xiii.
6. So that the _Persian_ Empire from the building of the Temple in the
Second year of _Darius Hystaspis_, flourished only thirty four years, until
_Alexander_ the great overthrew it: thus the _Jews_ reckon in their greater
Chronicle, _Seder Olam Rabbah_. _Josephus_, out of the sacred and other
books, reckons only these Kings of _Persia_; _Cyrus_, _Cambyses_, _Darius
Hystaspis_, _Xerxes_, _Artaxerxes_, and _Darius_: and taking this _Darius_,
who was _Darius Nothus_, to be one and the same King with the last
_Darius_, whom _Alexander_ the great overcame; by means of this reckoning
he makes _Sanballat_ and _Jaddua_ alive when _Alexander_ the great
overthrew the _Persian_ Empire. Thus all the _Jews_ conclude the _Persian_
Empire with _Artaxerxes Longimanus_, and _Darius Nothus_, allowing no more
Kings of _Persia_, than they found in the books of _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_;
and referring to the Reigns of this _Artaxerxes_, and this _Darius_,
whatever they met with in profane history concerning the following Kings of
the same names: so as to take _Artaxerxes Longimanus_, _Artaxerxes Mnemon_
and _Artaxerxes Ochus_, for one and the same _Artaxerxes_; and _Darius
Nothus_, and _Darius Codomannus_, for one and the same _Darius_; and
_Jaddua_, and _Simeon Justus_, for one and the same High-Priest. Those
_Jews_ who took _Herod_ for the _Messiah_, and were thence called
_Herodians_, seem to have grounded their opinion upon the seventy weeks of
years, which they found between the Reign of _Cyrus_ and that of _Herod_:
but afterwards, in applying the Prophesy to _Theudas_, and _Judas_ of
_Galilee_, and at length to _Barchochab_, they seem to have shortned the
Reign of the Kingdom of _Persia_. These accounts being very imperfect, it
was necessary to have recourse to the records of the _Greeks_ and
_Latines_, and to the Canon recited by _Ptolemy_, for stating the times of
this Empire. Which being done, we have a better ground for understanding
the history of the _Jews_ set down in the books of _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_,
and adjusting it; for this history having suffered by time, wants some
illustration: and first I shall state the history of the _Jews_ under
_Zerubbabel_, in the Reigns of _Cyrus_, _Cambysis_, and _Darius Hystaspis_.

This history is contained partly in the three first chapters of the book of
_Ezra_, and first five verses of the fourth; and partly in the book of
_Nehemiah_, from the 5th verse of the seventh chapter to the 9th verse of
the twelfth: for _Nehemiah_ copied all this out of the Chronicles of the
_Jews_, written before his days; as may appear by reading the place, and
considering that the Priests and Levites who sealed the Covenant on the
24th day of the seventh month, _Nehem._ x. were the very same with those
who returned from captivity in the first year of _Cyrus_, _Nehem._ xii. and
that all those who returned sealed it: this will be perceived by the
following comparison of their names.

The Priests who returned.       The Priests who sealed.

_Nehemiah._ _Ezra_ ii. 2.       _Nehemiah._

_Serajah._                      _Serajah._

*                               _Azariah._

_Jeremiah._                     _Jeremiah._

_Ezra._                         _Ezra._ _Nehem._ 8.

*                               _Pashur._

_Amariah._                      _Amariah._

_Malluch_: or _Melicu_, _Neh._  _Malchijah._
xii. 2, 14.

_Hattush_.                      _Hattush._

_Shechaniah_ or _Shebaniah_,    _Shebaniah._
_Neh._ xii. 3, 14.

*                               _Malluch._

_Rehum_: or _Harim_, _ib._ 3,   _Harim._
15.

_Meremoth._                     _Meremoth._

_Iddo._                         _Obadiah_ or _Obdia_.

*                               _Daniel._

_Ginnetho_: or _Ginnethon_,     _Ginnethon._
_Neh._ xii. 4, 16.

*                               _Baruch._

*                               _Meshullam._

_Abijah._                       _Abijah._

_Miamin._                       _Mijamin._

_Maadiah._                      _Maaziah._

_Bilgah._                       _Bilgai._

_Shemajah._                     _Shemajah._

_Jeshua._                       _Jeshua._

_Binnui._                       _Binnui._

_Kadmiel._                      _Kadmiel._

_Sherebiah._ ◊©◊®◊ë◊ô◊î.             _Shebaniah._ ◊©◊ë◊†◊ô◊î.

_Judah_: or _Hodaviah_,         _Hodijah._
_Ezra_ ii. 40. & iii. 9.
Œ©Œ¥ŒøœÖŒπŒ±; _Septuag._

The _Levites_, _Jeshua_, _Kadmiel_, and _Hodaviah_ or _Judah_, here
mentioned, are reckoned chief fathers among the people who returned with
_Zerubbabel_, _Ezra_ ii. 40. and they assisted as well in laying the
foundation of the Temple, _Ezra_ iii. 9. as in reading the law, and making
and sealing the covenant, _Nehem._ viii. 7. & ix. 5. & x. 9, 10.

Comparing therefore the books of _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_ together; the
history of the _Jews_ under _Cyrus_, _Cambyses_, and _Darius Hystaspis_, is
that they returned from captivity under _Zerubbabel_, in the first year of
_Cyrus_, with the Holy Vessels and a commission to build the Temple; and
came to _Jerusalem_ and _Judah_, every one to his city, and dwelt in their
cities untill the seventh month; and then coming to _Jerusalem_, they first
built the Altar, and on the first day of the seventh month began to offer
the daily burnt-offerings, and read in the book of the Law, and they kept a
solemn fast, and sealed a Covenant; and thenceforward the Rulers of the
people dwelt at _Jerusalem_, and the rest of the people cast lots, to dwell
one in ten at _Jerusalem_, and the rest in the cities of _Judah_: and in
the second year of their coming, in the second month, which was six years
before the death of _Cyrus_, they laid the foundation of the Temple; but
_the adversaries of _Judah_ troubled them in building, and hired
counsellors against them all the days of _Cyrus__, and longer, _even until
the Reign of _Darius_ King of _Persia__: but in the second year of his
Reign, by the prophesying of _Haggai_ and _Zechariah_, they returned to the
work; and by the help of a new decree from _Darius_, finished it on the
third day of the month _Adar_, in the sixth year of his Reign, and kept the
Dedication with joy, and the Passover, and Feast of Unleavened Bread.

Now this _Darius_ was not _Darius Nothus_, but _Darius Hystaspis_, as I
gather by considering that the second year of this _Darius_ was the
seventieth of the indignation against _Jerusalem_, and the cities of
_Judah_, which indignation commenced with the invasion of _Jerusalem_, and
the cities of _Judah_ by _Nebuchadnezzar_, in the ninth year of _Zedekiah_,
_Zech._ i. 12. _Jer._ xxxiv. 1, 7, 22. & xxxix. 1. and that the fourth year
of this _Darius_, was the seventieth from the burning of the Temple in the
eleventh year of _Zedekiah_, _Zech._ vii. 5. & _Jer._ lii. 12. both which
are exactly true of _Darius Hystaspis_: and that in the second year of this
_Darius_ there were men living who had seen the first Temple, _Hagg._ ii.
3. whereas the second year of _Darius Nothus_ was 166 years after the
desolation of the Temple and City. And further, if the finishing of the
Temple be deferred to the sixth year of _Darius Nothus_, _Jeshua_ and
_Zerubbabel_ must have been the one High-Priest, the other Captain of the
people an hundred and eighteen years together, besides their ages before;
which is surely too long: for in the first year of _Cyrus_ the chief
Priests were _Serajah_, _Jeremiah_, _Ezra_, _Amariah_, _Malluch_,
_Shechaniah_, _Rehum_, _Meremoth_, _Iddo_, _Ginnetho_, _Abijah_, _Miamin_,
_Maadiah_, _Bilgah_, _Shemajah_, _Joiarib_, _Jedaiah_, _Sallu_, _Amok_,
_Hilkiah_, _Jedaiah_: these were Priests in the days of _Jeshua_, and the
eldest sons of them all, _Merajah_ the son of _Serajah_, _Hananiah_ the son
of _Jeremiah_, _Meshullam_ the son of _Ezra_, &c. were chief Priests in the
days of _Joiakim_ the son of _Jeshua_: _Nehem._ xii. and therefore the High
Priest-hood of _Jeshua_ was but of an ordinary length.

I have now stated the history of the _Jews_ in the Reigns of _Cyrus_,
_Cambyses_, and _Darius Hystaspis_: it remains that I state their history
in the Reigns of _Xerxes_, and _Artaxerxes Longimanus_: for I place the
history of _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_ in the Reign of this _Artaxerxes_, and not
in that of _Artaxerxes Mnemon_: for during all the _Persian_ Monarchy,
until the last _Darius_ mentioned in Scripture, whom I take to be _Darius
Nothus_, there were but six High-Priests in continual succession of father
and son, namely, _Jeshua_, _Joiakim_, _Eliashib_, _Joiada_, _Jonathan_,
_Jaddua_, and the seventh High-Priest was _Onias_ the son of _Jaddua_, and
the eighth was _Simeon Justus_, the Son of _Onias_, and the ninth was
_Eleazar_ the younger brother of _Simeon_. Now, at a mean reckoning, we
should allow about 27 or 28 years only to a Generation by the eldest sons
of a family, one Generation with another, as above; but if in this case we
allow 30 years to a Generation, and may further suppose that _Jeshua_, at
the return of the captivity in the first year of the Empire of the
_Persians_, was about 30 or 40 years old; _Joiakim_ will be of about that
age in the 16th year of _Darius Hystaspis_, _Eliashib_ in the tenth year of
_Xerxes_, _Joiada_ in the 19th year of _Artaxerxes Longimanus_, _Jonathan_
in the 8th year of _Darius Nothus_, _Jaddua_ in the 19th year of
_Artaxerxes Mnemon_, _Onias_ in the 3d year of _Artaxerxes Ochus_, and
_Simeon Justus_ two years before the death of _Alexander_ the Great: and
this reckoning, as it is according to the course of nature, so it agrees
perfectly well with history; for thus _Eliashib_ might be High-Priest, and
have grandsons, before the seventh year of _Artaxerxes Longimanus_, _Ezra_
x. 6. and without exceeding the age which many old men attain unto,
continue High-Priest 'till after the 32d year of that King, _Nehem._ xiii.
6, 7. and his grandson _Johanan_, or _Jonathan_, might have a chamber in
the Temple in the seventh year of that King, _Ezra_ x. 6. and be
High-Priest before _Ezra_ wrote the sons of _Levi_ in the book of
_Chronicles_; _Nehem._ xii. 23. and in his High-Priesthood, he might slay
his younger brother _Jesus_ in the Temple, before the end of the Reign of
_Artaxerxes Mnemon_: _Joseph. Antiq._ l. xi. c. 7. and _Jaddua_ might be
High-Priest before the death of _Sanballat_, _Joseph._ _ib._ and before the
death of _Nehemiah_, _Nehem._ xii. 22. and also before the end of the Reign
of _Darius Nothus_; and he might thereby give occasion to _Josephus_ and
the later _Jews_, who took this King for the last _Darius_, to fall into an
opinion that _Sanballat, Jaddua_, and _Manasseh_ the younger brother of
_Jaddua_, lived till the end of the Reign of the last _Darius_: _Joseph._
_Antiq._ l. xi. c. 7, 8. and the said _Manasseh_ might marry _Nicaso_ the
daughter of _Sanballat_, and for that offence be chased from _Nehemiah_,
before the end of the Reign of _Artaxerxes Longimanus_; _Nehem_. xiii. 28.
_Joseph._ _Antiq._ l. xi. c. 7, 8. and _Sanballat_ might at that time be
_Satrapa_ of _Samaria_, and in the Reign of _Darius Nothus_, or soon after,
build the Temple of the _Samaritans_ in _Mount Gerizim_, for his son-in-law
_Manasseh_, the first High-Priest of that Temple; _Joseph._ _ib._ and
_Simeon Justus_ might be High-Priest when the _Persian_ Empire was invaded
by _Alexander_ the Great, as the _Jews_ represent, _Joma_ fol. 69. 1.
_Liber Juchasis. R. Gedaliah_, &c. and for that reason he might be taken by
some of the _Jews_ for the same High-Priest with _Jaddua_, and be dead some
time before the book of _Ecclesiasticus_ was writ in _Hebrew_ at
_Jerusalem_, by the grandfather of him, who in the 38th year of the
_Egyptian_ √Üra of _Dionysius_, that is in the 77th year after the death of
_Alexander_ the Great, met with a copy of it in _Egypt_, and there
translated it into _Greek: Ecclesiast._ ch. 50. & _in Prolog._ and
_Eleazar_, the younger brother and successor of _Simeon_, might cause the
Law to be translated into _Greek_, in the beginning of the Reign of
_Ptolemaus Philadelphus_: _Joseph._ _Antiq._ l. xii. c. 2. and _Onias_ the
son of _Simeon Justus_, who was a child at his father's death, and by
consequence was born in his father's old age, might be so old in the Reign
of _Ptolem√¶us Euergetes_, as to have his follies excused to that King, by
representing that he was then grown childish with old age. _Joseph._
_Antiq._ l. xii. c. 4. In this manner the actions of all these High-Priests
suit with the Reigns of the Kings, without any straining from the course of
nature: and according to this reckoning the days of _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_
fall in with the Reign of the first _Artaxerxes_; for _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_
flourished in the High Priesthood of _Eliashib_, _Ezra_ x. 6. _Nehem._ iii.
1. & xiii. 4, 28. But if _Eliashib_, _Ezra_ and _Nehemiah_ be placed in the
Reign of the second _Artaxerxes_, since they lived beyond the 32d year of
_Artaxerxes_, _Nehem._ xiii. 28, there must be at least 160 years allotted
to the three first High-Priests, and but 42 to the four or five last, a
division too unequal: for the High Priesthoods of _Jeshua_, _Joiakim_, and
_Eliashib_, were but of an ordinary length, that of _Jeshua_ fell in with
one Generation of the chief Priests, and that of _Joiakim_ with the next
Generation, as we have shewed already; and that of _Eliashib_ fell in with
the third Generation: for at the dedication of the wall, _Zechariah_ the
son of _Jonathan_, the son of _Shemaiah_, was one of the Priests, _Nehem._
xii. 35, and _Jonathan_ and his father _Shemaiah_, were contemporaries to
_Joiakim_ and his father _Jeshua_: _Nehem._ xii. 6, 18. I observe further
that in the first year of _Cyrus_, _Jeshua_, and _Bani_, or _Binnui_, were
chief fathers of the _Levites_, _Nehem_. vii. 7. 15. & _Ezra_ ii. 2. 10. &
iii. 9. and that _Jozabad_ the son of _Jeshua_, and _Noadiah_ the son of
_Binnui_, were chief Levites in the seventh year of _Artaxerxes_, when
_Ezra_ came to _Jerusalem_, _Ezra_ viii. 33. so that this _Artaxerxes_
began his Reign before the end of the second Generation: and that he
Reigned in the time of the third Generation is confirmed by two instances
more; for _Meshullam_ the son of _Berechiah_, the son of _Meshezabeel_, and
_Azariah_ the son of _Maaseiah_, the son of _Ananiah_, were fathers of
their houses at the repairing of the wall; _Nehem._ iii. 4, 23. and their
grandfathers, _Meshazabeel_ and _Hananiah_, subscribed the covenant in the
Reign of _Cyrus_: _Nehem._ x. 21, 23. Yea _Nehemiah_, this same _Nehemiah_
the son of _Hachaliah_, was the _Tirshatha_, and subscribed it, _Nehem._ x.
1, & viii. 9, & _Ezra_ ii. 2, 63. and therefore in the 32d year of
_Artaxerxes Mnemon_, he will be above 180 years old, an age surely too
great. The same may be said of _Ezra_, if he was that Priest and Scribe who
read the Law, _Nehem._ viii. for he is the son of _Serajah_, the son of
_Azariah_, the son of _Hilkiah_, the son of _Shallum_, &c. _Ezra_ vii. 1.
and this _Serajah_ went into captivity at the burning of the Temple, and
was there slain, 1 _Chron._ vi. 14. 2 _King._ xxv. 18. and from his death,
to the twentieth year of _Artaxerxes Mnemon_, is above 200 years; an age
too great for _Ezra_.

I consider further that _Ezra_, chap. iv. names _Cyrus_, *, _Darius_,
_Ahasuerus_, and _Artaxerxes_, in continual order, as successors to one
another, and these names agree to _Cyrus_, *, _Darius Hystaspis_, _Xerxes_,
and _Artaxerxes Longimanus_, and to no other Kings of _Persia_: some take
this _Artaxerxes_ to be not the Successor, but the Predecessor of _Darius
Hystaspis_, not considering that in his Reign the _Jews_ were busy in
building the City and the Wall, _Ezra_ iv. 12. and by consequence had
finished the Temple before. _Ezra_ describes first how the people of the
land hindered the building of the Temple all the days of _Cyrus_, and
further, untill the Reign of _Darius_; and after the Temple was built, how
they hindered the building of the city in the Reign of _Ahasuerus_ and
_Artaxerxes_, and then returns back to the story of the Temple in the Reign
of _Cyrus_ and _Darius_; and this is confirmed by comparing the book of
_Ezra_ with the book of _Esdras_: for if in the book of _Ezra_ you omit the
story of _Ahasuerus_ and _Artaxerxes_, and in that of _Esdras_ you omit the
same story of _Artaxerxes_, and that of the three wise men, the two books
will agree: and therefore the book of _Esdras_, if you except the story of
the three wise men, was originally copied from authentic writings of Sacred
Authority. Now the story of _Artaxerxes_, which, with that of _Ahasuerus_,
in the book of _Ezra_ interrupts the story of _Darius_, doth not interrupt
it in the book of _Esdras_, but is there inferred into the story of
_Cyrus_, between the first and second chapter of _Ezra_; and all the rest
of the story of _Cyrus_, and that of _Darius_, is told in the book of
_Esdras_ in continual order, without any interruption: so that the _Darius_
which in the book of _Ezra_ precedes _Ahasuerus_ and _Artaxerxes_, and the
_Darius_ which in the same book follows them, is, by the book of _Esdras_,
one and the same _Darius_; and I take the book of _Esdras_ to be the best
interpreter of the book of _Ezra_: so the _Darius_ mentioned between
_Cyrus_ and _Ahasuerus_, is _Darius Hysaspis_; and therefore _Ahasuerus_
and _Artaxerxes_ who succeed him, are _Xerxes_ and _Artaxerxes Longimanus_;
and the _Jews_ who came up from _Artaxerxes_ to _Jerusalem_, and began to
build the city and the wall, _Ezra_ iv. 13. are _Ezra_ with his companions:
which being understood, the history of the _Jews_ in the Reign of these
Kings will be as follows.

After the Temple was built, and _Darius Hystaspis_ was dead, the enemies of
the _Jews_ in the beginning of the Reign of his successor _Ahasuerus_ or
_Xerxes_, wrote unto him an accusation against them; _Ezra_ iv. 6. but in
the seventh year of his successor _Artaxerxes_, _Ezra_ and his companions
went up from _Babylon_ with Offerings and Vessels for the Temple, and power
to bestow on it out of the King's Treasure what should be requisite; _Ezra_
vii. whence the Temple is said to be finished, _according to the
commandment of _Cyrus_, and _Darius_, and _Artaxerxes_ King of _Persia__:
_Ezra_ vi. 14. Their commission was also to set Magistrates and Judges over
the land, and thereby becoming a new Body Politic, they called a great
Council or Sanhedrim to separate the people from strange wives; and they
were also encouraged to attempt the building of _Jerusalem_ with its wall:
and thence _Ezra_ saith in his prayer, that _God had extended mercy unto
them in the sight of the Kings of _Persia_, and given them a reviving to
set up the house of their God, and to repair the desolations thereof, and
to give them a WALL in _Judah_, even in _Jerusalem__. _Ezra_ ix. 9. But
when they had begun to repair the wall, their enemies wrote against them to
_Artaxerxes_: _Be it known_, say they, _unto the King, that the _Jews_
which came up from thee to us, are come unto _Jerusalem_, building the
rebellious and the bad city, and have set up the walls thereof, and joined
the foundations_, &c. And the King wrote back that the _Jews_ should cease
and the city not be built, until another commandment should be given from
him: whereupon their enemies _went up to _Jerusalem_, and made them cease
by force and power_; _Ezra_ iv. but in the twentieth year of the King,
_Nehemiah_ hearing that the _Jews_ were in great affliction and distress,
and that the wall of _Jerusalem_, that wall which had been newly repaired
by _Ezra_, _was broken down, and the gates thereof burnt wth fire_; he
obtained leave of the King to go and build the city, and the Governour's
house, _Nehem._ i. 3. & ii. 6, 8, 17. and coming to _Jerusalem_ the same
year, he continued Governor twelve years, and built the wall; and being
opposed by _Sanballat_, _Tobiah_ and _Geshem_, he persisted in the work
with great resolution and patience, until the breaches were made up: then
_Sanballat_ and _Geshem_ sent messengers unto him five times to hinder him
from setting up the doors upon the gates: but notwithstanding he persisted
in the work, until the doors were also set up: so the wall was finished in
the eight and twentieth year of the King, _Joseph._ _Antiq._ l. xi. c. 5.
in the five and twentieth day of the month _Elul_, or sixth month, in fifty
and two days after the breaches were made up, and they began to work upon
the gates. While the timber for the gates was preparing and seasoning, they
made up the breaches of the wall; both were works of time, and are not
jointly to be reckoned within the 52 days: this is the time of the last
work of the wall, the work of setting up the gates after the timber was
seasoned and the breaches made up. When he had set up the gates, he
dedicated the wall with great solemnity, and appointed Officers _over the
chambers for the Treasure, for the Offerings, for the First-Fruits, and for
the Tithes, to gather into them out of the fields of the cities, the
portions appointed by the law for the Priests and Levites; and the Singers
and the Porters kept the ward of their God_; Nehem. xii. _but the people in
the city were but few, and the houses were unbuilt_: _Nehem._ vii. 1, 4.
and in this condition he left _Jerusalem_ in the 32d year of the King; and
after sometime returning back from the King, he reformed such abuses as had
been committed in his absence. _Nehem._ xiii. In the mean time, the
Genealogies of the Priests and Levites were recorded in the book of the
_Chronicles_, in the days of _Eliashib_, _Joiada_, _Jonathan_, and
_Jaddua_, until the Reign of the next King _Darius Nothus_, whom _Nehemiah_
calls _Darius_ the _Persian_: _Nehem._ xii. 11, 22, 23. whence it follows
that _Nehemiah_ was Governor of the _Jews_ until the Reign of _Darius
Nothus_. And here ends the Sacred History of the _Jews_.

The histories of the _Persians_ now extant in the East, represent that the
oldest Dynasties of the Kings of _Persia_, were those whom they call
_Pischdadians_ and _Kaianides_, and that the Dynasty of the _Kaianides_
immediately succeeded that of the _Pischdadians_. They derive the name
_Kaianides_ from the word _Kai_, which, they say, in the old _Persian_
language signified a Giant or great King; and they call the first four
Kings of this Dynasty, _Kai-Cobad, Kai-Caus, Kai-Cosroes_, and _Lohorasp_,
and by _Lohorasp_ mean _Kai-Axeres_, or _Cyaxeres_: for they say that
_Lohorasp_ was the first of their Kings who reduced their armies to good
order and discipline, and _Herodotus_ affirms the same thing of _Cyaxeres_:
and they say further, that _Lohorasp_ went eastward, and conquered many
Provinces of _Persia_, and that one of his Generals, whom the _Hebrews_
call _Nebuchadnezzar_, the _Arabians_ _Bocktanassar_, and others _Raham_
and _Gudars_, went westward, and conquered all _Syria_ and _Jud√¶a_, and
took the city of _Jerusalem_ and destroyed it: they seem to call
_Nebuchadnezzar_ the General of _Lohorasp_, because he assisted him in some
of his wars. The fifth King of this Dynasty, they call _Kischtasp_, and by
this name mean sometimes _Darius Medus_, and sometimes _Darius Hystaspis_:
for they say that he was contemporary to _Ozair_ or _Ezra_, and to
_Zaradust_ or _Zoroastres_, the Legislator of the _Ghebers_ or
fire-worshippers, and established his doctrines throughout all _Persia_;
and here they take him for _Darius Hystaspis_: they say also that he was
contemporary to _Jeremiah_, and to _Daniel_, and that he was the son and
successor of _Lohorasp_, and here they take him for _Darius_ the _Mede_.
The sixth King of the _Kaianides_, they call _Bahaman_, and tell us that
_Bahaman_ was _Ardschir Diraz_, that is _Artaxerxes Longimanus_, so called
from the great extent of his power: and yet they say that _Bahaman_ went
westward into _Mesopotamia_ and _Syria_, and conquered _Belshazzar_ the son
of _Nebuchadnezzar_, and gave the Kingdom to _Cyrus_ his Lieutenant-General
over _Media_: and here they take _Bahaman_ for _Darius Medus_. Next after
_Ardschir Diraz_, they place _Homai_ a Queen, the mother of _Darius
Nothus_, tho' really she did not Reign: and the two next and last Kings of
the _Kaianides_, they call _Darab_ the bastard son of _Ardschir Diraz_, and
_Darab_ who was conquered by _Ascander Roumi_, that is _Darius Nothus_, and
_Darius_ who was conquered by _Alexander_ the _Greek_: and the Kings
between these two _Darius's_ they omit, as they do also _Cyrus_,
_Cambyses_, and _Xerxes_. The Dynasty of the _Kaianides_, was therefore
that of the _Medes_ and _Persians_, beginning with the defection of the
_Medes_ from the _Assyrians_, in the end of the Reign of _Sennacherib_, and
ending with the conquest of _Persia_ by _Alexander_ the Great. But their
account of this Dynasty is very imperfect, some Kings being omitted, and
others being confounded with one another: and their Chronology of this
Dynasty is still worse; for to the first King they assign a Reign of 120
years, to the second a Reign of 150 years, to the third a Reign of 60
years, to the fourth a Reign of 120 years, to the fifth as much, and to the
sixth a Reign of 112 years.

This Dynasty being the Monarchy of the _Medes_, and _Persians_; the Dynasty
of the _Pischdadians_ which immediately preceded it, must be that of the
_Assyrians_: and according to the oriental historians this was the oldest
Kingdom in the world, some of its Kings living a thousand years a-piece,
and one of them Reigning five hundred years, another seven hundred years,
and another a thousand years.

We need not then wonder, that the _Egyptians_ have made the Kings in the
first Dynasty of their Monarchy, that which was seated at _Thebes_ in the
days of _David_, _Solomon_, and _Rehoboam_, so very ancient and so long
lived; since the _Persians_ have done the like to their Kings, who began to
Reign in _Assyria_ two hundred years after the death of _Solomon_; and the
_Syrians_ of _Damascus_ have done the like to their Kings _Adar_ and
_Hazael_, who Reigned an hundred years after the death of _Solomon_,
_worshipping them as Gods, and boasting their antiquity, and not knowing_,
saith _Josephus_, _that they were but modern_.

And whilst all these nations have magnified their Antiquities so
exceedingly, we need not wonder that the _Greeks_ and _Latines_ have made
their first Kings a little older than the truth.

       *       *       *       *       *

FINIS.

       *       *       *       *       *

Notes.

[1] _In the life of_ Lycurgus.

[2] In the life of _Solon_.

[3] Herod. l. 2.

[4] Plutarch. de Pythi√¶ Oraculo.

[5] Plutarch. in Solon

[6] Apud Diog. Laert. in Solon p. 10.

[7] Plin. nat. hist. l. 7. c. 56.

[8] Ib. l. 5. c. 29.

[9] Cont. Apion. sub initio.

[10] In ŒëŒ∫ŒøœÖœÉŒπŒªŒ±ŒøœÇ.

[11] Joseph. cont. Ap. l. 1.

[12] Dionys. l. 1. initio.

[13] Plutarch. in Numa.

[14] Diodor. l. 16. p. 550. Edit. Steph.

[15] Polyb. p. 379. B.

[16] In vita Lycurgi, sub initio.

[17] In Solone.

[18] Plutarch. in Romulo & Numa.

[19] In √Üneid. 7. v. 678.

[20] Diodor. l. 1.

[21] Plutarch. in Romulo.

[22] Lib. I. in Pro√¶m.

[23] Plutarch. in Lycurgo sub initio.

[24] Pausan. l. 4. c. 13. p. 28. & c. 7. p. 296 & l. 3. c. 15. p. 245.

[25] Pausan. l. 4. c. 7. p. 296.

[26] Herod. l. 7.

[27] Herod. l. 8.

[28] Plato in Minoe.

[29] Thucyd. l. 1. p. 13.

[30] Athen. l. 14 p. 605

[31] Pausan. l. 5. c. 8.

[32] Pausan. l. 6. c. 19.

[33] Plutarch. de Musica. Clemens Strom. l. 1. p. 308.

[34] Herod. l. 6. c. 52.

[35] Pausan. l. 5. c. 4.

[36] Pausan. l. 5. c. 1, 3, 8. Strabo, l. 8, p. 357.

[37] Pausan. l. 5. c.4.

[38] Pausan. l. 5. c.18.

[39] Solin. c. 30.

[40] Dionys. l. 1. p. 15.

[41] Apollon. Argonaut. l. 1. v. 101.

[42] Plutarch. in Theseo.

[43] Diodor. l. 1. p. 35.

[44] Joseph. Antiq. l. 4. c. 8

[45] Contra Apion. l. 1.

[46] Hygin. Fab. 144.

[47] Gen. i. 14. & viii. 22. Censorinus c. 19 & 20. Cicero in Verrem.
Geminus c. 6.

[48] Cicero in Verrem.

[49] Diodor. l. 1.

[50] Cicero in Verrem.

[51] Gem. c. 6.

[52] Apud Laertium, in Cleobulo.

[53] Apud Laertium, in Thalete. Plutarch. in Solone.

[54] Censorinus c. 18. Herod. l. 2. prope initium.

[55] Apollodor l. 3. p. 169. Strabo l. 16. p. 476. Homer. Odyss. Œ§. v. 179.

[56] Herod. l. 1.

[57] Plutarch. in Numa.

[58] Diodor. l. 3. p. 133.

[59] Diodor. l. 1. p. 13.

[60] Apud Theodorum Gazam de mentibus.

[61] Apud Athen√¶um, l. 14.

[62] Suidas in Œ£Œ±œÅŒøŒπ.

[63] Herod. l. 1.

[64] Julian. Or: 4.

[65] Strabo l. 17. p. 816.

[66] Diodor. l. 1. p. 32.

[67] Plutarch de Osiride & Iside. Diodor. l. 1. p. 9.

[68] Hecat√¶us apud Diodor. l. 1. p. 32.

[69] Isagoge Sect. 23, a Petavio edit.

[70] Hipparch. ad Ph√¶nom. l.2. Sect. 3. a Petavio edit.

[71] Hipparch. ad Ph√¶nom. l.1. Sect. 2.

[72] Strom. 1. p. 306, 352.

[73] Laertius Proem. l. 1.

[74] Apollodor. l. 1. c. 9. Sect. 16.

[75] Suidas in ŒëŒΩŒ±Œ≥Œ±ŒªŒªŒπœÇ.

[76] Apollodor. l. 1. c. 9. Sect. 25.

[77] Laert. in Thalete. Plin. l. 2. c. 12.

[78] Plin. l. 18. c. 23.

[79] Petav. Var. Disl. l. 1. c. 5.

[80] Petav. Doct. Temp. l. 4. c. 26.

[81] Columel. l. 9. c. 14. Plin. l. 18. c. 25.

[82] Arrian. l. 7.

[83] In Moph.

[84] Euanthes apud Athen√¶um, l. 67. p. 296.

[85] Hyginus Fab. 14.

[86] Homer. Odyss. l. 8. v. 292.

[87] Hesiod. Theogon. v. 945.

[88] Pausan. l. 2. c. 23.

[89] Strabo l. 16.

[90] Isa. xxiii. 2. 12.

[91] 1 Kings v. 6

[92] Steph. in Azoth.

[93] Conon. Narrat. 37.

[94] Nonnus Dionysiac l. 13 v. 333 Œ± sequ.

[95] Athen. l. 4. c. 23.

[96] Strabo. l. 10. p. 661. Herod. l. 1.

[97] Strabo. l. 16.

[98] 2 Chron. xxi. 8, 10. & 2 Kings. viii. 20, 22.

[99] Herod. l. 1. initio, & l. 7. circa medium.

[100] Solin. c. 23, Edit. Salm.

[101] Plin. l. 4. c. 22.

[102] Strabo. l. 9. p. 401. & l. 10. p. 447.

[103] Herod. l. 5.

[104] Strabo. l. 1. p. 42.

[105] Strabo. l. 1. p. 48.

[106] Bochart. Canaan. l. 1. c. 34.

[107] Strabo. l. 3. p. 140.

[108] Vid. Phil. Transact. N¬∫. 359.

[109] Canaan, l. 1. c. 34. p. 682.

[110] Aristot. de Mirab.

[111] Plin. l. 7. c. 56.

[112] Canaan. l. 1. c. 39.

[113] Philostratus in vita Apollonii l. 5. c. 1. apud Photium.

[114] Arnob. l. 1.

[115] Bochart. in Canaan. l. 1. c. 24.

[116] Oros. l. 5. c. 15. Florus l. 3. c. 1. Sallust. in Jugurtha.

[117] Antiq. l. 8. c. 2, 5. & l. 9. c. 14.

[118] Thucyd. l. 6. initio. Euseb. Chr.

[119] Thucyd. ib.

[120] Apud Dionys. l. 1. p. 15.

[121] Herod. l. 8. c. 137.

[122] Herod. l. 8.

[123] Herod. l. 8. c. 139.

[124] Thucyd. l. 2. prope finem.

[125] Herod l. 6. c. 127.

[126] Strabo. l. 8. p. 355.

[127] Pausan. l. 6. c. 22.

[128] Pausan. l. 5. c. 9.

[129] Strabo. l. 8. p. 358.

[130] Phanias Eph. ap. Plut. in vita Solonis.

[131] Vid. Dionys. Halicarnass. l. 1. p. 44, 45.

[132] Pausan. l. 2. c. 6.

[133] Hygin. Fab. 7 & 8.

[134] Homer. Iliad. Œü.

[135] Homer. Odys. Œó. Diodor. l. 5. p.237.

[136] Diodor. l. 1. p.17.

[137] Pausan. l. 2. c. 25.

[138] Apollodor. l. 2. Sect. 5.

[139] Herod l. 7.

[140] Bochart. Canaan part. 2. cap. 13.

[141] Apollon. Argonaut. l. 1. v. 77.

[142] Conon. Narrat. 13.

[143] Pausan. l. 5. c. 1. Apollodor. l. 1. c. 7.

[144] Pausan. l. 7. c. 1.

[145] Pausan. l. 1. c. 37. & l. 10. c. 29.

[146] Pausan. l. 7. c. 1.

[147] Hesych. in ŒöœÅŒ±ŒΩŒ±ŒøœÇ.

[148] Themist. Orat. 19.

[149] Plato in Alcib. 1.

[150] Pausan. l. 8. c. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

[151] Pausan. l. 8. c. 4. Apollon. Argonaut. l. 1. v. 161.

[152] Pausan. l. 8. c. 4.

[153] Herod. l. 5. c. 58.

[154] Strabo l. 10. p. 464, 465, 466.

[155] Solin. Polyhist. c. 11.

[156] Isidor. originum. lib. xi. c. 6.

[157] Clem. Strom. l. 1.

[158] Pausan. l. 9. c. 11.

[159] Strabo l. 10. p. 472, 473. Diodor. l. 5. c. 4.

[160] Strabo l. 10. p. 468. 472. Diodor. l. 5. c. 4.

[161] Lucian de sacrificiis. Apollod. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 3. & c. 2. sect. 1.

[162] Boch. in Canaan. l. 1. c. 15.

[163] Athen. l. 13. p. 601.

[164] Plutarch in Theseo.

[165] Homer Il. Œù. & Œû. & Odys. Œõ. & Œ§.

[166] Herod. l. 1.

[167] Apollod. l. 3. c. 1. Hygin. Fab. 40, 41, 42. 178.

[168] Lucian. de Dea Syria.

[169] Diodor. l. 5. c. 4,

[170] Argonaut. l. 2. v. 1236.

[171] Lucian. de sacrificiis.

[172] Porphyr. in vita Pythag.

[173] Cicero de Nat. Deor. l. 3.

[174] Callimac. Hymn 1. v. 8.

[175] Cypr. de Idolorum vanitate.

[176] Tert. Apologet. c. 10.

[177] Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 1. c. 7.

[178] Pausan. l. 5. c. 7, vid. et. c. 13. 14. & l. 8. c. 2.

[179] Pausan. l. 8. c. 29.

[180] Diodor. l. 5. p. 183.

[181] Pausan. l. 5. c. 8. 14.

[182] Herod. l. 2. c. 44.

[183] Cic. de natura Deorum. lib. 3.

[184] Diodor. p. 223.

[185] Dionys. l. 1. p. 38, 42.

[186] Lucian. de saltatione.

[187] Arnob. adv. gent. l. 6. p. 131.

[188] Herod. l. 2. initio.

[189] Diodor. l. 1. p. 8.

[190] Hesiod. opera. v. 108.

[191] Apollon. Argonaut. l. 4. v. 1643.

[192] Vita Homeri Herodoto adfer.

[193] Herod. l. 2.

[194] 1 Sam. ix. 16. & xiii. 5. 19, 20.

[195] Clem. Al. Strom. 1. p. 321.

[196] Plin. l. 7.

[197] Plato in Tim√¶o.

[198] Apollodor. l. 3. c. 1.

[199] Herod. l. 2.

[200] Hygin. Fab. 7.

[201] Apollodor. l. 3. c. 6.

[202] Homer. Il. Œì. vers 572.

[203] Thucyd. l. 2. p. 110. & Plutarch. in Theseo.

[204] Strabo. l. 9. p. 396.

[205] Apud Strabonem, l. 9. p. 397.

[206] Pausan. l. 2. c. 15.

[207] Strabo. l. 8. p. 337.

[208] Pausan. l. 8. c. 1. 2.

[209] Plin. l. 7. c. 56.

[210] Dionys. l. 1. p. 10.

[211] Dionys. l. 2. p. 126.

[212] Diodor l. 5. p. 224. 225. 240.

[213] Ammian. l. 17. c. 7.

[214] Plin. l. 2. c. 87.

[215] Diodor. l. 5. p. 202. 204.

[216] Apud Diodor. l. 5. p. 201.

[217] Dionys. l. 1. p. 17.

[218] Dionys. l. 1. p. 33. 34.

[219] Dionys. ib.

[220] Ptol. Heph√¶st. l. 2.

[221] Dionys. l. 2. p. 34.

[222] Diodor. l. 5. p. 230.

[223] Ister apud Porphyr. abst. l. 2. s. 56.

[224] Bochart. Canaan. l. 1. c. 15.

[225] Apud Strabonem. lib. 14. p. 684.

[226] Strabo. l. 17. p. 828.

[227] Diodor. l. 3. p. 132.

[228] Herod. l. 1.

[229] 1 King. xx. 16.

[230] Genes. xiv. Deut ii. 9. 12. 19.-22.

[231] Exod. i. 9. 22.

[232] Job xxxi. 11.

[233] Job xxxi. 26.

[234] 1 Chron. xi. 4. 5. Judg. i. 21. 2 Sam v. 6.

[235] Vide Hermippum apud Athen√¶um, I.

[236] Argonaut. l. 4. v. 272.

[237] Diodor. l. 1. p. 7.

[238] Apud Diodorum l. 3. p. 140.

[239] Diodor. l. 3. p. 131. 132.

[240] Pausan. l. 2. c. 20. p. 155.

[241] Diodor. l. 3. p. 130 & Schol. Apollonii. l. 2.

[242] Ammian. l. 22. c. 8.

[243] Justin. l. 2. c. 4.

[244] Diodor. l. 1. p. 9.

[245] Apud Diodor. l. 3. p. 141.

[246] Step. in ŒëŒºŒºœâŒΩŒπŒ±.

[247] Plin. l. 6. c. 28.

[248] Ptol. l. 6. c. 7.

[249] D. Augustin. in exposit. epist. ad Rom. sub initio.

[250] Procop. de bello Vandal. l. 2. c. 10.

[251] Chron. l. 1. p. 11.

[252] Gemar. ad tit. Shebijth. cap. 6.

[253] Manetho apud Josephum cont. Appion. l. 1. p. 1039.

[254] Herod. l. 2.

[255] Jerem. xliv. 1. Ezek. xxix. 14.

[256] Menetho apud Porphyrium œÄŒµœÅŒπ Œ±œÄŒøŒΩŒ∑œÇ** l. 1. Sect. 55. Et. Euseb.
Pr√¶p. l. 4. c. 16. p. 155.

[257] Diodor. l. 3. p. 101.

[258] Diodor. apud Photium in Biblioth.

[259] Herod. l. 2.

[260] Plutarch. de Iside. p. 355. Diodor. l. 1. p. 9.

[261] Augustin. de Civ. Dei. l. 18. c. 47.

[262] Apud Photium, c. 279.

[263] Fab. 274.

[264] Apud Euseb. Chron.

[265] Plin. l. 6. c. 23, 28. & l. 7. c. 56.

[266] Diodor. l. 1. p. 17.

[267] Pausan. l. 4. c. 23.

[268] Apollodor. l. 2. c. 1.

[269] Dionys. in Perie. v. 623.

[270] Fab. 275.

[271] Saturnal. l. 5. c. 21.

[272] Lucan. l. 10.

[273] Lucan. l. 9.

[274] Herod. l. 1.

[275] Diodor. l. 1. p. 35. Herod. l. 2 c. 102, 103, 106.

[276] Pausan. l. 10. Suidas in Œ†Œ±œÅŒΩŒ±œÉŒπŒøŒπ.

[277] Lucan l. 5.

[278] Argonaut. l. 4. v. 272.

[279] Herod. l. 2. c. 109.

[280] In vita Pythag. c. 29.

[281] Diodor. l. 1. p. 36

[282] Dionys. de situ Orbis.

[283] Diodor. l. 1. p. 39.

[284] Plutarch. de Iside & Osiride.

[285] Diodor. l. 1. p. 8.

[286] Lucian. de Dea Syria

[287] Exod. xxxiv. 13. Num. xxxiii. 52. Deut. vii. 5. & xii. 3.

[288] 2 Sam. viii. 10. & 1 King. xi. 23.

[289] Antiq l. 9. c. 2.

[290] Justin. l. 36.

[291] Diodor. l. 5. p. 238.

[292] Suidas in Œ£Œ±œÅŒ¥Œ±ŒΩŒ±œÄŒ±ŒªŒøœÇ.

[293] Apollod. l. 3.

[294] Argonaut. l. 4. v. 424. & l. 1. v. 621.

[295] Homer Odyss. Œò. v. 268. 292. & Hymn. 1. & 2. in Venerem. & Hesiod.
Theogon. v. 192.

[296] Pausan. l. 1. c. 20.

[297] Clem. Al. Admon. ad Gent. p. 10. Apollodor. l. 3. c. 13. Pindar.
Pyth. Ode 2. Hesych. in ŒöŒπŒΩœÖœÅŒ±Œ¥Œ±Œπ. Steph. in ŒëŒºŒ±Œ∏ŒøœÖœÇ. Strabo. l. 16, p.
755.

[298] Clem. Al. Admon. ad Gent. p. 21. Plin. l. 7. c. 56.

[299] Herod. l. 2.

[300] Herod. l. 3. c. 37.

[301] Bochart. Canaan. l. 1. c. 4.

[302] Apud Athen√¶um l. 9. p. 392.

[303] Ptol. l. 2.

[304] Diod. l. 3. p. 145.

[305] Vas. Chron. Hisp. c. 10.

[306] Strabo l. 16. p. 776.

[307] Homer.

[308] Diodor. l. 3. p.132, 133

[309] Plato in Tim√¶o. & Critia.

[310] Apud Diodor. l. 5. p. 233.

[311] Pamphus apud Pausan. l. 7. c. 21.

[312] Herod. l. 2. c. 50.

[313] Plutarch in Iside.

[314] Lucian de Saltatione.

[315] Agatharc. apud Photium.

[316] Hygin. Fab. 150.

[317] Plutarch. in Iside.

[318] Diodor. l. 1. p. 10.

[319] Pindar. Pyth. Ode 9.

[320] Diodor. l. 1. p. 12.

[321] Plin. l. 6. c. 29.

[322] Herod. l. 2. c. 110.

[323] Manetho apud Josephum cont. Apion. p. 1052, 1053.

[324] Diodor. l. 1. p. 31.

[325] Herod. l. 2.

[326] Strabo. l. 1. p. 48.

[327] Pindar. Pyth. Ode 4.

[328] Strabo. l. 1. p. 21, 45, 46.

[329] Diodor. l. 1. p. 29.

[330] Manetho

[331] Herod. l. 2

[332] Herod. l. 2.

[333] Ammian. l. 17. c. 4.

[334] Strabo. l. 17. p. 817.

[335] Annal. l. 2. c. 60.

[336] Diodor. l. 1. p. 32.

[337] Diodor. l. 1. p. 51.

[338] Joseph. Ant. l. 1. c. 4.

[339] Heordot. l. 2. c. 141.

[340] Isa. xix. 2, 4, 11, 13, 23.

[341] Herod. l. 2. c. 148, &c.

[342] Plin. l. 36. c. 8. 9.

[343] Diodor. l. 1 p. 29, &c.

[344] Diodor. l. 2, p. 83.

[345] Amos vi. 13, 14.

[346] Amos vi. 2.

[347] 2 Chron. xxvi. 6.

[348] 2 King. xiv. 25.

[349] 2 King. xix. 11.

[350] Isa. x. 8.

[351] 1 Chron. v. 26. 2 King. xvi. 9 & xvii. 6, 24. & Ezra iv. 9.

[352] Isa. xxii. 6.

[353] 2 King. xvii. 24, 30, 31. & xviii. 33, 34, 35. 2 Chron. xxxii. 15.

[354] 2 Chron. xxxii. 13, 15.

[355] Hosea v. 13. & x. 6, 14.

[356] Herod. l. iii. c. 155.

[357] Herod. l. i. c. 184.

[358] Beros. apud Josep. contr. Appion. l. 1.

[359] Curt. l. 5. c. 1.

[360] Apud Euseb. Pr√¶p. l. 9. c. 41.

[361] Doroth. apud Julium Firmicum.

[362] Heren. apud Steph. in ŒíŒ±Œ≤.

[363] Abyden apud Euseb. Pr√¶p. l. 9. c. 41.

[364] Isa. xxiii. 13.

[365] Tobit. i. 13. Annal. Tyr. apud Joseph. Ant. l. 9. c. 14.

[366] Hosea x. 14.

[367] Tobit. i. 15.

[368] Tobit. i. 21. 2 King. xix. 37. Ptol. Canon.

[369] Isa. xx. 1, 3, 4.

[370] Herod. l. 1. c. 72. & l. 7. c. 63.

[371] Apud Athen√¶um l. xii. p. 528.

[372] Herod. l. 1. c. 96. &c.

[373] Athen√¶us l. 12. p. 529, 530.

[374] Herod. l. 1. c. 102.

[375] Herod. l. 1. c. 103. Steph. in Œ†Œ±œÅŒ∏œÖŒ±ŒπŒøŒπ.

[376] Alexander Polyhist. apud Euseb. in Chron. p. 46 & apud Syncellum. p.
210.

[377] 2 Kings xxiv. 7. Jer. xlvi. 2. Eupolemus apud Euseb. Pr√¶p. l. 9. c.
35.

[378] 2 King. xxiii. 29, &c.

[379] Eupolemus apud Euseb. Pr√¶p. l. 9. c. 39. 2 King. xxv. 2, 7.

[380] Dan. i. 1.

[381] Dan. i. 2. 2 Chron. xxxvi. 6.

[382] Jer. xlvi. 2.

[383] Apud Joseph. Antiq. l. 10. c. 11.

[384] Beros. apud Joseph. Ant. l. 10. c. 11.

[385] 2 King. xxiv. 12, 14. 2 Chron. xxxvi. 10.

[386] 2 Kings xxiv. 17. Ezek. xvii. 13, 16, 18.

[387] Ezek. xvii. 15.

[388] 2 King. xxv. 1, 2, 8. Jer. xxxii. 1, & xxxix 1, 2.

[389] Canon. & Beros.

[390] 2 King. xxv. 27.

[391] Hieron. in Isa. xiv. 19.

[392] 2 King. xxv. 27. 29, &c.

[393] Dan. v. 2.

[394] Jos. Ant. l. 10. c. 11.

[395] Herod. l. 1. c. 184, 185.

[396] Philost. in vita Apollonii. l. 1. c. 15.

[397] Jos. cont. Apion. l. 1. c. 21.

[398] Herod. l. 1. c. 189, 190, 191. Xenoph. l. 7. p. 190, 191, 192. Ed.
Paris.

[399] Dan. v. 30, 31. Joseph. Ant. l. 10. c. 11.

[400] √Üsch. Pers√¶ v. 761.

[401] Herod. l. 1. c. 107, 108. Xenophon Cyrop√¶d. l. 1. p. 3.

[402] Cyrop√¶d. l. 1. p. 22.

[403] Cyrop√¶d. l. viii. p. 228, 229.

[404] Herod. l. 1. c. 73.

[405] Herod. l. 1. c. 106, 130.

[406] Herod. l. 1. c. 103.

[407] Herod. ib.

[408] Jer. xxv.

[409] Herod. l. 1. c. 73, 74.

[410] Herod. Ibid. Plin. l. 2. c. 12.

[411] _The _Scythians_._

[412] Jer. xxvii. 3, 6. Ezek. xxi. 19, 20 & xxv. 2, 8, 12.

[413] Ezek. xxvi. 2. & xxix. 17, 19.

[414] Ezek. xxix. 19. & xxx. 4, 5.

[415] Suid. in ŒîŒ±œÅŒµŒπŒ∫ŒøœÇ & ŒîŒ±œÅŒµŒπŒ∫ŒøœÖœÇ. Harpocr. in ŒîŒ±œÅŒµŒπŒ∫ŒøœÇ. Scoliast in
Aristophanis. ŒïŒ∫Œ∫ŒªŒ∑œÉŒπŒ±Œ∂ŒøœÖœÉœÑŒøŒΩ. v. 598.

[416] Herod. l. 1. c. 71.

[417] Isa. xiii. 17.

[418] Plin. l. 33. c. 3.

[419] Herod. l. 1. c. 94.

[420] Theogn. ŒìŒΩœâŒºŒ±Œπ, v. 761.

[421] Ibid. v. 773.

[422] Cyrop. l. 8.

[423] Comment. in Dan. v.

[424] Strabo. l. 16. initio.

[425] Strab. l. 16. p. 745.

[426] Herod. l. 1. c. 192.

[427] Herod. l. 1. c. 178, &c.

[428] Isa. xxiii. 13.

[429] Diod. l. 1. p. 51.

[430] Herod. l. 1. c. 181.

[431] Suidas in ŒëœÅŒπœÉœÑŒ±œÅœáŒøœÇ. Herod. l. 1. c. 123, &c.

[432] Strabo. l. 15. p. 730.

[433] Herod. l. 1. c. 127, &c.

[434] Cyrop. l. 8. p. 233.

[435] See Plate I. & II.

[436] Ezek. xli. 13, 14.

[437] Ezek. xl. 47

[438] Ezek. xl. 29, 33, 36.

[439] Ezek. xl. 19, 23, 27. 2 King xxi. 5. 2 Chron. iv. 9.

[440] Ezek. xl. 15, 17, 21. 1 Chron. xxviii. 12.

[441] Ezek. xl 5, xlii. 20, & xlv. 2.

[442] 2 King. xxi.5.

[443] Ezek. xl.

[444] Plate III.

[445] Plate I.

[446] 1 Chron. xxvi. 17.

[447] Ezek. xlvi. 8, 9.

[448] Ezek. xliv. 2, 3.

[449] 1 Chron. xxvi. 15, 16, 17, 18.

[450] Ezek. xl. 22, 26, 31, 34, 37.

[451] Plate II & III.

[452] 1 King. vi. 36. & vii. 13. Ezek. xl. 17, 18.

[453] Ezek. xl. 10, 31, 34, 37.

[454] Plate I.

[455] 1 King. vi. 36, & vii. 12.

[456] Ezek. xl. 17.

[457] Plate III.

[458] Plate I & II.

[459] Ezek. xlvi. 21, 22.

[460] Ezek. xl. 45.

[461] Ezek. xl. 39, 41, 42, 46.

[462] Plate II.

[463] Ezek. xlii. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 13, 14.

[464] Ezek. xlvi. 19, 20.

[465] Ezek. xlii. 5, 6.

[466] 1 King. vi. 2. Ezek. xli. 2, 4, 12, 13, 14.

[467] 1 King. vi. 3. Ezek. xli. 13.

[468] Ezek. xli. 6, 11.

[469] 1 King. vi. 6.

[470] Ezek. xli. 6.

[471] 2 Chron. iii. 4.

[472] 1 King. vi. 8.

[473] 2 Chron. xx. 5.

[474] 2 King. xvi. 18.

[475] Ezra vi. 3, 4.

[476] Plate I

[477] Plate III.

[478] Plate I.

[479] Valer. Max. l. 9. c. 2.

[480] Porph. de Abstinentia, lib. 4.

[481] Q. Curt. Lib. iii. c. 3.

[482] Suidas in ŒñœâœÅŒøŒ±œÉœÑœÅŒ∑œÇ.

[483] Ammian. l. 23. c. 6.

[484] Euseb. Pr√¶p. Evang. l. 1. c. ult.

[485] √Üsch. Pers√¶ v. 763.

[486] Apud. Hieron in Dan. viii.


