
THE LAST OF THE PLAINSMEN


by

ZANE GREY





PREFATORY NOTE

Buffalo Jones needs no introduction to American sportsmen, but to these
of my readers who are unacquainted with him a few words may not be
amiss.

He was born sixty-two years ago on the Illinois prairie, and he has
devoted practically all of his life to the pursuit of wild animals. It
has been a pursuit which owed its unflagging energy and indomitable
purpose to a singular passion, almost an obsession, to capture alive,
not to kill. He has caught and broken the will of every well-known wild
beast native to western North America. Killing was repulsive to him. He
even disliked the sight of a sporting rifle, though for years necessity
compelled him to earn his livelihood by supplying the meat of buffalo
to the caravans crossing the plains. At last, seeing that the
extinction of the noble beasts was inevitable, he smashed his rifle
over a wagon wheel and vowed to save the species. For ten years he
labored, pursuing, capturing and taming buffalo, for which the West
gave him fame, and the name Preserver of the American Bison.

As civilization encroached upon the plains Buffalo Jones ranged slowly
westward; and to-day an isolated desert-bound plateau on the north rim
of the Grand Canyon of Arizona is his home. There his buffalo browse
with the mustang and deer, and are as free as ever they were on the
rolling plains.

In the spring of 1907 I was the fortunate companion of the old
plainsman on a trip across the desert, and a hunt in that wonderful
country of yellow crags, deep canyons and giant pines. I want to tell
about it. I want to show the color and beauty of those painted cliffs
and the long, brown-matted bluebell-dotted aisles in the grand forests;
I want to give a suggestion of the tang of the dry, cool air; and
particularly I want to throw a little light upon the life and nature of
that strange character and remarkable man, Buffalo Jones.

Happily in remembrance a writer can live over his experiences, and see
once more the moonblanched silver mountain peaks against the dark blue
sky; hear the lonely sough of the night wind through the pines; feel
the dance of wild expectation in the quivering pulse; the stir, the
thrill, the joy of hard action in perilous moments; the mystery of
man's yearning for the unattainable.

As a boy I read of Boone with a throbbing heart, and the silent
moccasined, vengeful Wetzel I loved.

I pored over the deeds of later men--Custer and Carson, those heroes of
the plains. And as a man I came to see the wonder, the tragedy of their
lives, and to write about them. It has been my destiny--what a happy
fulfillment of my dreams of border spirit!--to live for a while in the
fast-fading wild environment which produced these great men with the
last of the great plainsmen.

ZANE GREY.



CONTENTS

   1. THE ARIZONA DESERT
   2. THE RANGE
   3. THE LAST HERD
   4. THE TRAIL
   5. OAK SPRING
   6. THE WHITE MUSTANG
   7. SNAKE GULCH
   8. NAZA! NAZA! NAZA!
   9. THE LAND OF THE MUSK-OX
  10. SUCCESS AND FAILURE
  11. ON TO THE SIWASH
  12. OLD TOM
  13. SINGING CLIFFS
  14. ALL HEROES BUT ONE
  15. JONES ON COUGARS
  16. KITTY
  17. CONCLUSION




CHAPTER 1.

THE ARIZONA DESERT

One afternoon, far out on the sun-baked waste of sage, we made camp
near a clump of withered pinyon trees. The cold desert wind came down
upon us with the sudden darkness. Even the Mormons, who were finding
the trail for us across the drifting sands, forgot to sing and pray at
sundown. We huddled round the campfire, a tired and silent little
group. When out of the lonely, melancholy night some wandering Navajos
stole like shadows to our fire, we hailed their advent with delight.
They were good-natured Indians, willing to barter a blanket or
bracelet; and one of them, a tall, gaunt fellow, with the bearing of a
chief, could speak a little English.

"How," said he, in a deep chest voice.

"Hello, Noddlecoddy," greeted Jim Emmett, the Mormon guide.

"Ugh!" answered the Indian.

"Big paleface--Buffalo Jones---big chief--buffalo man," introduced
Emmett, indicating Jones.

"How." The Navajo spoke with dignity, and extended a friendly hand.

"Jones big white chief--rope buffalo--tie up tight," continued Emmett,
making motions with his arm, as if he were whirling a lasso.

"No big--heap small buffalo," said the Indian, holding his hand level
with his knee, and smiling broadly.

Jones, erect, rugged, brawny, stood in the full light of the campfire.
He had a dark, bronzed, inscrutable face; a stern mouth and square jaw,
keen eyes, half-closed from years of searching the wide plains; and
deep furrows wrinkling his cheeks. A strange stillness enfolded his
feature the tranquility earned from a long life of adventure.

He held up both muscular hands to the Navajo, and spread out his
fingers.

"Rope buffalo--heap big buffalo--heap many--one sun."

The Indian straightened up, but kept his friendly smile.

"Me big chief," went on Jones, "me go far north--Land of Little
Sticks--Naza! Naza! rope musk-ox; rope White Manitou of Great Slave
Naza! Naza!"

"Naza!" replied the Navajo, pointing to the North Star; "no--no."

"Yes me big paleface--me come long way toward setting sun--go cross Big
Water--go Buckskin--Siwash--chase cougar."

The cougar, or mountain lion, is a Navajo god and the Navajos hold him
in as much fear and reverence as do the Great Slave Indians the musk-ox.

"No kill cougar," continued Jones, as the Indian's bold features
hardened. "Run cougar horseback--run long way--dogs chase cougar long
time--chase cougar up tree! Me big chief--me climb tree--climb high
up--lasso cougar--rope cougar--tie cougar all tight."

The Navajo's solemn face relaxed

"White man heap fun. No."

"Yes," cried Jones, extending his great arms. "Me strong; me rope
cougar--me tie cougar; ride off wigwam, keep cougar alive."

"No," replied the savage vehemently.

"Yes," protested Jones, nodding earnestly.

"No," answered the Navajo, louder, raising his dark head.

"Yes!" shouted Jones.

"BIG LIE!" the Indian thundered.

Jones joined good-naturedly in the laugh at his expense. The Indian had
crudely voiced a skepticism I had heard more delicately hinted in New
York, and singularly enough, which had strengthened on our way West, as
we met ranchers, prospectors and cowboys. But those few men I had
fortunately met, who really knew Jones, more than overbalanced the
doubt and ridicule cast upon him. I recalled a scarred old veteran of
the plains, who had talked to me in true Western bluntness:

"Say, young feller, I heerd yer couldn't git acrost the Canyon fer the
deep snow on the north rim. Wal, ye're lucky. Now, yer hit the trail
fer New York, an' keep goin'! Don't ever tackle the desert, 'specially
with them Mormons. They've got water on the brain, wusser 'n religion.
It's two hundred an' fifty miles from Flagstaff to Jones range, an'
only two drinks on the trail. I know this hyar Buffalo Jones. I knowed
him way back in the seventies, when he was doin' them ropin' stunts
thet made him famous as the preserver of the American bison. I know
about that crazy trip of his'n to the Barren Lands, after musk-ox. An'
I reckon I kin guess what he'll do over there in the Siwash. He'll rope
cougars--sure he will--an' watch 'em jump. Jones would rope the devil,
an' tie him down if the lasso didn't burn. Oh! he's hell on ropin'
things. An' he's wusser 'n hell on men, an' hosses, an' dogs."

All that my well-meaning friend suggested made me, of course, only the
more eager to go with Jones. Where I had once been interested in the
old buffalo hunter, I was now fascinated. And now I was with him in the
desert and seeing him as he was, a simple, quiet man, who fitted the
mountains and the silences, and the long reaches of distance.

"It does seem hard to believe--all this about Jones," remarked Judd,
one of Emmett's men.

"How could a man have the strength and the nerve? And isn't it cruel to
keep wild animals in captivity? it against God's word?"

Quick as speech could flow, Jones quoted: "And God said, 'Let us make
man in our image, and give him dominion over the fish of the sea, the
fowls of the air, over all the cattle, and over every creeping thing
that creepeth upon the earth'!"

"Dominion--over all the beasts of the field!" repeated Jones, his big
voice rolling out. He clenched his huge fists, and spread wide his long
arms. "Dominion! That was God's word!" The power and intensity of him
could be felt. Then he relaxed, dropped his arms, and once more grew
calm. But he had shown a glimpse of the great, strange and absorbing
passion of his life. Once he had told me how, when a mere child, he had
hazarded limb and neck to capture a fox squirrel, how he had held on to
the vicious little animal, though it bit his hand through; how he had
never learned to play the games of boyhood; that when the youths of the
little Illinois village were at play, he roamed the prairies, or the
rolling, wooded hills, or watched a gopher hole. That boy was father of
the man: for sixty years an enduring passion for dominion over wild
animals had possessed him, and made his life an endless pursuit.

Our guests, the Navajos, departed early, and vanished silently in the
gloom of the desert. We settled down again into a quiet that was broken
only by the low chant-like song of a praying Mormon. Suddenly the
hounds bristled, and old Moze, a surly and aggressive dog, rose and
barked at some real or imaginary desert prowler. A sharp command from
Jones made Moze crouch down, and the other hounds cowered close
together.

"Better tie up the dogs," suggested Jones. "Like as not coyotes run
down here from the hills."

The hounds were my especial delight. But Jones regarded them with
considerable contempt. When all was said, this was no small wonder, for
that quintet of long-eared canines would have tried the patience of a
saint. Old Moze was a Missouri hound that Jones had procured in that
State of uncertain qualities; and the dog had grown old over
coon-trails. He was black and white, grizzled and battlescarred; and if
ever a dog had an evil eye, Moze was that dog. He had a way of wagging
his tail--an indeterminate, equivocal sort of wag, as if he realized
his ugliness and knew he stood little chance of making friends, but was
still hopeful and willing. As for me, the first time he manifested this
evidence of a good heart under a rough coat, he won me forever.

To tell of Moze's derelictions up to that time would take more space
than would a history of the whole trip; but the enumeration of several
incidents will at once stamp him as a dog of character, and will
establish the fact that even if his progenitors had never taken any
blue ribbons, they had at least bequeathed him fighting blood. At
Flagstaff we chained him in the yard of a livery stable. Next morning
we found him hanging by his chain on the other side of an eight-foot
fence. We took him down, expecting to have the sorrowful duty of
burying him; but Moze shook himself, wagged his tail and then pitched
into the livery stable dog. As a matter of fact, fighting was his
forte. He whipped all of the dogs in Flagstaff; and when our blood
hounds came on from California, he put three of them hors de combat at
once, and subdued the pup with a savage growl. His crowning feat,
however, made even the stoical Jones open his mouth in amaze. We had
taken Moze to the El Tovar at the Grand Canyon, and finding it
impossible to get over to the north rim, we left him with one of
Jones's men, called Rust, who was working on the Canyon trail. Rust's
instructions were to bring Moze to Flagstaff in two weeks. He brought
the dog a little ahead time, and roared his appreciation of the relief
it to get the responsibility off his hands. And he related many strange
things, most striking of which was how Moze had broken his chain and
plunged into the raging Colorado River, and tried to swim it just above
the terrible Sockdolager Rapids. Rust and his fellow-workmen watched
the dog disappear in the yellow, wrestling, turbulent whirl of waters,
and had heard his knell in the booming roar of the falls. Nothing but a
fish could live in that current; nothing but a bird could scale those
perpendicular marble walls. That night, however, when the men crossed
on the tramway, Moze met them with a wag of his tail. He had crossed
the river, and he had come back!

To the four reddish-brown, high-framed bloodhounds I had given the
names of Don, Tige, Jude and Ranger; and by dint of persuasion, had
succeeded in establishing some kind of family relation between them and
Moze. This night I tied up the bloodhounds, after bathing and salving
their sore feet; and I left Moze free, for he grew fretful and surly
under restraint.

The Mormons, prone, dark, blanketed figures, lay on the sand. Jones was
crawling into his bed. I walked a little way from the dying fire, and
faced the north, where the desert stretched, mysterious and
illimitable. How solemn and still it was! I drew in a great breath of
the cold air, and thrilled with a nameless sensation. Something was
there, away to the northward; it called to me from out of the dark and
gloom; I was going to meet it.

I lay down to sleep with the great blue expanse open to my eyes. The
stars were very large, and wonderfully bright, yet they seemed so much
farther off than I had ever seen them. The wind softly sifted the sand.
I hearkened to the tinkle of the cowbells on the hobbled horses. The
last thing I remembered was old Moze creeping close to my side, seeking
the warmth of my body.

When I awakened, a long, pale line showed out of the dun-colored clouds
in the east. It slowly lengthened, and tinged to red. Then the morning
broke, and the slopes of snow on the San Francisco peaks behind us
glowed a delicate pink. The Mormons were up and doing with the dawn.
They were stalwart men, rather silent, and all workers. It was
interesting to see them pack for the day's journey. They traveled with
wagons and mules, in the most primitive way, which Jones assured me was
exactly as their fathers had crossed the plains fifty years before, on
the trail to Utah.

All morning we made good time, and as we descended into the desert, the
air became warmer, the scrubby cedar growth began to fail, and the
bunches of sage were few and far between. I turned often to gaze back
at the San Francisco peaks. The snowcapped tips glistened and grew
higher, and stood out in startling relief. Some one said they could be
seen two hundred miles across the desert, and were a landmark and a
fascination to all travelers thitherward.

I never raised my eyes to the north that I did not draw my breath
quickly and grow chill with awe and bewilderment with the marvel of the
desert. The scaly red ground descended gradually; bare red knolls, like
waves, rolled away northward; black buttes reared their flat heads;
long ranges of sand flowed between them like streams, and all sloped
away to merge into gray, shadowy obscurity, into wild and desolate,
dreamy and misty nothingness.

"Do you see those white sand dunes there, more to the left?" asked
Emmett. "The Little Colorado runs in there. How far does it look to
you?"

"Thirty miles, perhaps," I replied, adding ten miles to my estimate.

"It's seventy-five. We'll get there day after to-morrow. If the snow in
the mountains has begun to melt, we'll have a time getting across."

That afternoon, a hot wind blew in my face, carrying fine sand that cut
and blinded. It filled my throat, sending me to the water cask till I
was ashamed. When I fell into my bed at night, I never turned. The next
day was hotter; the wind blew harder; the sand stung sharper.

About noon the following day, the horses whinnied, and the mules roused
out of their tardy gait. "They smell water," said Emmett. And despite
the heat, and the sand in my nostrils, I smelled it, too. The dogs,
poor foot-sore fellows, trotted on ahead down the trail. A few more
miles of hot sand and gravel and red stone brought us around a low mesa
to the Little Colorado.

It was a wide stream of swiftly running, reddish-muddy water. In the
channel, cut by floods, little streams trickled and meandered in all
directions. The main part of the river ran in close to the bank we were
on. The dogs lolled in the water; the horses and mules tried to run in,
but were restrained; the men drank, and bathed their faces. According
to my Flagstaff adviser, this was one of the two drinks I would get on
the desert, so I availed myself heartily of the opportunity. The water
was full of sand, but cold and gratefully thirst-quenching.

The Little Colorado seemed no more to me than a shallow creek; I heard
nothing sullen or menacing in its musical flow.

"Doesn't look bad, eh?" queried Emmett, who read my thought. "You'd be
surprised to learn how many men and Indians, horses, sheep and wagons
are buried under that quicksand."

The secret was out, and I wondered no more. At once the stream and wet
bars of sand took on a different color. I removed my boots, and waded
out to a little bar. The sand seemed quite firm, but water oozed out
around my feet; and when I stepped, the whole bar shook like jelly. I
pushed my foot through the crust, and the cold, wet sand took hold, and
tried to suck me down.

"How can you ford this stream with horses?" I asked Emmett.

"We must take our chances," replied he. "We'll hitch two teams to one
wagon, and run the horses. I've forded here at worse stages than this.
Once a team got stuck, and I had to leave it; another time the water
was high, and washed me downstream."

Emmett sent his son into the stream on a mule. The rider lashed his
mount, and plunging, splashing, crossed at a pace near a gallop. He
returned in the same manner, and reported one bad place near the other
side.

Jones and I got on the first wagon and tried to coax up the dogs, but
they would not come. Emmett had to lash the four horses to start them;
and other Mormons riding alongside, yelled at them, and used their
whips. The wagon bowled into the water with a tremendous splash. We
were wet through before we had gone twenty feet. The plunging horses
were lost in yellow spray; the stream rushed through the wheels; the
Mormons yelled. I wanted to see, but was lost in a veil of yellow mist.
Jones yelled in my ear, but I could not hear what he said. Once the
wagon wheels struck a stone or log, almost lurching us overboard. A
muddy splash blinded me. I cried out in my excitement, and punched
Jones in the back. Next moment, the keen exhilaration of the ride gave
way to horror. We seemed to drag, and almost stop. Some one roared:
"Horse down!" One instant of painful suspense, in which imagination
pictured another tragedy added to the record of this deceitful river--a
moment filled with intense feeling, and sensation of splash, and yell,
and fury of action; then the three able horses dragged their comrade
out of the quicksand. He regained his feet, and plunged on. Spurred by
fear, the horses increased their efforts, and amid clouds of spray,
galloped the remaining distance to the other side.

Jones looked disgusted. Like all plainsmen, he hated water. Emmett and
his men calmly unhitched. No trace of alarm, or even of excitement
showed in their bronzed faces.

"We made that fine and easy," remarked Emmett.

So I sat down and wondered what Jones and Emmett, and these men would
consider really hazardous. I began to have a feeling that I would find
out; that experience for me was but in its infancy; that far across the
desert the something which had called me would show hard, keen,
perilous life. And I began to think of reserve powers of fortitude and
endurance.

The other wagons were brought across without mishap; but the dogs did
not come with them. Jones called and called. The dogs howled and
howled. Finally I waded out over the wet bars and little streams to a
point several hundred yards nearer the dogs. Moze was lying down, but
the others were whining and howling in a state of great perturbation. I
called and called. They answered, and even ran into the water, but did
not start across.

"Hyah, Moze! hyah, you Indian!" I yelled, losing my patience. "You've
already swum the Big Colorado, and this is only a brook. Come on!"

This appeal evidently touched Moze, for he barked, and plunged in. He
made the water fly, and when carried off his feet, breasted the current
with energy and power. He made shore almost even with me, and wagged
his tail. Not to be outdone, Jude, Tige and Don followed suit, and
first one and then another was swept off his feet and carried
downstream. They landed below me. This left Ranger, the pup, alone on
the other shore. Of all the pitiful yelps ever uttered by a frightened
and lonely puppy, his were the most forlorn I had ever heard. Time
after time he plunged in, and with many bitter howls of distress, went
back. I kept calling, and at last, hoping to make him come by a show of
indifference, I started away. This broke his heart. Putting up his
head, he let out a long, melancholy wail, which for aught I knew might
have been a prayer, and then consigned himself to the yellow current.
Ranger swam like a boy learning. He seemed to be afraid to get wet. His
forefeet were continually pawing the air in front of his nose. When he
struck the swift place, he went downstream like a flash, but still kept
swimming valiantly. I tried to follow along the sand-bar, but found it
impossible. I encouraged him by yelling. He drifted far below, stranded
on an island, crossed it, and plunged in again, to make shore almost
out of my sight. And when at last I got to dry sand, there was Ranger,
wet and disheveled, but consciously proud and happy.

After lunch we entered upon the seventy-mile stretch from the Little to
the Big Colorado.

Imagination had pictured the desert for me as a vast, sandy plain, flat
and monotonous. Reality showed me desolate mountains gleaming bare in
the sun, long lines of red bluffs, white sand dunes, and hills of blue
clay, areas of level ground--in all, a many-hued, boundless world in
itself, wonderful and beautiful, fading all around into the purple haze
of deceiving distance.

Thin, clear, sweet, dry, the desert air carried a languor, a
dreaminess, tidings of far-off things, and an enthralling promise. The
fragrance of flowers, the beauty and grace of women, the sweetness of
music, the mystery of life--all seemed to float on that promise. It was
the air breathed by the lotus-eaters, when they dreamed, and wandered
no more.

Beyond the Little Colorado, we began to climb again. The sand was
thick; the horses labored; the drivers shielded their faces. The dogs
began to limp and lag. Ranger had to be taken into a wagon; and then,
one by one, all of the other dogs except Moze. He refused to ride, and
trotted along with his head down.

Far to the front the pink cliffs, the ragged mesas, the dark, volcanic
spurs of the Big Colorado stood up and beckoned us onward. But they
were a far hundred miles across the shifting sands, and baked day, and
ragged rocks. Always in the rear rose the San Francisco peaks, cold and
pure, startlingly clear and close in the rare atmosphere.

We camped near another water hole, located in a deep, yellow-colored
gorge, crumbling to pieces, a ruin of rock, and silent as the grave. In
the bottom of the canyon was a pool of water, covered with green scum.
My thirst was effectually quenched by the mere sight of it. I slept
poorly, and lay for hours watching the great stars. The silence was
painfully oppressive. If Jones had not begun to give a respectable
imitation of the exhaust pipe on a steamboat, I should have been
compelled to shout aloud, or get up; but this snoring would have
dispelled anything. The morning came gray and cheerless. I got up stiff
and sore, with a tongue like a rope.

All day long we ran the gauntlet of the hot, flying sand. Night came
again, a cold, windy night. I slept well until a mule stepped on my
bed, which was conducive to restlessness. At dawn, cold, gray clouds
tried to blot out the rosy east. I could hardly get up. My lips were
cracked; my tongue swollen to twice its natural size; my eyes smarted
and burned. The barrels and kegs of water were exhausted. Holes that
had been dug in the dry sand of a dry streambed the night before in the
morning yielded a scant supply of muddy alkali water, which went to the
horses.

Only twice that day did I rouse to anything resembling enthusiasm. We
came to a stretch of country showing the wonderful diversity of the
desert land. A long range of beautifully rounded clay stones bordered
the trail. So symmetrical were they that I imagined them works of
sculptors. Light blue, dark blue, clay blue, marine blue, cobalt
blue--every shade of blue was there, but no other color. The other time
that I awoke to sensations from without was when we came to the top of
a ridge. We had been passing through red-lands. Jones called the place
a strong, specific word which really was illustrative of the heat amid
those scaling red ridges. We came out where the red changed abruptly to
gray. I seemed always to see things first, and I cried out: "Look! here
are a red lake and trees!"

"No, lad, not a lake," said old Jim, smiling at me; "that's what haunts
the desert traveler. It's only mirage!"

So I awoke to the realization of that illusive thing, the mirage, a
beautiful lie, false as stairs of sand. Far northward a clear rippling
lake sparkled in the sunshine. Tall, stately trees, with waving green
foliage, bordered the water. For a long moment it lay there, smiling in
the sun, a thing almost tangible; and then it faded. I felt a sense of
actual loss. So real had been the illusion that I could not believe I
was not soon to drink and wade and dabble in the cool waters.
Disappointment was keen. This is what maddens the prospector or
sheep-herder lost in the desert. Was it not a terrible thing to be
dying of thirst, to see sparkling water, almost to smell it and then
realize suddenly that all was only a lying track of the desert, a lure,
a delusion? I ceased to wonder at the Mormons, and their search for
water, their talk of water. But I had not realized its true
significance. I had not known what water was. I had never appreciated
it. So it was my destiny to learn that water is the greatest thing on
earth. I hung over a three-foot hole in a dry stream-bed, and watched
it ooze and seep through the sand, and fill up--oh, so slowly; and I
felt it loosen my parched tongue, and steal through all my dry body
with strength and life. Water is said to constitute three fourths of
the universe. However that may be, on the desert it is the whole world,
and all of life.

Two days passed by, all hot sand and wind and glare. The Mormons sang
no more at evening; Jones was silent; the dogs were limp as rags.

At Moncaupie Wash we ran into a sandstorm. The horses turned their
backs to it, and bowed their heads patiently. The Mormons covered
themselves. I wrapped a blanket round my head and hid behind a sage
bush. The wind, carrying the sand, made a strange hollow roar. All was
enveloped in a weird yellow opacity. The sand seeped through the sage
bush and swept by with a soft, rustling sound, not unlike the wind in
the rye. From time to time I raised a corner of my blanket and peeped
out. Where my feet had stretched was an enormous mound of sand. I felt
the blanket, weighted down, slowly settle over me.

Suddenly as it had come, the sandstorm passed. It left a changed world
for us. The trail was covered; the wheels hub-deep in sand; the horses,
walking sand dunes. I could not close my teeth without grating harshly
on sand.

We journeyed onward, and passed long lines of petrified trees, some a
hundred feet in length, lying as they had fallen, thousands of years
before. White ants crawled among the ruins. Slowly climbing the sandy
trail, we circled a great red bluff with jagged peaks, that had seemed
an interminable obstacle. A scant growth of cedar and sage again made
its appearance. Here we halted to pass another night. Under a cedar I
heard the plaintive, piteous bleat of an animal. I searched, and
presently found a little black and white lamb, scarcely able to stand.
It came readily to me, and I carried it to the wagon.

"That's a Navajo lamb," said Emmett. "It's lost. There are Navajo
Indians close by."

"Away in the desert we heard its cry," quoted one of the Mormons.

Jones and I climbed the red mesa near camp to see the sunset. All the
western world was ablaze in golden glory. Shafts of light shot toward
the zenith, and bands of paler gold, tinging to rose, circled away from
the fiery, sinking globe. Suddenly the sun sank, the gold changed to
gray, then to purple, and shadows formed in the deep gorge at our feet.
So sudden was the transformation that soon it was night, the solemn,
impressive night of the desert. A stillness that seemed too sacred to
break clasped the place; it was infinite; it held the bygone ages, and
eternity.

More days, and miles, miles, miles! The last day's ride to the Big
Colorado was unforgettable. We rode toward the head of a gigantic red
cliff pocket, a veritable inferno, immeasurably hot, glaring, awful. It
towered higher and higher above us. When we reached a point of this red
barrier, we heard the dull rumbling roar of water, and we came out, at
length, on a winding trail cut in the face of a blue overhanging the
Colorado River. The first sight of most famous and much-heralded
wonders of nature is often disappointing; but never can this be said of
the blood-hued Rio Colorado. If it had beauty, it was beauty that
appalled. So riveted was my gaze that I could hardly turn it across the
river, where Emmett proudly pointed out his lonely home--an oasis set
down amidst beetling red cliffs. How grateful to the eye was the green
of alfalfa and cottonwood! Going round the bluff trail, the wheels had
only a foot of room to spare; and the sheer descent into the red,
turbid, congested river was terrifying.

I saw the constricted rapids, where the Colorado took its plunge into
the box-like head of the Grand Canyon of Arizona; and the deep,
reverberating boom of the river, at flood height, was a fearful thing
to hear. I could not repress a shudder at the thought of crossing above
that rapid.

The bronze walls widened as we proceeded, and we got down presently to
a level, where a long wire cable stretched across the river. Under the
cable ran a rope. On the other side was an old scow moored to the bank.

"Are we going across in that?" I asked Emmett, pointing to the boat.

"We'll all be on the other side before dark," he replied cheerily.

I felt that I would rather start back alone over the desert than trust
myself in such a craft, on such a river. And it was all because I had
had experience with bad rivers, and thought I was a judge of dangerous
currents. The Colorado slid with a menacing roar out of a giant split
in the red wall, and whirled, eddied, bulged on toward its confinement
in the iron-ribbed canyon below.

In answer to shots fired, Emmett's man appeared on the other side, and
rode down to the ferry landing. Here he got into a skiff, and rowed
laboriously upstream for a long distance before he started across, and
then swung into the current. He swept down rapidly, and twice the skiff
whirled, and completely turned round; but he reached our bank safely.
Taking two men aboard he rowed upstream again, close to the shore, and
returned to the opposite side in much the same manner in which he had
come over.

The three men pushed out the scow, and grasping the rope overhead,
began to pull. The big craft ran easily. When the current struck it,
the wire cable sagged, the water boiled and surged under it, raising
one end, and then the other. Nevertheless, five minutes were all that
were required to pull the boat over.

It was a rude, oblong affair, made of heavy planks loosely put
together, and it leaked. When Jones suggested that we get the agony
over as quickly as possible, I was with him, and we embarked together.
Jones said he did not like the looks of the tackle; and when I thought
of his by no means small mechanical skill, I had not added a cheerful
idea to my consciousness. The horses of the first team had to be
dragged upon the scow, and once on, they reared and plunged.

When we started, four men pulled the rope, and Emmett sat in the stern,
with the tackle guys in hand. As the current hit us, he let out the
guys, which maneuver caused the boat to swing stern downstream. When it
pointed obliquely, he made fast the guys again. I saw that this served
two purposes: the current struck, slid alongside, and over the stern,
which mitigated the danger, and at the same time helped the boat across.

To look at the river was to court terror, but I had to look. It was an
infernal thing. It roared in hollow, sullen voice, as a monster
growling. It had voice, this river, and one strangely changeful. It
moaned as if in pain--it whined, it cried. Then at times it would seem
strangely silent. The current as complex and mutable as human life. It
boiled, beat and bulged. The bulge itself was an incompressible thing,
like a roaring lift of the waters from submarine explosion. Then it
would smooth out, and run like oil. It shifted from one channel to
another, rushed to the center of the river, then swung close to one
shore or the other. Again it swelled near the boat, in great, boiling,
hissing eddies.

"Look! See where it breaks through the mountain!" yelled Jones in my
ear.

I looked upstream to see the stupendous granite walls separated in a
gigantic split that must have been made by a terrible seismic
disturbance; and from this gap poured the dark, turgid, mystic flood.

I was in a cold sweat when we touched shore, and I jumped long before
the boat was properly moored.

Emmett was wet to the waist where the water had surged over him. As he
sat rearranging some tackle I remarked to him that of course he must be
a splendid swimmer, or he would not take such risks.

"No, I can't swim a stroke," he replied; "and it wouldn't be any use if
I could. Once in there a man's a goner."

"You've had bad accidents here?" I questioned.

"No, not bad. We only drowned two men last year. You see, we had to tow
the boat up the river, and row across, as then we hadn't the wire. Just
above, on this side, the boat hit a stone, and the current washed over
her, taking off the team and two men."

"Didn't you attempt to rescue them?" I asked, after waiting a moment.

"No use. They never came up."

"Isn't the river high now?" I continued, shuddering as I glanced out at
the whirling logs and drifts.

"High, and coming up. If I don't get the other teams over to-day I'll
wait until she goes down. At this season she rises and lowers every day
or so, until June then comes the big flood, and we don't cross for
months."

I sat for three hours watching Emmett bring over the rest of his party,
which he did without accident, but at the expense of great effort. And
all the time in my ears dinned the roar, the boom, the rumble of this
singularly rapacious and purposeful river--a river of silt, a red river
of dark, sinister meaning, a river with terrible work to perform, a
river which never gave up its dead.



CHAPTER 2.

THE RANGE

After a much-needed rest at Emmett's, we bade good-by to him and his
hospitable family, and under the guidance of his man once more took to
the wind-swept trail. We pursued a southwesterly course now, following
the lead of the craggy red wall that stretched on and on for hundreds
of miles into Utah. The desert, smoky and hot, fell away to the left,
and in the foreground a dark, irregular line marked the Grand Canyon
cutting through the plateau.

The wind whipped in from the vast, open expanse, and meeting an
obstacle in the red wall, turned north and raced past us. Jones's hat
blew off, stood on its rim, and rolled. It kept on rolling, thirty
miles an hour, more or less; so fast, at least, that we were a long
time catching up to it with a team of horses. Possibly we never would
have caught it had not a stone checked its flight. Further
manifestation of the power of the desert wind surrounded us on all
sides. It had hollowed out huge stones from the cliffs, and tumbled
them to the plain below; and then, sweeping sand and gravel low across
the desert floor, had cut them deeply, until they rested on slender
pedestals, thus sculptoring grotesque and striking monuments to the
marvelous persistence of this element of nature.

Late that afternoon, as we reached the height of the plateau, Jones
woke up and shouted: "Ha! there's Buckskin!"

Far southward lay a long, black mountain, covered with patches of
shining snow. I could follow the zigzag line of the Grand Canyon
splitting the desert plateau, and saw it disappear in the haze round
the end of the mountain. From this I got my first clear impression of
the topography of the country surrounding our objective point. Buckskin
mountain ran its blunt end eastward to the Canyon--in fact, formed a
hundred miles of the north rim. As it was nine thousand feet high it
still held the snow, which had occasioned our lengthy desert ride to
get back of the mountain. I could see the long slopes rising out of the
desert to meet the timber.

As we bowled merrily down grade I noticed that we were no longer on
stony ground, and that a little scant silvery grass had made its
appearance. Then little branches of green, with a blue flower, smiled
out of the clayish sand.

All of a sudden Jones stood up, and let out a wild Comanche yell. I was
more startled by the yell than by the great hand he smashed down on my
shoulder, and for the moment I was dazed.

"There! look! look! the buffalo! Hi! Hi! Hi!"

Below us, a few miles on a rising knoll, a big herd of buffalo shone
black in the gold of the evening sun. I had not Jones's incentive, but
I felt enthusiasm born of the wild and beautiful picture, and added my
yell to his. The huge, burly leader of the herd lifted his head, and
after regarding us for a few moments calmly went on browsing.

The desert had fringed away into a grand rolling pastureland, walled in
by the red cliffs, the slopes of Buckskin, and further isolated by the
Canyon. Here was a range of twenty-four hundred square miles without a
foot of barb-wire, a pasture fenced in by natural forces, with the
splendid feature that the buffalo could browse on the plain in winter,
and go up into the cool foothills of Buckskin in summer.

From another ridge we saw a cabin dotting the rolling plain, and in
half an hour we reached it. As we climbed down from the wagon a brown
and black dog came dashing out of the cabin, and promptly jumped at
Moze. His selection showed poor discrimination, for Moze whipped him
before I could separate them. Hearing Jones heartily greeting some one,
I turned in his direction, only to be distracted by another dog fight.
Don had tackled Moze for the seventh time. Memory rankled in Don, and
he needed a lot of whipping, some of which he was getting when I
rescued him.

Next moment I was shaking hands with Frank and Jim, Jones's ranchmen.
At a glance I liked them both. Frank was short and wiry, and had a big,
ferocious mustache, the effect of which was softened by his kindly
brown eyes. Jim was tall, a little heavier; he had a careless, tidy
look; his eyes were searching, and though he appeared a young man, his
hair was white.

"I shore am glad to see you all," said Jim, in slow, soft, Southern
accent.

"Get down, get down," was Frank's welcome--a typically Western one, for
we had already gotten down; "an' come in. You must be worked out. Sure
you've come a long way." He was quick of speech, full of nervous
energy, and beamed with hospitality.

The cabin was the rudest kind of log affair, with a huge stone
fireplace in one end, deer antlers and coyote skins on the wall,
saddles and cowboys' traps in a corner, a nice, large, promising
cupboard, and a table and chairs. Jim threw wood on a smoldering fire,
that soon blazed and crackled cheerily.

I sank down into a chair with a feeling of blessed relief. Ten days of
desert ride behind me! Promise of wonderful days before me, with the
last of the old plainsmen. No wonder a sweet sense of ease stole over
me, or that the fire seemed a live and joyously welcoming thing, or
that Jim's deft maneuvers in preparation of supper roused in me a rapt
admiration.

"Twenty calves this spring!" cried Jones, punching me in my sore side.
"Ten thousand dollars worth of calves!"

He was now altogether a changed man; he looked almost young; his eyes
danced, and he rubbed his big hands together while he plied Frank with
questions. In strange surroundings--that is, away from his Native
Wilds, Jones had been a silent man; it had been almost impossible to
get anything out of him. But now I saw that I should come to know the
real man. In a very few moments he had talked more than on all the
desert trip, and what he said, added to the little I had already
learned, put me in possession of some interesting information as to his
buffalo.

Some years before he had conceived the idea of hybridizing buffalo with
black Galloway cattle; and with the characteristic determination and
energy of the man, he at once set about finding a suitable range. This
was difficult, and took years of searching. At last the wild north rim
of the Grand Canyon, a section unknown except to a few Indians and
mustang hunters, was settled upon. Then the gigantic task of
transporting the herd of buffalo by rail from Montana to Salt Lake was
begun. The two hundred and ninety miles of desert lying between the
home of the Mormons and Buckskin Mountain was an obstacle almost
insurmountable. The journey was undertaken and found even more trying
than had been expected. Buffalo after buffalo died on the way. Then
Frank, Jones's right-hand man, put into execution a plan he had been
thinking of--namely, to travel by night. It succeeded. The buffalo
rested in the day and traveled by easy stages by night, with the result
that the big herd was transported to the ideal range.

Here, in an environment strange to their race, but peculiarly
adaptable, they thrived and multiplied. The hybrid of the Galloway cow
and buffalo proved a great success. Jones called the new species
"Cattalo." The cattalo took the hardiness of the buffalo, and never
required artificial food or shelter. He would face the desert storm or
blizzard and stand stock still in his tracks until the weather cleared.
He became quite domestic, could be easily handled, and grew exceedingly
fat on very little provender. The folds of his stomach were so numerous
that they digested even the hardest and flintiest of corn. He had
fourteen ribs on each side, while domestic cattle had only thirteen;
thus he could endure rougher work and longer journeys to water. His fur
was so dense and glossy that it equaled that of the unplucked beaver or
otter, and was fully as valuable as the buffalo robe. And not to be
overlooked by any means was the fact that his meat was delicious.

Jones had to hear every detail of all that had happened since his
absence in the East, and he was particularly inquisitive to learn all
about the twenty cattalo calves. He called different buffalo by name;
and designated the calves by descriptive terms, such as "Whiteface" and
"Crosspatch." He almost forgot to eat, and kept Frank too busy to get
anything into his own mouth. After supper he calmed down.

"How about your other man--Mr. Wallace, I think you said?" asked Frank.

"We expected to meet him at Grand Canyon Station, and then at
Flagstaff. But he didn't show up. Either he backed out or missed us.
I'm sorry; for when we get up on Buckskin, among the wild horses and
cougars, we'll be likely to need him."

"I reckon you'll need me, as well as Jim," said Frank dryly, with a
twinkle in his eye. "The buffs are in good shape an' can get along
without me for a while."

"That'll be fine. How about cougar sign on the mountain?"

"Plenty. I've got two spotted near Clark Spring. Comin' over two weeks
ago I tracked them in the snow along the trail for miles. We'll ooze
over that way, as it's goin' toward the Siwash. The Siwash breaks of
the Canyon--there's the place for lions. I met a wild-horse wrangler
not long back, an' he was tellin' me about Old Tom an' the colts he'd
killed this winter."

Naturally, I here expressed a desire to know more of Old Tom.

"He's the biggest cougar ever known of in these parts. His tracks are
bigger than a horse's, an' have been seen on Buckskin for twelve years.
This wrangler--his name is Clark--said he'd turned his saddle horse out
to graze near camp, an' Old Tom sneaked in an' downed him. The lions
over there are sure a bold bunch. Well, why shouldn't they be? No one
ever hunted them. You see, the mountain is hard to get at. But now
you're here, if it's big cats you want we sure can find them. Only be
easy, be easy. You've all the time there is. An' any job on Buckskin
will take time. We'll look the calves over, an' you must ride the range
to harden up. Then we'll ooze over toward Oak. I expect it'll be boggy,
an' I hope the snow melts soon."

"The snow hadn't melted on Greenland point," replied Jones. "We saw
that with a glass from the El Tovar. We wanted to cross that way, but
Rust said Bright Angel Creek was breast high to a horse, and that creek
is the trail."

"There's four feet of snow on Greenland," said Frank. "It was too early
to come that way. There's only about three months in the year the
Canyon can be crossed at Greenland."

"I want to get in the snow," returned Jones. "This bunch of long-eared
canines I brought never smelled a lion track. Hounds can't be trained
quick without snow. You've got to see what they're trailing, or you
can't break them."

Frank looked dubious. "'Pears to me we'll have trouble gettin' a lion
without lion dogs. It takes a long time to break a hound off of deer,
once he's chased them. Buckskin is full of deer, wolves, coyotes, and
there's the wild horses. We couldn't go a hundred feet without crossin'
trails."

"How's the hound you and Jim fetched in las' year? Has he got a good
nose? Here he is--I like his head. Come here, Bowser--what's his name?"

"Jim named him Sounder, because he sure has a voice. It's great to hear
him on a trail. Sounder has a nose that can't be fooled, an' he'll
trail anythin'; but I don't know if he ever got up a lion."

Sounder wagged his bushy tail and looked up affectionately at Frank. He
had a fine head, great brown eyes, very long ears and curly
brownish-black hair. He was not demonstrative, looked rather askance at
Jones, and avoided the other dogs.

"That dog will make a great lion-chaser," said Jones, decisively, after
his study of Sounder. "He and Moze will keep us busy, once they learn
we want lions."

"I don't believe any dog-trainer could teach them short of six months,"
replied Frank. "Sounder is no spring chicken; an' that black and dirty
white cross between a cayuse an' a barb-wire fence is an old dog. You
can't teach old dogs new tricks."

Jones smiled mysteriously, a smile of conscious superiority, but said
nothing.

"We'll shore hev a storm to-morrow," said Jim, relinquishing his pipe
long enough to speak. He had been silent, and now his meditative gaze
was on the west, through the cabin window, where a dull afterglow faded
under the heavy laden clouds of night and left the horizon dark.

I was very tired when I lay down, but so full of excitement that sleep
did not soon visit my eyelids. The talk about buffalo, wild-horse
hunters, lions and dogs, the prospect of hard riding and unusual
adventure; the vision of Old Tom that had already begun to haunt me,
filled my mind with pictures and fancies. The other fellows dropped off
to sleep, and quiet reigned. Suddenly a succession of queer, sharp
barks came from the plain, close to the cabin. Coyotes were paying us a
call, and judging from the chorus of yelps and howls from our dogs, it
was not a welcome visit. Above the medley rose one big, deep, full
voice that I knew at once belonged to Sounder. Then all was quiet
again. Sleep gradually benumbed my senses. Vague phrases dreamily
drifted to and fro in my mind: "Jones's wild range--Old
Tom--Sounder--great name--great voice--Sounder! Sounder! Sounder--"

Next morning I could hardly crawl out of my sleeping-bag. My bones
ached, my muscles protested excruciatingly, my lips burned and bled,
and the cold I had contracted on the desert clung to me. A good brisk
walk round the corrals, and then breakfast, made me feel better.

"Of course you can ride?" queried Frank.

My answer was not given from an overwhelming desire to be truthful.
Frank frowned a little, as it wondering how a man could have the nerve
to start out on a jaunt with Buffalo Jones without being a good
horseman. To be unable to stick on the back of a wild mustang, or a
cayuse, was an unpardonable sin in Arizona. My frank admission was made
relatively, with my mind on what cowboys held as a standard of
horsemanship.

The mount Frank trotted out of the corral for me was a pure white,
beautiful mustang, nervous, sensitive, quivering. I watched Frank put
on the saddle, and when he called me I did not fail to catch a covert
twinkle in his merry brown eyes. Looking away toward Buckskin Mountain,
which was coincidentally in the direction of home, I said to myself:
"This may be where you get on, but most certainly it is where you get
off!"

Jones was already riding far beyond the corral, as I could see by a
cloud of dust; and I set off after him, with the painful consciousness
that I must have looked to Frank and Jim much as Central Park
equestrians had often looked to me. Frank shouted after me that he
would catch up with us out on the range. I was not in any great hurry
to overtake Jones, but evidently my horse's inclinations differed from
mine; at any rate, he made the dust fly, and jumped the little sage
bushes.

Jones, who had tarried to inspect one of the pools--formed of running
water from the corrals--greeted me as I came up with this cheerful
observation.

"What in thunder did Frank give you that white nag for? The buffalo
hate white horses--anything white. They're liable to stampede off the
range, or chase you into the canyon."

I replied grimly that, as it was certain something was going to happen,
the particular circumstance might as well come off quickly.

We rode over the rolling plain with a cool, bracing breeze in our
faces. The sky was dull and mottled with a beautiful cloud effect that
presaged wind. As we trotted along Jones pointed out to me and
descanted upon the nutritive value of three different kinds of grass,
one of which he called the Buffalo Pea, noteworthy for a beautiful blue
blossom. Soon we passed out of sight of the cabin, and could see only
the billowy plain, the red tips of the stony wall, and the
black-fringed crest of Buckskin. After riding a while we made out some
cattle, a few of which were on the range, browsing in the lee of a
ridge. No sooner had I marked them than Jones let out another Comanche
yell.

"Wolf!" he yelled; and spurring his big bay, he was off like the wind.

A single glance showed me several cows running as if bewildered, and
near them a big white wolf pulling down a calf. Another white wolf
stood not far off. My horse jumped as if he had been shot; and the
realization darted upon me that here was where the certain something
began. Spot--the mustang had one black spot in his pure white--snorted
like I imagined a blooded horse might, under dire insult. Jones's bay
had gotten about a hundred paces the start. I lived to learn that Spot
hated to be left behind; moreover, he would not be left behind; he was
the swiftest horse on the range, and proud of the distinction. I cast
one unmentionable word on the breeze toward the cabin and Frank, then
put mind and muscle to the sore task of remaining with Spot. Jones was
born on a saddle, and had been taking his meals in a saddle for about
sixty-three years, and the bay horse could run. Run is not a felicitous
word--he flew. And I was rendered mentally deranged for the moment to
see that hundred paces between the bay and Spot materially lessen at
every jump. Spot lengthened out, seemed to go down near the ground, and
cut the air like a high-geared auto. If I had not heard the fast
rhythmic beat of his hoofs, and had not bounced high into the air at
every jump, I would have been sure I was riding a bird. I tried to stop
him. As well might I have tried to pull in the Lusitania with a thread.
Spot was out to overhaul that bay, and in spite of me, he was doing it.
The wind rushed into my face and sang in my ears. Jones seemed the
nucleus of a sort of haze, and it grew larger and larger. Presently he
became clearly defined in my sight; the violent commotion under me
subsided; I once more felt the saddle, and then I realized that Spot
had been content to stop alongside of Jones, tossing his head and
champing his bit.

"Well, by George! I didn't know you were in the stretch," cried my
companion. "That was a fine little brush. We must have come several
miles. I'd have killed those wolves if I'd brought a gun. The big one
that had the calf was a bold brute. He never let go until I was within
fifty feet of him. Then I almost rode him down. I don't think the calf
was much hurt. But those blood-thirsty devils will return, and like as
not get the calf. That's the worst of cattle raising. Now, take the
buffalo. Do you suppose those wolves could have gotten a buffalo calf
out from under the mother? Never. Neither could a whole band of wolves.
Buffalo stick close together, and the little ones do not stray. When
danger threatens, the herd closes in and faces it and fights. That is
what is grand about the buffalo and what made them once roam the
prairies in countless, endless droves."

From the highest elevation in that part of the range we viewed the
surrounding ridges, flats and hollows, searching for the buffalo. At
length we spied a cloud of dust rising from behind an undulating mound,
then big black dots hove in sight.

"Frank has rounded up the herd, and is driving it this way. We'll
wait," said Jones.

Though the buffalo appeared to be moving fast, a long time elapsed
before they reached the foot of our outlook. They lumbered along in a
compact mass, so dense that I could not count them, but I estimated the
number at seventy-five. Frank was riding zigzag behind them, swinging
his lariat and yelling. When he espied us he reined in his horse and
waited. Then the herd slowed down, halted and began browsing.

"Look at the cattalo calves," cried Jones, in ecstatic tones. "See how
shy they are, how close they stick to their mothers."

The little dark-brown fellows were plainly frightened. I made several
unsuccessful attempts to photograph them, and gave it up when Jones
told me not to ride too close and that it would be better to wait till
we had them in the corral.

He took my camera and instructed me to go on ahead, in the rear of the
herd. I heard the click of the instrument as he snapped a picture, and
then suddenly heard him shout in alarm: "Look out! look out! pull your
horse!"

Thundering hoof-beats pounding the earth accompanied his words. I saw a
big bull, with head down, tail raised, charging my horse. He answered
Frank's yell of command with a furious grunt. I was paralyzed at the
wonderfully swift action of the shaggy brute, and I sat helpless. Spot
wheeled as if he were on a pivot and plunged out of the way with a
celerity that was astounding. The buffalo stopped, pawed the ground,
and angrily tossed his huge head. Frank rode up to him, yelled, and
struck him with the lariat, whereupon he gave another toss of his
horns, and then returned to the herd.

"It was that darned white nag," said Jones. "Frank, it was wrong to put
an inexperienced man on Spot. For that matter, the horse should never
be allowed to go near the buffalo."

"Spot knows the buffs; they'd never get to him," replied Frank. But the
usual spirit was absent from his voice, and he glanced at me soberly. I
knew I had turned white, for I felt the peculiar cold sensation on my
face.

"Now, look at that, will you?" cried Jones. "I don't like the looks of
that."

He pointed to the herd. They stopped browsing, and were uneasily
shifting to and fro. The bull lifted his head; the others slowly
grouped together.

"Storm! Sandstorm!" exclaimed Jones, pointing desert-ward. Dark yellow
clouds like smoke were rolling, sweeping, bearing down upon us. They
expanded, blossoming out like gigantic roses, and whirled and merged
into one another, all the time rolling on and blotting out the light.

"We've got to run. That storm may last two days," yelled Frank to me.
"We've had some bad ones lately. Give your horse free rein, and cover
your face."

A roar, resembling an approaching storm at sea, came on puffs of wind,
as the horses got into their stride. Long streaks of dust whipped up in
different places; the silver-white grass bent to the ground; round
bunches of sage went rolling before us. The puffs grew longer,
steadier, harder. Then a shrieking blast howled on our trail, seeming
to swoop down on us with a yellow, blinding pall. I shut my eyes and
covered my face with a handkerchief. The sand blew so thick that it
filled my gloves, pebbles struck me hard enough to sting through my
coat.

Fortunately, Spot kept to an easy swinging lope, which was the most
comfortable motion for me. But I began to get numb, and could hardly
stick on the saddle. Almost before I had dared to hope, Spot stopped.
Uncovering my face, I saw Jim in the doorway of the lee side of the
cabin. The yellow, streaky, whistling clouds of sand split on the cabin
and passed on, leaving a small, dusty space of light.

"Shore Spot do hate to be beat," yelled Jim, as he helped me off. I
stumbled into the cabin and fell upon a buffalo robe and lay there
absolutely spent. Jones and Frank came in a few minutes apart, each
anathematizing the gritty, powdery sand.

All day the desert storm raged and roared. The dust sifted through the
numerous cracks in the cabin burdened our clothes, spoiled our food and
blinded our eyes. Wind, snow, sleet and rainstorms are discomforting
enough under trying circumstances; but all combined, they are nothing
to the choking stinging, blinding sandstorm.

"Shore it'll let up by sundown," averred Jim. And sure enough the roar
died away about five o'clock, the wind abated and the sand settled.

Just before supper, a knock sounded heavily o the cabin door. Jim
opened it to admit one of Emmett's sons and a very tall man whom none
of us knew. He was a sand-man. All that was not sand seemed a space or
two of corduroy, a big bone-handled knife, a prominent square jaw and
bronze cheek and flashing eyes.

"Get down--get down, an' come in, stranger, said Frank cordially.

"How do you do, sir," said Jones.

"Colonel Jones, I've been on your trail for twelve days," announced the
stranger, with a grim smile. The sand streamed off his coat in little
white streak. Jones appeared to be casting about in his mind.

"I'm Grant Wallace," continued the newcomer. "I missed you at the El
Tovar, at Williams and at Flagstaff, where I was one day behind. Was
half a day late at the Little Colorado, saw your train cross Moncaupie
Wash, and missed you because of the sandstorm there. Saw you from the
other side of the Big Colorado as you rode out from Emmett's along the
red wall. And here I am. We've never met till now, which obviously
isn't my fault."

The Colonel and I fell upon Wallace's neck. Frank manifested his usual
alert excitation, and said: "Well, I guess he won't hang fire on a long
cougar chase." And Jim--slow, careful Jim, dropped a plate with the
exclamation: "Shore it do beat hell!" The hounds sniffed round Wallace,
and welcomed him with vigorous tails.

Supper that night, even if we did grind sand with our teeth, was a
joyous occasion. The biscuits were flaky and light; the bacon fragrant
and crisp. I produced a jar of blackberry jam, which by subtle cunning
I had been able to secrete from the Mormons on that dry desert ride,
and it was greeted with acclamations of pleasure. Wallace, divested of
his sand guise, beamed with the gratification of a hungry man once more
in the presence of friends and food. He made large cavities in Jim's
great pot of potato stew, and caused biscuits to vanish in a way that
would not have shamed a Hindoo magician. The Grand Canyon he dug in my
jar of jam, however, could not have been accomplished by legerdemain.

Talk became animated on dogs, cougars, horses and buffalo. Jones told
of our experience out on the range, and concluded with some salient
remarks.

"A tame wild animal is the most dangerous of beasts. My old friend,
Dick Rock, a great hunter and guide out of Idaho, laughed at my advice,
and got killed by one of his three-year-old bulls. I told him they knew
him just well enough to kill him, and they did. My friend, A. H. Cole,
of Oxford, Nebraska, tried to rope a Weetah that was too tame to be
safe, and the bull killed him. Same with General Bull, a member of the
Kansas Legislature, and two cowboys who went into a corral to tie up a
tame elk at the wrong time. I pleaded with them not to undertake it.
They had not studied animals as I had. That tame elk killed all of
them. He had to be shot in order to get General Bull off his great
antlers. You see, a wild animal must learn to respect a man. The way I
used to teach the Yellowstone Park bears to be respectful and safe
neighbors was to rope them around the front paw, swing them up on a
tree clear of the ground, and whip them with a long pole. It was a
dangerous business, and looks cruel, but it is the only way I could
find to make the bears good. You see, they eat scraps around the hotels
and get so tame they will steal everything but red-hot stoves, and will
cuff the life out of those who try to shoo them off. But after a bear
mother has had a licking, she not only becomes a good bear for the rest
of her life, but she tells all her cubs about it with a good smack of
her paw, for emphasis, and teaches them to respect peaceable citizens
generation after generation.

"One of the hardest jobs I ever tackled was that of supplying the
buffalo for Bronx Park. I rounded up a magnificent 'king' buffalo bull,
belligerent enough to fight a battleship. When I rode after him the
cowmen said I was as good as killed. I made a lance by driving a nail
into the end of a short pole and sharpening it. After he had chased me,
I wheeled my broncho, and hurled the lance into his back, ripping a
wound as long as my hand. That put the fear of Providence into him and
took the fight all out of him. I drove him uphill and down, and across
canyons at a dead run for eight miles single handed, and loaded him on
a freight car; but he came near getting me once or twice, and only
quick broncho work and lance play saved me.

"In the Yellowstone Park all our buffaloes have become docile,
excepting the huge bull which led them. The Indians call the buffalo
leader the 'Weetah,' the master of the herd. It was sure death to go
near this one. So I shipped in another Weetah, hoping that he might
whip some of the fight out of old Manitou, the Mighty. They came
together head on, like a railway collision, and ripped up over a square
mile of landscape, fighting till night came on, and then on into the
night.

"I jumped into the field with them, chasing them with my biograph,
getting a series of moving pictures of that bullfight which was sure
the real thing. It was a ticklish thing to do, though knowing that
neither bull dared take his eyes off his adversary for a second, I felt
reasonably safe. The old Weetah beat the new champion out that night,
but the next morning they were at it again, and the new buffalo finally
whipped the old one into submission. Since then his spirit has remained
broken, and even a child can approach him safely--but the new Weetah is
in turn a holy terror.

"To handle buffalo, elk and bear, you must get into sympathy with their
methods of reasoning. No tenderfoot stands any show, even with the tame
animals of the Yellowstone."

The old buffalo hunter's lips were no longer locked. One after another
he told reminiscences of his eventful life, in a simple manner; yet so
vivid and gripping were the unvarnished details that I was spellbound.

"Considering what appears the impossibility of capturing a full-grown
buffalo, how did you earn the name of preserver of the American bison?"
inquired Wallace.

"It took years to learn how, and ten more to capture the fifty-eight
that I was able to keep. I tried every plan under the sun. I roped
hundreds, of all sizes and ages. They would not live in captivity. If
they could not find an embankment over which to break their necks, they
would crush their skulls on stones. Failing any means like that, they
would lie down, will themselves to die, and die. Think of a savage wild
nature that could will its heart to cease beating! But it's true.
Finally I found I could keep only calves under three months of age. But
to capture them so young entailed time and patience. For the buffalo
fight for their young, and when I say fight, I mean till they drop. I
almost always had to go alone, because I could neither coax nor hire
any one to undertake it with me. Sometimes I would be weeks getting one
calf. One day I captured eight--eight little buffalo calves! Never will
I forget that day as long as I live!"

"Tell us about it," I suggested, in a matter of fact,
round-the-campfire voice. Had the silent plainsman ever told a complete
and full story of his adventures? I doubted it. He was not the man to
eulogize himself.

A short silence ensued. The cabin was snug and warm; the ruddy embers
glowed; one of Jim's pots steamed musically and fragrantly. The hounds
lay curled in the cozy chimney corner.

Jones began to talk again, simply and unaffectedly, of his famous
exploit; and as he went on so modestly, passing lightly over features
we recognized as wonderful, I allowed the fire of my imagination to
fuse for myself all the toil, patience, endurance, skill, herculean
strength and marvelous courage and unfathomable passion which he
slighted in his narrative.



CHAPTER 3.

THE LAST HERD

Over gray No-Man's-Land stole down the shadows of night. The undulating
prairie shaded dark to the western horizon, rimmed with a fading streak
of light. Tall figures, silhouetted sharply against the last golden
glow of sunset, marked the rounded crest of a grassy knoll.

"Wild hunter!" cried a voice in sullen rage, "buffalo or no, we halt
here. Did Adams and I hire to cross the Staked Plains? Two weeks in
No-Man's-Land, and now we're facing the sand! We've one keg of water,
yet you want to keep on. Why, man, you're crazy! You didn't tell us you
wanted buffalo alive. And here you've got us looking death in the eye!"

In the grim silence that ensued the two men unhitched the team from the
long, light wagon, while the buffalo hunter staked out his wiry,
lithe-limbed racehorses. Soon a fluttering blaze threw a circle of
light, which shone on the agitated face of Rude and Adams, and the
cold, iron-set visage of their brawny leader.

"It's this way," began Jones, in slow, cool voice; "I engaged you
fellows, and you promised to stick by me. We've had no luck. But I've
finally found sign--old sign, I'll admit the buffalo I'm looking
for--the last herd on the plains. For two years I've been hunting this
herd. So have other hunters. Millions of buffalo have been killed and
left to rot. Soon this herd will be gone, and then the only buffalo in
the world will be those I have given ten years of the hardest work in
capturing. This is the last herd, I say, and my last chance to capture
a calf or two. Do you imagine I'd quit? You fellows go back if you
want, but I keep on."

"We can't go back. We're lost. We'll have to go with you. But, man,
thirst is not the only risk we run. This is Comanche country. And if
that herd is in here the Indians have it spotted."

"That worries me some," replied the plainsman, "but we'll keep on it."

They slept. The night wind swished the grasses; dark storm clouds
blotted out the northern stars; the prairie wolves mourned dismally.

Day broke cold, wan, threatening, under a leaden sky. The hunters
traveled thirty miles by noon, and halted in a hollow where a stream
flowed in wet season. Cottonwood trees were bursting into green;
thickets of prickly thorn, dense and matted, showed bright spring buds.

"What is it?" suddenly whispered Rude.

The plainsman lay in strained posture, his ear against the ground.

"Hide the wagon and horses in the clump of cottonwoods," he ordered,
tersely. Springing to his feet, he ran to the top of the knoll above
the hollow, where he again placed his ear to the ground.

Jones's practiced ear had detected the quavering rumble of far-away,
thundering hoofs. He searched the wide waste of plain with his powerful
glass. To the southwest, miles distant, a cloud of dust mushroomed
skyward. "Not buffalo," he muttered, "maybe wild horses." He watched
and waited. The yellow cloud rolled forward, enlarging, spreading out,
and drove before it a darkly indistinct, moving mass. As soon as he had
one good look at this he ran back to his comrades.

"Stampede! Wild horses! Indians! Look to your rifles and hide!"

Wordless and pale, the men examined their Sharps, and made ready to
follow Jones. He slipped into the thorny brake and, flat on his
stomach, wormed his way like a snake far into the thickly interlaced
web of branches. Rude and Adams crawled after him. Words were
superfluous. Quiet, breathless, with beating hearts, the hunters
pressed close to the dry grass. A long, low, steady rumble filled the
air, and increased in volume till it became a roar. Moments, endless
moments, passed. The roar filled out like a flood slowly released from
its confines to sweep down with the sound of doom. The ground began to
tremble and quake: the light faded; the smell of dust pervaded the
thicket, then a continuous streaming roar, deafening as persistent roll
of thunder, pervaded the hiding place. The stampeding horses had split
round the hollow. The roar lessened. Swiftly as a departing snow-squall
rushing on through the pines, the thunderous thud and tramp of hoofs
died away.

The trained horses hidden in the cottonwoods never stirred. "Lie low!
lie low!" breathed the plainsman to his companions.

Throb of hoofs again became audible, not loud and madly pounding as
those that had passed, but low, muffled, rhythmic. Jones's sharp eye,
through a peephole in the thicket, saw a cream-colored mustang bob over
the knoll, carrying an Indian. Another and another, then a swiftly
following, close-packed throng appeared. Bright red feathers and white
gleamed; weapons glinted; gaunt, bronzed savage leaned forward on racy,
slender mustangs.

The plainsman shrank closer to the ground. "Apache!" he exclaimed to
himself, and gripped his rifle. The band galloped down to the hollow,
and slowing up, piled single file over the bank. The leader, a short,
squat chief, plunged into the brake not twenty yards from the hidden
men. Jones recognized the cream mustang; he knew the somber, sinister,
broad face. It belonged to the Red Chief of the Apaches.

"Geronimo!" murmured the plainsman through his teeth.

Well for the Apache that no falcon savage eye discovered aught strange
in the little hollow! One look at the sand of the stream bed would have
cost him his life. But the Indians crossed the thicket too far up; they
cantered up the slope and disappeared. The hoof-beats softened and
ceased.

"Gone?" whispered Rude.

"Gone. But wait," whispered Jones. He knew the savage nature, and he
knew how to wait. After a long time, he cautiously crawled out of the
thicket and searched the surroundings with a plainsman's eye. He
climbed the slope and saw the clouds of dust, the near one small, the
far one large, which told him all he needed to know.

"Comanches?" queried Adams, with a quaver in his voice. He was new to
the plains.

"Likely," said Jones, who thought it best not to tell all he knew. Then
he added to himself: "We've no time to lose. There's water back here
somewhere. The Indians have spotted the buffalo, and were running the
horses away from the water."

The three got under way again, proceeding carefully, so as not to raise
the dust, and headed due southwest. Scantier and scantier grew the
grass; the hollows were washes of sand; steely gray dunes, like long,
flat, ocean swells, ribbed the prairie. The gray day declined. Late
into the purple night they traveled, then camped without fire.

In the gray morning Jones climbed a high ride and scanned the
southwest. Low dun-colored sandhills waved from him down and down, in
slow, deceptive descent. A solitary and remote waste reached out into
gray infinitude. A pale lake, gray as the rest of that gray expanse,
glimmered in the distance.

"Mirage!" he muttered, focusing his glass, which only magnified all
under the dead gray, steely sky. "Water must be somewhere; but can that
be it? It's too pale and elusive to be real. No life--a blasted, staked
plain! Hello!"

A thin, black, wavering line of wild fowl, moving in beautiful, rapid
flight, crossed the line of his vision. "Geese flying north, and low.
There's water here," he said. He followed the flock with his glass, saw
them circle over the lake, and vanish in the gray sheen.

"It's water." He hurried back to camp. His haggard and worn companions
scorned his discovery. Adams siding with Rude, who knew the plains,
said: "Mirage! the lure of the desert!" Yet dominated by a force too
powerful for them to resist, they followed the buffalo-hunter. All day
the gleaming lake beckoned them onward, and seemed to recede. All day
the drab clouds scudded before the cold north wind. In the gray
twilight, the lake suddenly lay before them, as if it had opened at
their feet. The men rejoiced, the horses lifted their noses and sniffed
the damp air.

The whinnies of the horses, the clank of harness, and splash of water,
the whirl of ducks did not blur out of Jones's keen ear a sound that
made him jump. It was the thump of hoofs, in a familiar beat, beat,
beat. He saw a shadow moving up a ridge. Soon, outlined black against
the yet light sky, a lone buffalo cow stood like a statue. A moment she
held toward the lake, studying the danger, then went out of sight over
the ridge.

Jones spurred his horse up the ascent, which was rather long and steep,
but he mounted the summit in time to see the cow join eight huge,
shaggy buffalo. The hunter reined in his horse, and standing high in
his stirrups, held his hat at arms' length over his head. So he
thrilled to a moment he had sought for two years. The last herd of
American bison was near at hand. The cow would not venture far from the
main herd; the eight stragglers were the old broken-down bulls that had
been expelled, at this season, from the herd by younger and more
vigorous bulls. The old monarchs saw the hunter at the same time his
eyes were gladdened by sight of them, and lumbered away after the cow,
to disappear in the gathering darkness. Frightened buffalo always make
straight for their fellows; and this knowledge contented Jones to
return to the lake, well satisfied that the herd would not be far away
in the morning, within easy striking distance by daylight.

At dark the storm which had threatened for days, broke in a fury of
rain, sleet and hail. The hunters stretched a piece of canvas over the
wheels of the north side of the wagon, and wet and shivering, crawled
under it to their blankets. During the night the storm raged with
unabated strength.

Dawn, forbidding and raw, lightened to the whistle of the sleety gusts.
Fire was out of the question. Chary of weight, the hunters had carried
no wood, and the buffalo chips they used for fuel were lumps of ice.
Grumbling, Adams and Rude ate a cold breakfast, while Jones, munching a
biscuit, faced the biting blast from the crest of the ridge. The middle
of the plain below held a ragged, circular mass, as still as stone. It
was the buffalo herd, with every shaggy head to the storm. So they
would stand, never budging from their tracks, till the blizzard of
sleet was over.

Jones, though eager and impatient, restrained himself, for it was
unwise to begin operations in the storm. There was nothing to do but
wait. Ill fared the hunters that day. Food had to be eaten uncooked.
The long hours dragged by with the little group huddled under icy
blankets. When darkness fell, the sleet changed to drizzling rain. This
blew over at midnight, and a colder wind, penetrating to the very
marrow of the sleepless men, made their condition worse. In the after
part of the night, the wolves howled mournfully.

With a gray, misty light appearing in the east, Jones threw off his
stiff, ice-incased blanket, and crawled out. A gaunt gray wolf, the
color of the day and the sand and the lake, sneaked away, looking back.
While moving and threshing about to warm his frozen blood, Jones
munched another biscuit. Five men crawled from under the wagon, and
made an unfruitful search for the whisky. Fearing it, Jones had thrown
the bottle away. The men cursed. The patient horses drooped sadly, and
shivered in the lee of the improvised tent. Jones kicked the inch-thick
casing of ice from his saddle. Kentuck, his racer, had been spared on
the whole trip for this day's work. The thoroughbred was cold, but as
Jones threw the saddle over him, he showed that he knew the chase
ahead, and was eager to be off. At last, after repeated efforts with
his benumbed fingers, Jones got the girths tight. He tied a bunch of
soft cords to the saddle and mounted.

"Follow as fast as you can," he called to his surly men. "The buffs
will run north against the wind. This is the right direction for us;
we'll soon leave the sand. Stick to my trail and come a-humming."

From the ridge he met the red sun, rising bright, and a keen
northeasterly wind that lashed like a whip. As he had anticipated, his
quarry had moved northward. Kentuck let out into a swinging stride,
which in an hour had the loping herd in sight. Every jump now took him
upon higher ground, where the sand failed, and the grass grew thicker
and began to bend under the wind.

In the teeth of the nipping gale Jones slipped close upon the herd
without alarming even a cow. More than a hundred little reddish-black
calves leisurely loped in the rear. Kentuck, keen to his work, crept on
like a wolf, and the hunter's great fist clenched the coiled lasso.
Before him expanded a boundless plain. A situation long cherished and
dreamed of had become a reality. Kentuck, fresh and strong, was good
for all day. Jones gloated over the little red bulls and heifers, as a
miser gloats over gold and jewels. Never before had he caught more than
two in one day, and often it had taken days to capture one. This was
the last herd, this the last opportunity toward perpetuating a grand
race of beasts. And with born instinct he saw ahead the day of his life.

At a touch, Kentuck closed in, and the buffalo, seeing him, stampeded
into the heaving roll so well known to the hunter. Racing on the right
flank of the herd, Jones selected a tawny heifer and shot the lariat
after her. It fell true, but being stiff and kinky from the sleet,
failed to tighten, and the quick calf leaped through the loop to
freedom.

Undismayed the pursuer quickly recovered his rope. Again he whirled and
sent the loop. Again it circled true, and failed to close; again the
agile heifer bounded through it. Jones whipped the air with the
stubborn rope. To lose a chance like that was worse than boy's work.

The third whirl, running a smaller loop, tightened the coil round the
frightened calf just back of its ears. A pull on the bridle brought
Kentuck to a halt in his tracks, and the baby buffalo rolled over and
over in the grass. Jones bounced from his seat and jerked loose a
couple of the soft cords. In a twinkling; his big knee crushed down on
the calf, and his big hands bound it helpless.

Kentuck neighed. Jones saw his black ears go up. Danger threatened. For
a moment the hunter's blood turned chill, not from fear, for he never
felt fear, but because he thought the Indians were returning to ruin
his work. His eye swept the plain. Only the gray forms of wolves
flitted through the grass, here, there, all about him. Wolves! They
were as fatal to his enterprise as savages. A trooping pack of prairie
wolves had fallen in with the herd and hung close on the trail, trying
to cut a calf away from its mother. The gray brutes boldly trotted to
within a few yards of him, and slyly looked at him, with pale, fiery
eyes. They had already scented his captive. Precious time flew by; the
situation, critical and baffling, had never before been met by him.
There lay his little calf tied fast, and to the north ran many others,
some of which he must--he would have. To think quickly had meant the
solving of many a plainsman's problem. Should he stay with his prize to
save it, or leave it to be devoured?

"Ha! you old gray devils!" he yelled, shaking his fist at the wolves.
"I know a trick or two." Slipping his hat between the legs of the calf,
he fastened it securely. This done, he vaulted on Kentuck, and was off
with never a backward glance. Certain it was that the wolves would not
touch anything, alive or dead, that bore the scent of a human being.

The bison scoured away a long half-mile in the lead, sailing northward
like a cloud-shadow over the plain. Kentuck, mettlesome, over-eager,
would have run himself out in short order, but the wary hunter, strong
to restrain as well as impel, with the long day in his mind, kept the
steed in his easy stride, which, springy and stretching, overhauled the
herd in the course of several miles.

A dash, a swirl, a shock, a leap, horse and hunter working in perfect
accord, and a fine big calf, bellowing lustily, struggled desperately
for freedom under the remorseless knee. The big hands toyed with him;
and then, secure in the double knots, the calf lay still, sticking out
his tongue and rolling his eyes, with the coat of the hunter tucked
under his bonds to keep away the wolves.

The race had but begun; the horse had but warmed to his work; the
hunter had but tasted of sweet triumph. Another hopeful of a buffalo
mother, negligent in danger, truant from his brothers, stumbled and
fell in the enmeshing loop. The hunter's vest, slipped over the calf's
neck, served as danger signal to the wolves. Before the lumbering
buffalo missed their loss, another red and black baby kicked helplessly
on the grass and sent up vain, weak calls, and at last lay still, with
the hunter's boot tied to his cords.

Four! Jones counted them aloud, add in his mind, and kept on. Fast,
hard work, covering upward of fifteen miles, had begun to tell on herd,
horse and man, and all slowed down to the call for strength. The fifth
time Jones closed in on his game, he encountered different
circumstances such as called forth his cunning.

The herd had opened up; the mothers had fallen back to the rear; the
calves hung almost out of sight under the shaggy sides of protectors.
To try them out Jones darted close and threw his lasso. It struck a
cow. With activity incredible in such a huge beast, she lunged at him.
Kentuck, expecting just such a move, wheeled to safety. This duel,
ineffectual on both sides, kept up for a while, and all the time, man
and herd were jogging rapidly to the north.

Jones could not let well enough alone; he acknowledged this even as he
swore he must have five. Emboldened by his marvelous luck, and yielding
headlong to the passion within, he threw caution to the winds. A lame
old cow with a red calf caught his eye; in he spurred his willing horse
and slung his rope. It stung the haunch of the mother. The mad grunt
she vented was no quicker than the velocity with which she plunged and
reared. Jones had but time to swing his leg over the saddle when the
hoofs beat down. Kentuck rolled on the plain, flinging his rider from
him. The infuriated buffalo lowered her head for the fatal charge on
the horse, when the plainsman, jerking out his heavy Colts, shot her
dead in her tracks.

Kentuck got to his feet unhurt, and stood his ground, quivering but
ready, showing his steadfast courage. He showed more, for his ears lay
back, and his eyes had the gleam of the animal that strikes back.

The calf ran round its mother. Jones lassoed it, and tied it down,
being compelled to cut a piece from his lasso, as the cords on the
saddle had given out. He left his other boot with baby number five. The
still heaving, smoking body of the victim called forth the stern,
intrepid hunter's pity for a moment. Spill of blood he had not wanted.
But he had not been able to avoid it; and mounting again with
close-shut jaw and smoldering eye, he galloped to the north.

Kentuck snorted; the pursuing wolves shied off in the grass; the pale
sun began to slant westward. The cold iron stirrups froze and cut the
hunter's bootless feet.

When once more he came hounding the buffalo, they were considerably
winded. Short-tufted tails, raised stiffly, gave warning. Snorts, like
puffs of escaping steam, and deep grunts from cavernous chests evinced
anger and impatience that might, at any moment, bring the herd to a
defiant stand.

He whizzed the shortened noose over the head of a calf that was
laboring painfully to keep up, and had slipped down, when a mighty
grunt told him of peril. Never looking to see whence it came, he sprang
into the saddle. Fiery Kentuck jumped into action, then hauled up with
a shock that almost threw himself and rider. The lasso, fast to the
horse, and its loop end round the calf, had caused the sudden check.

A maddened cow bore down on Kentuck. The gallant horse straightened in
a jump, but dragging the calf pulled him in a circle, and in another
moment he was running round and round the howling, kicking pivot. Then
ensued a terrible race, with horse and bison describing a twenty-foot
circle. Bang! Bang! The hunter fired two shots, and heard the spats of
the bullets. But they only augmented the frenzy of the beast. Faster
Kentuck flew, snorting in terror; closer drew the dusty, bouncing
pursuer; the calf spun like a top; the lasso strung tighter than wire.
Jones strained to loosen the fastening, but in vain. He swore at his
carelessness in dropping his knife by the last calf he had tied. He
thought of shooting the rope, yet dared not risk the shot. A hollow
sound turned him again, with the Colts leveled. Bang! Dust flew from
the ground beyond the bison.

The two charges left in the gun were all that stood between him and
eternity. With a desperate display of strength Jones threw his weight
in a backward pull, and hauled Kentuck up. Then he leaned far back in
the saddle, and shoved the Colts out beyond the horse's flank. Down
went the broad head, with its black, glistening horns. Bang! She slid
forward with a crash, plowing the ground with hoofs and nose--spouted
blood, uttered a hoarse cry, kicked and died.

Kentuck, for once completely terrorized, reared and plunged from the
cow, dragging the calf. Stern command and iron arm forced him to a
standstill. The calf, nearly strangled, recovered when the noose was
slipped, and moaned a feeble protest against life and captivity. The
remainder of Jones's lasso went to bind number six, and one of his
socks went to serve as reminder to the persistent wolves.

"Six! On! On! Kentuck! On!" Weakening, but unconscious of it, with
bloody hands and feet, without lasso, and with only one charge in his
revolver, hatless, coatless, vestless, bootless, the wild hunter urged
on the noble horse. The herd had gained miles in the interval of the
fight. Game to the backbone, Kentuck lengthened out to overhaul it, and
slowly the rolling gap lessened and lessened. A long hour thumped away,
with the rumble growing nearer.

Once again the lagging calves dotted the grassy plain before the
hunter. He dashed beside a burly calf, grasped its tail, stopped his
horse, and jumped. The calf went down with him, and did not come up.
The knotted, blood-stained hands, like claws of steel, bound the hind
legs close and fast with a leathern belt, and left between them a torn
and bloody sock.

"Seven! On! Old Faithfull! We MUST have another! the last! This is your
day."

The blood that flecked the hunter was not all his own.

The sun slanted westwardly toward the purpling horizon; the grassy
plain gleamed like a ruffled sea of glass; the gray wolves loped on.

When next the hunter came within sight of the herd, over a wavy ridge,
changes in its shape and movement met his gaze. The calves were almost
done; they could run no more; their mothers faced the south, and
trotted slowly to and fro; the bulls were grunting, herding, piling
close. It looked as if the herd meant to stand and fight.

This mattered little to the hunter who had captured seven calves since
dawn. The first limping calf he reached tried to elude the grasping
hand and failed. Kentuck had been trained to wheel to the right or
left, in whichever way his rider leaned; and as Jones bent over and
caught an upraised tail, the horse turned to strike the calf with both
front hoofs. The calf rolled; the horse plunged down; the rider sped
beyond to the dust. Though the calf was tired, he still could bellow,
and he filled the air with robust bawls.

Jones all at once saw twenty or more buffalo dash in at him with fast,
twinkling, short legs. With the thought of it, he was in the air to the
saddle. As the black, round mounds charged from every direction,
Kentuck let out with all there was left in him. He leaped and whirled,
pitched and swerved, in a roaring, clashing, dusty melee. Beating hoofs
threw the turf, flying tails whipped the air, and everywhere were
dusky, sharp-pointed heads, tossing low. Kentuck squeezed out
unscathed. The mob of bison, bristling, turned to lumber after the main
herd. Jones seized his opportunity and rode after them, yelling with
all his might. He drove them so hard that soon the little fellows
lagged paces behind. Only one or two old cows straggled with the calves.

Then wheeling Kentuck, he cut between the herd and a calf, and rode it
down. Bewildered, the tously little bull bellowed in great affright.
The hunter seized the stiff tail, and calling to his horse, leaped off.
But his strength was far spent and the buffalo, larger than his
fellows, threshed about and jerked in terror. Jones threw it again and
again. But it struggled up, never once ceasing its loud demands for
help. Finally the hunter tripped it up and fell upon it with his knees.

Above the rumble of retreating hoofs, Jones heard the familiar short,
quick, jarring pound on the turf. Kentuck neighed his alarm and raced
to the right. Bearing down on the hunter, hurtling through the air, was
a giant furry mass, instinct with fierce life and power--a buffalo cow
robbed of her young.

With his senses almost numb, barely able to pull and raise the Colt,
the plainsman willed to live, and to keep his captive. His leveled arm
wavered like a leaf in a storm.

Bang! Fire, smoke, a shock, a jarring crash, and silence!

The calf stirred beneath him. He put out a hand to touch a warm, furry
coat. The mother had fallen beside him. Lifting a heavy hoof, he laid
it over the neck of the calf to serve as additional weight. He lay
still and listened. The rumble of the herd died away in the distance.

The evening waned. Still the hunter lay quiet. From time to time the
calf struggled and bellowed. Lank, gray wolves appeared on all sides;
they prowled about with hungry howls, and shoved black-tipped noses
through the grass. The sun sank, and the sky paled to opal blue. A star
shone out, then another, and another. Over the prairie slanted the
first dark shadow of night.

Suddenly the hunter laid his ear to the ground, and listened. Faint
beats, like throbs of a pulsing heart, shuddered from the soft turf.
Stronger they grew, till the hunter raised his head. Dark forms
approached; voices broke the silence; the creaking of a wagon scared
away the wolves.

"This way!" shouted the hunter weakly.

"Ha! here he is. Hurt?" cried Rude, vaulting the wheel.

"Tie up this calf. How many--did you find?" The voice grew fainter.

"Seven--alive, and in good shape, and all your clothes."

But the last words fell on unconscious ears.



CHAPTER 4.

THE TRAIL

"Frank, what'll we do about horses?" asked Jones. "Jim'll want the bay,
and of course you'll want to ride Spot. The rest of our nags will only
do to pack the outfit."

"I've been thinkin'," replied the foreman. "You sure will need good
mounts. Now it happens that a friend of mine is just at this time at
House Rock Valley, an outlyin' post of one of the big Utah ranches. He
is gettin' in the horses off the range, an' he has some crackin' good
ones. Let's ooze over there--it's only thirty miles--an' get some
horses from him."

We were all eager to act upon Frank's suggestion. So plans were made
for three of us to ride over and select our mounts. Frank and Jim would
follow with the pack train, and if all went well, on the following
evening we would camp under the shadow of Buckskin.

Early next morning we were on our way. I tried to find a soft place on
Old Baldy, one of Frank's pack horses. He was a horse that would not
have raised up at the trumpet of doom. Nothing under the sun, Frank
said, bothered Old Baldy but the operation of shoeing. We made the
distance to the outpost by noon, and found Frank's friend a genial and
obliging cowboy, who said we could have all the horses we wanted.

While Jones and Wallace strutted round the big corral, which was full
of vicious, dusty, shaggy horses and mustangs, I sat high on the fence.
I heard them talking about points and girth and stride, and a lot of
terms that I could not understand. Wallace selected a heavy sorrel, and
Jones a big bay; very like Jim's. I had observed, way over in the
corner of the corral, a bunch of cayuses, and among them a clean-limbed
black horse. Edging round on the fence I got a closer view, and then
cried out that I had found my horse. I jumped down and caught him, much
to my surprise, for the other horses were wild, and had kicked
viciously. The black was beautifully built, wide-chested and powerful,
but not heavy. His coat glistened like sheeny black satin, and he had a
white face and white feet and a long mane.

"I don't know about giving you Satan--that's his name," said the
cowboy. "The foreman rides him often. He's the fastest, the best
climber, and the best dispositioned horse on the range.

"But I guess I can let you have him," he continued, when he saw my
disappointed face.

"By George!" exclaimed Jones. "You've got it on us this time."

"Would you like to trade?" asked Wallace, as his sorrel tried to bite
him. "That black looks sort of fierce."

I led my prize out of the corral, up to the little cabin nearby, where
I tied him, and proceeded to get acquainted after a fashion of my own.
Though not versed in horse-lore, I knew that half the battle was to win
his confidence. I smoothed his silky coat, and patted him, and then
surreptitiously slipped a lump of sugar from my pocket. This sugar,
which I had purloined in Flagstaff, and carried all the way across the
desert, was somewhat disreputably soiled, and Satan sniffed at it
disdainfully. Evidently he had never smelled or tasted sugar. I pressed
it into his mouth. He munched it, and then looked me over with some
interest. I handed him another lump. He took it and rubbed his nose
against me. Satan was mine!

Frank and Jim came along early in the afternoon. What with packing,
changing saddles and shoeing the horses, we were all busy. Old Baldy
would not be shod, so we let him off till a more opportune time. By
four o'clock we were riding toward the slopes of Buckskin, now only a
few miles away, standing up higher and darker.

"What's that for?" inquired Wallace, pointing to a long, rusty,
wire-wrapped, double-barreled blunderbuss of a shotgun, stuck in the
holster of Jones's saddle.

The Colonel, who had been having a fine time with the impatient and
curious hounds, did not vouchsafe any information on that score. But
very shortly we were destined to learn the use of this incongruous
firearm. I was riding in advance of Wallace, and a little behind Jones.
The dogs--excepting Jude, who had been kicked and lamed--were ranging
along before their master. Suddenly, right before me, I saw an immense
jack-rabbit; and just then Moze and Don caught sight of it. In fact,
Moze bumped his blunt nose into the rabbit. When it leaped into scared
action, Moze yelped, and Don followed suit. Then they were after it in
wild, clamoring pursuit. Jones let out the stentorian blast, now
becoming familiar, and spurred after them. He reached over, pulled the
shotgun out of the holster and fired both barrels at the jumping dogs.

I expressed my amazement in strong language, and Wallace whistled.

Don came sneaking back with his tail between his legs, and Moze, who
had cowered as if stung, circled round ahead of us. Jones finally
succeeded in gettin him back.

"Come in hyah! You measly rabbit dogs! What do you mean chasing off
that way? We're after lions. Lions! understand?"

Don looked thoroughly convinced of his error, but Moze, being more
thick-headed, appeared mystified rather than hurt or frightened.

"What size shot do you use?" I asked.

"Number ten. They don't hurt much at seventy five yards," replied our
leader. "I use them as sort of a long arm. You see, the dogs must be
made to know what we're after. Ordinary means would never do in a case
like this. My idea is to break them of coyotes, wolves and deer, and
when we cross a lion trail, let them go. I'll teach them sooner than
you'd think. Only we must get where we can see what they're trailing.
Then I can tell whether to call then back or not."

The sun was gilding the rim of the desert rampart when we began the
ascent of the foothills of Buckskin. A steep trail wound zigzag up the
mountain We led our horses, as it was a long, hard climb. From time to
time, as I stopped to catch my breath I gazed away across the growing
void to the gorgeous Pink Cliffs, far above and beyond the red wall
which had seemed so high, and then out toward the desert. The irregular
ragged crack in the plain, apparently only a thread of broken ground,
was the Grand Canyon. How unutterably remote, wild, grand was that
world of red and brown, of purple pall, of vague outline!

Two thousand feet, probably, we mounted to what Frank called Little
Buckskin. In the west a copper glow, ridged with lead-colored clouds,
marked where the sun had set. The air was very thin and icy cold. At
the first clump of pinyon pines, we made dry camp. When I sat down it
was as if I had been anchored. Frank solicitously remarked that I
looked "sort of beat." Jim built a roaring fire and began getting
supper. A snow squall came on the rushing wind. The air grew colder,
and though I hugged the fire, I could not get warm. When I had
satisfied my hunger, I rolled out my sleeping-bag and crept into it. I
stretched my aching limbs and did not move again. Once I awoke,
drowsily feeling the warmth of the fire, and I heard Frank say: "He's
asleep, dead to the world!"

"He's all in," said Jones. "Riding's what did it You know how a horse
tears a man to pieces."

"Will he be able to stand it?" asked Frank, with as much solicitude as
if he were my brother. "When you get out after anythin'--well, you're
hell. An' think of the country we're goin' into. I know you've never
seen the breaks of the Siwash, but I have, an' it's the worst an'
roughest country I ever saw. Breaks after breaks, like the ridges on a
washboard, headin' on the south slope of Buckskin, an' runnin' down,
side by side, miles an' miles, deeper an' deeper, till they run into
that awful hole. It will be a killin' trip on men, horses an' dogs.
Now, Mr. Wallace, he's been campin' an' roughin' with the Navajos for
months; he's in some kind of shape, but--"

Frank concluded his remark with a doubtful pause.

"I'm some worried, too," replied Jones. "But he would come. He stood
the desert well enough; even the Mormons said that."

In the ensuing silence the fire sputtered, the glare fitfully merged
into dark shadows under the weird pinyons, and the wind moaned through
the short branches.

"Wal," drawled a slow, soft voice, "shore I reckon you're hollerin' too
soon. Frank's measly trick puttin' him on Spot showed me. He rode out
on Spot, an' he rode in on Spot. Shore he'll stay."

It was not all the warmth of the blankets that glowed over me then. The
voices died away dreamily, and my eyelids dropped sleepily tight. Late
in the night I sat up suddenly, roused by some unusual disturbance. The
fire was dead; the wind swept with a rush through the pinyons. From the
black darkness came the staccato chorus of coyotes. Don barked his
displeasure; Sounder made the welkin ring, and old Moze growled low and
deep, grumbling like muttered thunder. Then all was quiet, and I slept.

Dawn, rosy red, confronted me when I opened my eyes. Breakfast was
ready; Frank was packing Old Baldy; Jones talked to his horse as he
saddled him; Wallace came stooping his giant figure under the pinyons;
the dogs, eager and soft-eyed, sat around Jim and begged. The sun
peeped over the Pink Cliffs; the desert still lay asleep, tranced in a
purple and golden-streaked mist.

"Come, come!" said Jones, in his big voice. "We're slow; here's the
sun."

"Easy, easy," replied Frank, "we've all the time there is."

When Frank threw the saddle over Satan I interrupted him and said I
would care for my horse henceforward. Soon we were under way, the
horses fresh, the dogs scenting the keen, cold air.

The trail rolled over the ridges of pinyon and scrubby pine.
Occasionally we could see the black, ragged crest of Buckskin above us.
From one of these ridges I took my last long look back at the desert,
and engraved on my mind a picture of the red wall, and the many-hued
ocean of sand. The trail, narrow and indistinct, mounted the last
slow-rising slope; the pinyons failed, and the scrubby pines became
abundant. At length we reached the top, and entered the great arched
aisles of Buckskin Forest. The ground was flat as a table. Magnificent
pine trees, far apart, with branches high and spreading, gave the eye
glad welcome. Some of these monarchs were eight feet thick at the base
and two hundred feet high. Here and there one lay, gaunt and prostrate,
a victim of the wind. The smell of pitch pine was sweetly overpowering.

"When I went through here two weeks ago, the snow was a foot deep, an'
I bogged in places," said Frank. "The sun has been oozin' round here
some. I'm afraid Jones won't find any snow on this end of Buckskin."

Thirty miles of winding trail, brown and springy from its thick mat of
pine needles, shaded always by the massive, seamy-barked trees, took us
over the extremity of Buckskin. Then we faced down into the head of a
ravine that ever grew deeper, stonier and rougher. I shifted from side
to side, from leg to leg in my saddle, dismounted and hobbled before
Satan, mounted again, and rode on. Jones called the dogs and complained
to them of the lack of snow. Wallace sat his horse comfortably, taking
long pulls at his pipe and long gazes at the shaggy sides of the
ravine. Frank, energetic and tireless, kept the pack-horses in the
trail. Jim jogged on silently. And so we rode down to Oak Spring.

The spring was pleasantly situated in a grove of oaks and Pinyons,
under the shadow of three cliffs. Three ravines opened here into an
oval valley. A rude cabin of rough-hewn logs stood near the spring.

"Get down, get down," sang out Frank. "We'll hang up here. Beyond Oak
is No-Man's-Land. We take our chances on water after we leave here."

When we had unsaddled, unpacked, and got a fire roaring on the wide
stone hearth of the cabin, it was once again night.

"Boys," said Jones after supper, "we're now on the edge of the lion
country. Frank saw lion sign in here only two weeks ago; and though the
snow is gone, we stand a show of finding tracks in the sand and dust.
To-morrow morning, before the sun gets a chance at the bottom of these
ravines, we'll be up and doing. We'll each take a dog and search in
different directions. Keep the dog in leash, and when he opens up,
examine the ground carefully for tracks. If a dog opens on any track
that you are sure isn't lion's, punish him. And when a lion-track is
found, hold the dog in, wait and signal. We'll use a signal I have
tried and found far-reaching and easy to yell. Waa-hoo! That's it. Once
yelled it means come. Twice means comes quickly. Three times means
come--danger!"

In one corner of the cabin was a platform of poles, covered with straw.
I threw the sleeping-bag on this, and was soon stretched out.
Misgivings as to my strength worried me before I closed my eyes. Once
on my back, I felt I could not rise; my chest was sore; my cough deep
and rasping. It seemed I had scarcely closed my eyes when Jones's
impatient voice recalled me from sweet oblivion.

"Frank, Frank, it's daylight. Jim--boys!" he called.

I tumbled out in a gray, wan twilight. It was cold enough to make the
fire acceptable, but nothing like the morning before on Buckskin.

"Come to the festal board," drawled Jim, almost before I had my boots
laced.

"Jones," said Frank, "Jim an' I'll ooze round here to-day. There's lots
to do, an' we want to have things hitched right before we strike for
the Siwash. We've got to shoe Old Baldy, an' if we can't get him
locoed, it'll take all of us to do it."

The light was still gray when Jones led off with Don, Wallace with
Sounder and I with Moze. Jones directed us to separate, follow the dry
stream beds in the ravines, and remember his instructions given the
night before.

The ravine to the right, which I entered, was choked with huge stones
fallen from the cliff above, and pinyons growing thick; and I wondered
apprehensively how a man could evade a wild animal in such a place,
much less chase it. Old Moze pulled on his chain and sniffed at coyote
and deer tracks. And every time he evinced interest in such, I cut him
with a switch, which, to tell the truth, he did not notice. I thought I
heard a shout, and holding Moze tight, I waited and listened.

"Waa-hoo--waa-hoo!" floated on the air, rather deadened as if it had
come from round the triangular cliff that faced into the valley. Urging
and dragging Moze, I ran down the ravine as fast as I could, and soon
encountered Wallace coming from the middle ravine. "Jones," he said
excitedly,  "this way--there's the signal again." We dashed in haste
for the mouth of the third ravine, and came suddenly upon Jones,
kneeling under a pinyon tree. "Boys, look!" he exclaimed, as he pointed
to the ground. There, clearly defined in the dust, was a cat track as
big as my spread hand, and the mere sight of it sent a chill up my
spine. "There's a lion track for you; made by a female, a two-year-old;
but can't say if she passed here last night. Don won't take the trail.
Try Moze."

I led Moze to the big, round imprint, and put his nose down into it.
The old hound sniffed and sniffed, then lost interest.

"Cold!" ejaculated Jones. "No go. Try Sounder. Come, old boy, you've
the nose for it."

He urged the reluctant hound forward. Sounder needed not to be shown
the trail; he stuck his nose in it, and stood very quiet for a long
moment; then he quivered slightly, raised his nose and sought the next
track. Step by step he went slowly, doubtfully. All at once his tail
wagged stiffly.

"Look at that!" cried Jones in delight. "He's caught a scent when the
others couldn't. Hyah, Moze, get back. Keep Moze and Don back; give him
room."

Slowly Sounder paced up the ravine, as carefully as if he were
traveling on thin ice. He passed the dusty, open trail to a scaly
ground with little bits of grass, and he kept on.

We were electrified to hear him give vent to a deep bugle-blast note of
eagerness.

"By George, he's got it, boys!" exclaimed Jones, as he lifted the
stubborn, struggling hound off the trail. "I know that bay. It means a
lion passed here this morning. And we'll get him up as sure as you're
alive. Come, Sounder. Now for the horses."

As we ran pell-mell into the little glade, where Jim sat mending some
saddle trapping, Frank rode up the trail with the horses.

"Well, I heard Sounder," he said with his genial smile. "Somethin's
comin' off, eh? You'll have to ooze round some to keep up with that
hound."

I saddled Satan with fingers that trembled in excitement, and pushed my
little Remington automatic into the rifle holster.

"Boys, listen," said our leader. "We're off now in the beginning of a
hunt new to you. Remember no shooting, no blood-letting, except in
self-defense. Keep as close to me as you can. Listen for the dogs, and
when you fall behind or separate, yell out the signal cry. Don't forget
this. We're bound to lose each other. Look out for the spikes and
branches on the trees. If the dogs split, whoever follows the one that
trees the lion must wait there till the rest come up. Off now! Come,
Sounder; Moze, you rascal, hyah! Come, Don, come, Puppy, and take your
medicine."

Except Moze, the hounds were all trembling and running eagerly to and
fro. When Sounder was loosed, he led them in a bee-line to the trail,
with us cantering after. Sounder worked exactly as before, only he
followed the lion tracks a little farther up the ravine before he
bayed. He kept going faster and faster, occasionally letting out one
deep, short yelp. The other hounds did not give tongue, but eager,
excited, baffled, kept at his heels. The ravine was long, and the wash
at the bottom, up which the lion had proceeded, turned and twisted
round boulders large as houses, and led through dense growths of some
short, rough shrub. Now and then the lion tracks showed plainly in the
sand. For five miles or more Sounder led us up the ravine, which began
to contract and grow steep. The dry stream bed got to be full of
thickets of branchless saplings, about the poplar--tall, straight, size
of a man's arm, and growing so close we had to press them aside to let
our horses through.

Presently Sounder slowed up and appeared at fault. We found him
puzzling over an open, grassy patch, and after nosing it for a little
while, he began skirting the edge.

"Cute dog!" declared Jones. "That Sounder will make a lion chaser. Our
game has gone up here somewhere."

Sure enough, Sounder directly gave tongue from the side of the ravine.
It was climb for us now. Broken shale, rocks of all dimensions, pinyons
down and pinyons up made ascending no easy problem. We had to dismount
and lead the horses, thus losing ground. Jones forged ahead and reached
the top of the ravine first. When Wallace and I got up, breathing
heavily, Jones and the hounds were out of sight. But Sounder kept
voicing his clear call, giving us our direction. Off we flew, over
ground that was still rough, but enjoyable going compared to the ravine
slopes. The ridge was sparsely covered with cedar and pinyon, through
which, far ahead, we pretty soon spied Jones. Wallace signaled, and our
leader answered twice. We caught up with him on the brink of another
ravine deeper and craggier than the first, full of dead, gnarled pinyon
and splintered rocks.

"This gulch is the largest of the three that head in at Oak Spring,"
said Jones. "Boys, don't forget your direction. Always keep a feeling
where camp is, always sense it every time you turn. The dogs have gone
down. That lion is in here somewhere. Maybe he lives down in the high
cliffs near the spring and came up here last night for a kill he's
buried somewhere. Lions never travel far. Hark! Hark! There's Sounder
and the rest of them! They've got the scent; they've all got it! Down,
boys, down, and ride!"

With that he crashed into the cedar in a way that showed me how
impervious he was to slashing branches, sharp as thorns, and steep
descent and peril.

Wallace's big sorrel plunged after him and the rolling stones cracked.
Suffering as I was by this time, with cramp in my legs, and torturing
pain, I had to choose between holding my horse in or falling off; so I
chose the former and accordingly got behind.

Dead cedar and pinyon trees lay everywhere, with their contorted limbs
reaching out like the arms of a devil-fish. Stones blocked every
opening. Making the bottom of the ravine after what seemed an
interminable time, I found the tracks of Jones and Wallace. A long
"Waa-hoo!" drew me on; then the mellow bay of a hound floated up the
ravine. Satan made up time in the sandy stream bed, but kept me busily
dodging overhanging branches. I became aware, after a succession of
efforts to keep from being strung on pinyons, that the sand before me
was clean and trackless. Hauling Satan up sharply, I waited
irresolutely and listened. Then from high up the ravine side wafted
down a medley of yelps and barks.

"Waa-hoo, waa-hoo!" ringing down the slope, pealed against the cliff
behind me, and sent the wild echoes flying. Satan, of his own accord,
headed up the incline. Surprised at this, I gave him free rein. How he
did climb! Not long did it take me to discover that he picked out
easier going than I had. Once I saw Jones crossing a ledge far above
me, and I yelled our signal cry. The answer returned clear and sharp;
then its echo cracked under the hollow cliff, and crossing and
recrossing the ravine, it died at last far away, like the muffled peal
of a bell-buoy. Again I heard the blended yelping of the hounds, and
closer at hand. I saw a long, low cliff above, and decided that the
hounds were running at the base of it. Another chorus of yelps,
quicker, wilder than the others, drew a yell from me. Instinctively I
knew the dogs had jumped game of some kind. Satan knew it as well as I,
for he quickened his pace and sent the stones clattering behind him.

I gained the base of the yellow cliff, but found no tracks in the dust
of ages that had crumbled in its shadow, nor did I hear the dogs.
Considering how close they had seemed, this was strange. I halted and
listened. Silence reigned supreme. The ragged cracks in the cliff walls
could have harbored many a watching lion, and I cast an apprehensive
glance into their dark confines. Then I turned my horse to get round
the cliff and over the ridge. When I again stopped, all I could hear
was the thumping of my heart and the labored panting of Satan. I came
to a break in the cliff, a steep place of weathered rock, and I put
Satan to it. He went up with a will. From the narrow saddle of the
ridge-crest I tried to take my bearings. Below me slanted the green of
pinyon, with the bleached treetops standing like spears, and uprising
yellow stones. Fancying I heard a gunshot, I leaned a straining ear
against the soft breeze. The proof came presently in the unmistakable
report of Jones's blunderbuss. It was repeated almost instantly, giving
reality to the direction, which was down the slope of what I concluded
must be the third ravine. Wondering what was the meaning of the shots,
and chagrined because I was out of the race, but calmer in mind, I let
Satan stand.

Hardly a moment elapsed before a sharp bark tingled in my ears. It
belonged to old Moze. Soon I distinguished a rattling of stones and the
sharp, metallic clicks of hoofs striking rocks. Then into a space below
me loped a beautiful deer, so large that at first I took it for an elk.
Another sharp bark, nearer this time, told the tale of Moze's
dereliction. In a few moments he came in sight, running with his tongue
out and his head high.

"Hyah, you old gladiator! hyah! hyah!" I yelled and yelled again. Moze
passed over the saddle on the trail of the deer, and his short bark
floated back to remind me how far he was from a lion dog.

Then I divined the meaning of the shotgun reports. The hounds had
crossed a fresher trail than that of the lion, and our leader had
discovered it. Despite a keen appreciation of Jones's task, I gave way
to amusement, and repeated Wallace's paradoxical formula: "Pet the
lions and shoot the hounds."

So I headed down the ravine, looking for a blunt, bold crag, which I
had descried from camp. I found it before long, and profiting by past
failures to judge of distance, gave my first impression a great
stretch, and then decided that I was more than two miles from Oak.

Long after two miles had been covered, and I had begun to associate
Jim's biscuits with a certain soft seat near a ruddy fire, I was
apparently still the same distance from my landmark crag. Suddenly a
slight noise brought me to a halt. I listened intently. Only an
indistinct rattling of small rocks disturbed the impressive stillness.
It might have been the weathering that goes on constantly, and it might
have been an animal. I inclined to the former idea till I saw Satan's
ears go up. Jones had told me to watch the ears of my horse, and short
as had been my acquaintance with Satan, I had learned that he always
discovered things more quickly than I. So I waited patiently.

From time to time a rattling roll of pebbles, almost musical, caught my
ear. It came from the base of the wall of yellow cliff that barred the
summit of all those ridges. Satan threw up his head and nosed the
breeze. The delicate, almost stealthy sounds, the action of my horse,
the waiting drove my heart to extra work. The breeze quickened and
fanned my cheek, and borne upon it came the faint and far-away bay of a
hound. It came again and again, each time nearer. Then on a stronger
puff of wind rang the clear, deep, mellow call that had given Sounder
his beautiful name. Never it seemed had I heard music so
blood-stirring. Sounder was on the trail of something, and he had it
headed my way. Satan heard, shot up his long ears, and tried to go
ahead; but I restrained and soothed him into quiet.

Long moments I sat there, with the poignant consciousness of the
wildness of the scene, of the significant rattling of the stones and of
the bell-tongued hound baying incessantly, sending warm joy through my
veins, the absorption in sensations new, yielding only to the hunting
instinct when Satan snorted and quivered. Again the deep-toned bay rang
into the silence with its stirring thrill of life. And a sharp rattling
of stones just above brought another snort from Satan.

Across an open space in the pinyons a gray form flashed. I leaped off
Satan and knelt to get a better view under the trees. I soon made out
another deer passing along the base of the cliff. Mounting again, I
rode up to the cliff to wait for Sounder.

A long time I had to wait for the hound. It proved that the atmosphere
was as deceiving in regard to sound as to sight. Finally Sounder came
running along the wall. I got off to intercept him. The crazy
fellow--he had never responded to my overtures of friendship--uttered
short, sharp yelps of delight, and actually leaped into my arms. But I
could not hold him. He darted upon the trail again and paid no heed to
my angry shouts. With a resolve to overhaul him, I jumped on Satan and
whirled after the hound.

The black stretched out with such a stride that I was at pains to keep
my seat. I dodged the jutting rocks and projecting snags; felt stinging
branches in my face and the rush of sweet, dry wind. Under the
crumbling walls, over slopes of weathered stone and droppings of
shelving rock, round protruding noses of cliff, over and under pinyons
Satan thundered. He came out on the top of the ridge, at the narrow
back I had called a saddle. Here I caught a glimpse of Sounder far
below, going down into the ravine from which I had ascended some time
before. I called to him, but I might as well have called to the wind.

Weary to the point of exhaustion, I once more turned Satan toward camp.
I lay forward on his neck and let him have his will. Far down the
ravine I awoke to strange sounds, and soon recognized the cracking of
iron-shod hoofs against stone; then voices. Turning an abrupt bend in
the sandy wash, I ran into Jones and Wallace.

"Fall in! Line up in the sad procession!" said Jones. "Tige and the pup
are faithful. The rest of the dogs are somewhere between the Grand
Canyon and the Utah desert."

I related my adventures, and tried to spare Moze and Sounder as much as
conscience would permit.

"Hard luck!" commented Jones. "Just as the hounds jumped the
cougar--Oh! they bounced him out of the rocks all right--don't you
remember, just under that cliff wall where you and Wallace came up to
me? Well, just as they jumped him, they ran right into fresh deer
tracks. I saw one of the deer. Now that's too much for any hounds,
except those trained for lions. I shot at Moze twice, but couldn't turn
him. He has to be hurt, they've all got to be hurt to make them
understand."

Wallace told of a wild ride somewhere in Jones's wake, and of sundry
knocks and bruises he had sustained, of pieces of corduroy he had left
decorating the cedars and of a most humiliating event, where a gaunt
and bare pinyon snag had penetrated under his belt and lifted him, mad
and kicking, off his horse.

"These Western nags will hang you on a line every chance they get,"
declared Jones, "and don't you overlook that. Well, there's the cabin.
We'd better stay here a few days or a week and break in the dogs and
horses, for this day's work was apple pie to what we'll get in the
Siwash."

I groaned inwardly, and was remorselessly glad to see Wallace fall off
his horse and walk on one leg to the cabin. When I got my saddle off
Satan, had given him a drink and hobbled him, I crept into the cabin
and dropped like a log. I felt as if every bone in my body was broken
and my flesh was raw. I got gleeful gratification from Wallace's
complaints, and Jones's remark that he had a stitch in his back. So
ended the first chase after cougars.



CHAPTER 5.

OAK SPRING

Moze and Don and Sounder straggled into camp next morning, hungry,
footsore and scarred; and as they limped in, Jones met them with
characteristic speech: "Well, you decided to come in when you got
hungry and tired? Never thought of how you fooled me, did you? Now, the
first thing you get is a good licking."

He tied them in a little log pen near the cabin and whipped them
soundly. And the next few days, while Wallace and I rested, he took
them out separately and deliberately ran them over coyote and deer
trails. Sometimes we heard his stentorian yell as a forerunner to the
blast from his old shotgun. Then again we heard the shots unheralded by
the yell. Wallace and I waxed warm under the collar over this peculiar
method of training dogs, and each of us made dire threats. But in
justice to their implacable trainer, the dogs never appeared to be
hurt; never a spot of blood flecked their glossy coats, nor did they
ever come home limping. Sounder grew wise, and Don gave up, but Moze
appeared not to change.

"All hands ready to rustle," sang out Frank one morning. "Old Baldy's
got to be shod."

This brought us all, except Jones, out of the cabin, to see the object
of Frank's anxiety tied to a nearby oak. At first I failed to recognize
Old Baldy. Vanished was the slow, sleepy, apathetic manner that had
characterized him; his ears lay back on his head; fire flashed from his
eyes. When Frank threw down a kit-bag, which emitted a metallic
clanking, Old Baldy sat back on his haunches, planted his forefeet deep
in the ground and plainly as a horse could speak, said "No!"

"Sometimes he's bad, and sometimes worse," growled Frank.

"Shore he's plumb bad this mornin'," replied Jim.

Frank got the three of us to hold Baldy's head and pull him up, then he
ventured to lift a hind foot over his line. Old Baldy straightened out
his leg and sent Frank sprawling into the dirt. Twice again Frank
patiently tried to hold a hind leg, with the same result; and then he
lifted a forefoot. Baldy uttered a very intelligible snort, bit through
Wallace's glove, yanked Jim off his feet, and scared me so that I let
go his forelock. Then he broke the rope which held him to the tree.
There was a plunge, a scattering of men, though Jim still valiantly
held on to Baldy's head, and a thrashing of scrub pinyon, where Baldy
reached out vigorously with his hind feet. But for Jim, he would have
escaped.

"What's all the row?" called Jones from the cabin. Then from the door,
taking in the situation, he yelled: "Hold on, Jim! Pull down on the
ornery old cayuse!"

He leaped into action with a lasso in each hand, one whirling round his
head. The slender rope straightened with a whiz and whipped round
Baldy's legs as he kicked viciously. Jones pulled it tight, then
fastened it with nimble fingers to the tree.

"Let go! let go! Jim!" he yelled, whirling the other lasso. The loop
flashed and fell over Baldy's head and tightened round his neck. Jones
threw all the weight of his burly form on the lariat, and Baldy crashed
to the ground, rolled, tussled, screamed, and then lay on his back,
kicking the air with three free legs. "Hold this," ordered Jones,
giving the tight rope to Frank. Whereupon he grabbed my lasso from the
saddle, roped Baldy's two forefeet, and pulled him down on his side.
This lasso he fastened to a scrub cedar.

"He's chokin'!" said Frank.

"Likely he is," replied Jones shortly. "It'll do him good." But with
his big hands he drew the coil loose and slipped it down over Baldy's
nose, where he tightened it again.

"Now, go ahead," he said, taking the rope from Frank.

It had all been done in a twinkling. Baldy lay there groaning and
helpless, and when Frank once again took hold of the wicked leg, he was
almost passive. When the shoeing operation had been neatly and quickly
attended to and Baldy released from his uncomfortable position he
struggled to his feet with heavy breaths, shook himself, and looked at
his master.

"How'd you like being hog-tied?" queried his conqueror, rubbing Baldy's
nose. "Now, after this you'll have some manners."

Old Baldy seemed to understand, for he looked sheepish, and lapsed once
more into his listless, lazy unconcern.

"Where's Jim's old cayuse, the pack-horse?" asked our leader.

"Lost. Couldn't find him this morning, an' had a deuce of a time
findin' the rest of the bunch. Old Baldy was cute. He hid in a bunch of
pinyons an' stood quiet so his bell wouldn't ring. I had to trail him."

"Do the horses stray far when they are hobbled?" inquired Wallace.

"If they keep jumpin' all night they can cover some territory. We're
now on the edge of the wild horse country, and our nags know this as
well as we. They smell the mustangs, an' would break their necks to get
away. Satan and the sorrel were ten miles from camp when I found them
this mornin'. An' Jim's cayuse went farther, an' we never will get him.
He'll wear his hobbles out, then away with the wild horses. Once with
them, he'll never be caught again."

On the sixth day of our stay at Oak we had visitors, whom Frank
introduced as the Stewart brothers and Lawson, wild-horse wranglers.
They were still, dark men, whose facial expression seldom varied; tall
and lithe and wiry as the mustangs they rode. The Stewarts were on
their way to Kanab, Utah, to arrange for the sale of a drove of horses
they had captured and corraled in a narrow canyon back in the Siwash.
Lawson said he was at our service, and was promptly hired to look after
our horses.

"Any cougar signs back in the breaks?" asked Jones.

"Wal, there's a cougar on every deer trail," replied the elder Stewart,
"An' two for every pinto in the breaks. Old Tom himself downed fifteen
colts fer us this spring."

"Fifteen colts! That's wholesale murder. Why don't you kill the
butcher?"

"We've tried more'n onct. It's a turrible busted up country, them
brakes. No man knows it, an' the cougars do. Old Tom ranges all the
ridges and brakes, even up on the slopes of Buckskin; but he lives down
there in them holes, an' Lord knows, no dog I ever seen could follow
him. We tracked him in the snow, an' had dogs after him, but none could
stay with him, except two as never cum back. But we've nothin' agin Old
Tom like Jeff Clarke, a hoss rustler, who has a string of pintos
corraled north of us. Clarke swears he ain't raised a colt in two
years."

"We'll put that old cougar up a tree," exclaimed Jones.

"If you kill him we'll make you all a present of a mustang, an' Clarke,
he'll give you two each," replied Stewart. "We'd be gettin' rid of him
cheap."

"How many wild horses on the mountain now?"

"Hard to tell. Two or three thousand, mebbe. There's almost no ketchin'
them, an' they regrowin' all the time We ain't had no luck this spring.
The bunch in corral we got last year."

"Seen anythin' of the White Mustang?" inquired Frank. "Ever get a rope
near him?"

"No nearer'n we hev fer six years back. He can't be ketched. We seen
him an' his band of blacks a few days ago, headin' fer a water-hole
down where Nail Canyon runs into Kanab Canyon. He's so cunnin' he'll
never water at any of our trap corrals. An' we believe he can go
without water fer two weeks, unless mebbe he hes a secret hole we've
never trailed him to."

"Would we have any chance to see this White Mustang and his band?"
questioned Jones.

"See him? Why, thet'd be easy. Go down Snake Gulch, camp at Singin'
Cliffs, go over into Nail Canyon, an' wait. Then send some one slippin'
down to the water-hole at Kanab Canyon, an' when the band cums in to
drink--which I reckon will be in a few days now--hev them drive the
mustangs up. Only be sure to hev them get ahead of the White Mustang,
so he'll hev only one way to cum, fer he sure is knowin'. He never
makes a mistake. Mebbe you'll get to see him cum by like a white
streak. Why, I've heerd thet mustang's hoofs ring like bells on the
rocks a mile away. His hoofs are harder'n any iron shoe as was ever
made. But even if you don't get to see him, Snake Gulch is worth
seein'."

I learned later from Stewart that the White Mustang was a beautiful
stallion of the wildest strain of mustang blue blood. He had roamed the
long reaches between the Grand Canyon and Buckskin toward its southern
slope for years; he had been the most sought-for horse by all the
wranglers, and had become so shy and experienced that nothing but a
glimpse was ever obtained of him. A singular fact was that he never
attached any of his own species to his band, unless they were coal
black. He had been known to fight and kill other stallions, but he kept
out of the well-wooded and watered country frequented by other bands,
and ranged the brakes of the Siwash as far as he could range. The usual
method, indeed the only successful way to capture wild horses, was to
build corrals round the waterholes. The wranglers lay out night after
night watching. When the mustangs came to drink--which was always after
dark--the gates would be closed on them. But the trick had never even
been tried on the White Mustang, for the simple reason that he never
approached one of these traps.

"Boys," said Jones, "seeing we need breaking in, we'll give the White
Mustang a little run."

This was most pleasurable news, for the wild horses fascinated me.
Besides, I saw from the expression on our leader's face that an
uncapturable mustang was an object of interest for him.

Wallace and I had employed the last few warm sunny afternoons in riding
up and down the valley, below Oak, where there was a fine, level
stretch. Here I wore out my soreness of muscle, and gradually overcame
my awkwardness in the saddle. Frank's remedy of maple sugar and red
pepper had rid me of my cold, and with the return of strength, and the
coming of confidence, full, joyous appreciation of wild environment and
life made me unspeakably happy. And I noticed that my companions were
in like condition of mind, though self-contained where I was exuberant.
Wallace galloped his sorrel and watched the crags; Jones talked more
kindly to the dogs; Jim baked biscuits indefatigably, and smoked in
contented silence; Frank said always: "We'll ooze along easy like, for
we've all the time there is." Which sentiment, whether from reiterated
suggestion, or increasing confidence in the practical cowboy, or charm
of its free import, gradually won us all.

"Boys," said Jones, as we sat round the campfire, "I see you're getting
in shape. Well, I've worn off the wire edge myself. And I have the
hounds coming fine. They mind me now, but they're mystified. For the
life of them they can't understand what I mean. I don't blame them.
Wait till, by good luck, we get a cougar in a tree. When Sounder and
Don see that, we've lion dogs, boys! we've lion dogs! But Moze is a
stubborn brute. In all my years of animal experience, I've never
discovered any other way to make animals obey than by instilling fear
and respect into their hearts. I've been fond of buffalo, horses and
dogs, but sentiment never ruled me. When animals must obey, they
must--that's all, and no mawkishness! But I never trusted a buffalo in
my life. If I had I wouldn't be here to-night. You all know how many
keepers of tame wild animals get killed. I could tell you dozens of
tragedies. And I've often thought, since I got back from New York, of
that woman I saw with her troop of African lions. I dream about those
lions, and see them leaping over her head. What a grand sight that was!
But the public is fooled. I read somewhere that she trained those lions
by love. I don't believe it. I saw her use a whip and a steel spear.
Moreover, I saw many things that escaped most observers--how she
entered the cage, how she maneuvered among them, how she kept a
compelling gaze on them! It was an admirable, a great piece of work.
Maybe she loves those huge yellow brutes, but her life was in danger
every moment while she was in that cage, and she knew it. Some day, one
of her pets likely the King of Beasts she pets the most will rise up
and kill her. That is as certain as death."



CHAPTER 6.

THE WHITE MUSTANG

For thirty miles down Nail Canyon we marked, in every dusty trail and
sandy wash, the small, oval, sharply defined tracks of the White
Mustang and his band.

The canyon had been well named. It was long, straight and square sided;
its bare walls glared steel-gray in the sun, smooth, glistening
surfaces that had been polished by wind and water. No weathered heaps
of shale, no crumbled piles of stone obstructed its level floor. And,
softly toning its drab austerity, here grew the white sage, waving in
the breeze, the Indian Paint Brush, with vivid vermilion flower, and
patches of fresh, green grass.

"The White King, as we Arizona wild-hoss wranglers calls this mustang,
is mighty pertickler about his feed, an' he ranged along here last
night, easy like, browsin' on this white sage," said Stewart. Inflected
by our intense interest in the famous mustang, and ruffled slightly by
Jones's manifest surprise and contempt that no one had captured him,
Stewart had volunteered to guide us. "Never knowed him to run in this
way fer water; fact is, never knowed Nail Canyon had a fork. It splits
down here, but you'd think it was only a crack in the wall. An' thet
cunnin' mustang hes been foolin' us fer years about this water-hole."

The fork of Nail Canyon, which Stewart had decided we were in, had been
accidentally discovered by Frank, who, in search of our horses one
morning had crossed a ridge, to come suddenly upon the blind, box-like
head of the canyon. Stewart knew the lay of the ridges and run of the
canyons as well as any man could know a country where, seemingly, every
rod was ridged and bisected, and he was of the opinion that we had
stumbled upon one of the White Mustang's secret passages, by which he
had so often eluded his pursuers.

Hard riding had been the order of the day, but still we covered ten
more miles by sundown. The canyon apparently closed in on us, so camp
was made for the night. The horses were staked out, and supper made
ready while the shadows were dropping; and when darkness settled thick
over us, we lay under our blankets.

Morning disclosed the White Mustang's secret passage. It was a narrow
cleft, splitting the canyon wall, rough, uneven, tortuous and choked
with fallen rocks--no more than a wonderful crack in solid stone,
opening into another canyon. Above us the sky seemed a winding, flowing
stream of blue. The walls were so close in places that a horse with
pack would have been blocked, and a rider had to pull his legs up over
the saddle. On the far side, the passage fell very suddenly for several
hundred feet to the floor of the other canyon. No hunter could have
seen it, or suspected it from that side.

"This is Grand Canyon country, an' nobody knows what he's goin' to
find," was Frank's comment.

"Now we're in Nail Canyon proper," said Stewart; "An' I know my
bearin's. I can climb out a mile below an' cut across to Kanab Canyon,
an' slip up into Nail Canyon agin, ahead of the mustangs, an' drive 'em
up. I can't miss 'em, fer Kanab Canyon is impassable down a little
ways. The mustangs will hev to run this way. So all you need do is go
below the break, where I climb out, an' wait. You're sure goin' to get
a look at the White Mustang. But wait. Don't expect him before noon,
an' after thet, any time till he comes. Mebbe it'll be a couple of
days, so keep a good watch."

Then taking our man Lawson, with blankets and a knapsack of food,
Stewart rode off down the canyon.

We were early on the march. As we proceeded the canyon lost its
regularity and smoothness; it became crooked as a rail fence, narrower,
higher, rugged and broken. Pinnacled cliffs, cracked and leaning,
menaced us from above. Mountains of ruined wall had tumbled into
fragments.

It seemed that Jones, after much survey of different corners, angles
and points in the canyon floor, chose his position with much greater
care than appeared necessary for the ultimate success of our
venture--which was simply to see the White Mustang, and if good fortune
attended us, to snap some photographs of this wild king of horses. It
flashed over me that, with his ruling passion strong within him, our
leader was laying some kind of trap for that mustang, was indeed bent
on his capture.

Wallace, Frank and Jim were stationed at a point below the break where
Stewart had evidently gone up and out. How a horse could have climbed
that streaky white slide was a mystery. Jones's instructions to the men
were to wait until the mustangs were close upon them, and then yell and
shout and show themselves.

He took me to a jutting corner of cliff, which hid us from the others,
and here he exercised still more care in scrutinizing the lay of the
ground. A wash from ten to fifteen feet wide, and as deep, ran through
the canyon in a somewhat meandering course. At the corner which
consumed so much of his attention, the dry ditch ran along the cliff
wall about fifty feet out; between it and the wall was good level
ground, on the other side huge rocks and shale made it hummocky,
practically impassable for a horse. It was plain the mustangs, on their
way up, would choose the inside of the wash; and here in the middle of
the passage, just round the jutting corner, Jones tied our horses to
good, strong bushes. His next act was significant. He threw out his
lasso and, dragging every crook out of it, carefully recoiled it, and
hung it loose over the pommel of his saddle.

"The White Mustang may be yours before dark," he said with the smile
that came so seldom. "Now I placed our horses there for two reasons.
The mustangs won't see them till they're right on them. Then you'll see
a sight and have a chance for a great picture. They will halt; the
stallion will prance, whistle and snort for a fight, and then they'll
see the saddles and be off. We'll hide across the wash, down a little
way, and at the right time we'll shout and yell to drive them up."

By piling sagebrush round a stone, we made a hiding-place. Jones was
extremely cautious to arrange the bunches in natural positions. "A
Rocky Mountain Big Horn is the only four-footed beast," he said, "that
has a better eye than a wild horse. A cougar has an eye, too; he's used
to lying high up on the cliffs and looking down for his quarry so as to
stalk it at night; but even a cougar has to take second to a mustang
when it comes to sight."

The hours passed slowly. The sun baked us; the stones were too hot to
touch; flies buzzed behind our ears; tarantulas peeped at us from
holes. The afternoon slowly waned.

At dark we returned to where we had left Wallace and the cowboys. Frank
had solved the problem of water supply, for he had found a little
spring trickling from a cliff, which, by skillful management, produced
enough drink for the horses. We had packed our water for camp use.

"You take the first watch to-night," said Jones to me after supper.
"The mustangs might try to slip by our fire in the night and we must
keep a watch or them. Call Wallace when your time's up. Now, fellows,
roll in."

When the pink of dawn was shading white, we were at our posts. A long,
hot day--interminably long, deadening to the keenest interest--passed,
and still no mustangs came. We slept and watched again, in the grateful
cool of night, till the third day broke.

The hours passed; the cool breeze changed to hot; the sun blazed over
the canyon wall; the stones scorched; the flies buzzed. I fell asleep
in the scant shade of the sage bushes and awoke, stifled and moist. The
old plainsman, never weary, leaned with his back against a stone and
watched, with narrow gaze, the canyon below. The steely walls hurt my
eyes; the sky was like hot copper. Though nearly wild with heat and
aching bones and muscles and the long hours of wait--wait--wait, I was
ashamed to complain, for there sat the old man, still and silent. I
routed out a hairy tarantula from under a stone and teased him into a
frenzy with my stick, and tried to get up a fight between him and a
scallop-backed horned-toad that blinked wonderingly at me. Then I
espied a green lizard on a stone. The beautiful reptile was about a
foot in length, bright green, dotted with red, and he had diamonds for
eyes. Nearby a purple flower blossomed, delicate and pale, with a bee
sucking at its golden heart. I observed then that the lizard had his
jewel eyes upon the bee; he slipped to the edge of the stone, flicked
out a long, red tongue, and tore the insect from its honeyed perch.
Here were beauty, life and death; and I had been weary for something to
look at, to think about, to distract me from the wearisome wait!

"Listen!" broke in Jones's sharp voice. His neck was stretched, his
eyes were closed, his ear was turned to the wind.

With thrilling, reawakened eagerness, I strained my hearing. I caught a
faint sound, then lost it.

"Put your ear to the ground," said Jones. I followed his advice, and
detected the rhythmic beat of galloping horses.

"The mustangs are coming, sure as you're born!" exclaimed Jones.

"There I see the cloud of dust!" cried he a minute later.

In the first bend of the canyon below, a splintered ruin of rock now
lay under a rolling cloud of dust. A white flash appeared, a line of
bobbing black objects, and more dust; then with a sharp pounding of
hoofs, into clear vision shot a dense black band of mustangs, and well
in front swung the White King.

"Look! Look! I never saw the beat of that--never in my born days!"
cried Jones. "How they move! yet that white fellow isn't half-stretched
out. Get your picture before they pass. You'll never see the beat of
that."

With long manes and tails flying, the mustangs came on apace and passed
us in a trampling roar, the white stallion in the front. Suddenly a
shrill, whistling blast, unlike any sound I had ever heard, made the
canyon fairly ring. The white stallion plunged back, and his band
closed in behind him. He had seen our saddle horses. Then trembling,
whinnying, and with arched neck and high-poised head, bespeaking his
mettle, he advanced a few paces, and again whistled his shrill note of
defiance. Pure creamy white he was, and built like a racer. He pranced,
struck his hoofs hard and cavorted; then, taking sudden fright, he
wheeled.

It was then, when the mustangs were pivoting, with the white in the
lead, that Jones jumped upon the stone, fired his pistol and roared
with all his strength. Taking his cue, I did likewise. The band huddled
back again, uncertain and frightened, then broke up the canyon.

Jones jumped the ditch with surprising agility, and I followed close at
his heels. When we reached our plunging horses, he shouted: "Mount, and
hold this passage. Keep close in by that big stone at the turn so they
can't run you down, or stampede you. If they head your way, scare them
back."

Satan quivered, and when I mounted, reared and plunged. I had to hold
him in hard, for he was eager to run. At the cliff wall I was at some
pains to check him. He kept champing his bit and stamping his feet.

From my post I could see the mustangs flying before a cloud of dust.
Jones was turning in his horse behind a large rock in the middle of the
canyon, where he evidently intended to hide. Presently successive yells
and shots from our comrades blended in a roar which the narrow
box-canyon augmented and echoed from wall to wall. High the White
Mustang reared, and above the roar whistled his snort of furious
terror. His band wheeled with him and charged back, their hoofs ringing
like hammers on iron.

The crafty old buffalo-hunter had hemmed the mustangs in a circle and
had left himself free in the center. It was a wily trick, born of his
quick mind and experienced eye.

The stallion, closely crowded by his followers, moved swiftly I saw
that he must pass near the stone. Thundering, crashing, the horses came
on. Away beyond them I saw Frank and Wallace. Then Jones yelled to me:
"Open up! open up!"

I turned Satan into the middle of the narrow passage, screaming at the
top of my voice and discharging my revolver rapidly.

But the wild horses thundered on. Jones saw that they would not now be
balked, and he spurred his bay directly in their path. The big horse,
courageous as his intrepid master, dove forward.

Then followed confusion for me. The pound of hoofs, the snorts, a
screaming neigh that was frightful, the mad stampede of the mustangs
with a whirling cloud of dust, bewildered and frightened me so that I
lost sight of Jones. Danger threatened and passed me almost before I
was aware of it. Out of the dust a mass of tossing manes, foam-flecked
black horses, wild eyes and lifting hoofs rushed at me. Satan, with a
presence of mind that shamed mine, leaped back and hugged the wall. My
eyes were blinded by dust; the smell of dust choked me. I felt a strong
rush of wind and a mustang grazed my stirrup. Then they had passed, on
the wings of the dust-laden breeze.

But not all, for I saw that Jones had, in some inexplicable manner, cut
the White Mustang and two of his blacks out of the band. He had turned
them back again and was pursuing them. The bay he rode had never before
appeared to much advantage, and now, with his long, lean, powerful body
in splendid action, imbued with the relentless will of his rider, what
a picture he presented! How he did run! With all that, the White
Mustang made him look dingy and slow. Nevertheless, it was a critical
time in the wild career of that king of horses. He had been penned in a
space two hundred by five hundred yards, half of which was separated
from him by a wide ditch, a yawning chasm that he had refused, and
behind him, always keeping on the inside, wheeled the yelling hunter,
who savagely spurred his bay and whirled a deadly lasso. He had been
cut off and surrounded; the very nature of the rocks and trails of the
canyon threatened to end his freedom or his life. Certain it was he
preferred to end the latter, for he risked death from the rocks as he
went over them in long leaps.

Jones could have roped either of the two blacks, but he hardly noticed
them. Covered with dust and splotches of foam, they took their
advantage, turned on the circle toward the passage way and galloped by
me out of sight. Again Wallace, Frank and Jim let out strings of yells
and volleys. The chase was narrowing down. Trapped, the White Mustang
King had no chance. What a grand spirit he showed! Frenzied as I was
with excitement, the thought occurred to me that this was an unfair
battle, that I ought to stand aside and let him pass. But the blood and
lust of primitive instinct held me fast. Jones, keeping back, met his
every turn. Yet always with lithe and beautiful stride the stallion
kept out of reach of the whirling lariat.

"Close in!" yelled Jones, and his voice, powerful with a note of
triumph, bespoke the knell of the king's freedom.

The trap closed in. Back and forth at the upper end the White Mustang
worked; then rendered desperate by the closing in, he circled round
nearer to me. Fire shone in his wild eyes. The wily Jones was not to be
outwitted; he kept in the middle, always on the move, and he yelled to
me to open up.

I lost my voice again, and fired my last shot. Then the White Mustang
burst into a dash of daring, despairing speed. It was his last
magnificent effort. Straight for the wash at the upper end he pointed
his racy, spirited head, and his white legs stretched far apart,
twinkled and stretched again. Jones galloped to cut him off, and the
yells he emitted were demoniacal. It was a long, straight race for the
mustang, a short curve for the bay.

That the white stallion gained was as sure as his resolve to elude
capture, and he never swerved a foot from his course. Jones might have
headed him, but manifestly he wanted to ride with him, as well as to
meet him, so in case the lasso went true, a terrible shock might be
averted.

Up went Jones's arm as the space shortened, and the lasso ringed his
head. Out it shot, lengthened like a yellow, striking snake, and fell
just short of the flying white tail.

The White Mustang, fulfilling his purpose in a last heroic display of
power, sailed into the air, up and up, and over the wide wash like a
white streak. Free! the dust rolled in a cloud from under his hoofs,
and he vanished.

Jones's superb horse, crashing down on his haunches, just escaped
sliding into the hole.

I awoke to the realization that Satan had carried me, in pursuit of the
thrilling chase, all the way across the circle without my knowing it.

Jones calmly wiped the sweat from his face, calmly coiled his lasso,
and calmly remarked:

"In trying to capture wild animals a man must never be too sure. Now
what I thought my strong point was my weak point--the wash. I made sure
no horse could ever jump that hole."



CHAPTER 8.

SNAKE GULCH

Not far from the scene of our adventure with the White Streak as we
facetious and appreciatively named the mustang, deep, flat cave
indented the canyon wall. By reason of its sandy floor and close
proximity to Frank's trickling spring, we decided to camp in it. About
dawn Lawson and Stewart straggled in on spent horse and found awaiting
them a bright fire, a hot supper and cheery comrades.

"Did yu fellars git to see him?" was the ranger's first question.

"Did we get to see him?" echoed five lusty voice as one. "We did!"

It was after Frank, in his plain, blunt speech had told of our
experience, that the long Arizonian gazed fixedly at Jones.

"Did yu acktully tech the hair of thet mustang with a rope?"

In all his days Jones never had a greater complement. By way of reply,
he moved his big hand to button of his coat, and, fumbling over it,
unwound a string of long, white hairs, then said: "I pulled these out
of his tail with my lasso; it missed his left hind hoof about six
inches."

There were six of the hairs, pure, glistening white, and over three
feet long. Stewart examined then in expressive silence, then passed
them along; and when they reached me, they stayed.

The cave, lighted up by a blazing fire, appeared to me a forbidding,
uncanny place. Small, peculiar round holes, and dark cracks, suggestive
of hidden vermin, gave me a creepy feeling; and although not
over-sensitive on the subject of crawling, creeping things, I voiced my
disgust.

"Say, I don't like the idea of sleeping in this hole. I'll bet it's
full of spiders, snakes and centipedes and other poisonous things."

Whatever there was in my inoffensive declaration to rouse the usually
slumbering humor of the Arizonians, and the thinly veiled ridicule of
Colonel Jones, and a mixture of both in my once loyal California
friend, I am not prepared to state. Maybe it was the dry, sweet, cool
air of Nail Canyon; maybe my suggestion awoke ticklish associations
that worked themselves off thus; maybe it was the first instance of my
committing myself to a breach of camp etiquette. Be that as it may, my
innocently expressed sentiment gave rise to bewildering dissertations
on entomology, and most remarkable and startling tales from first-hand
experience.

"Like as not," began Frank in matter-of-fact tone. "Them's tarantuler
holes all right. An' scorpions, centipedes an' rattlers always rustle
with tarantulers. But we never mind them--not us fellers! We're used to
sleepin' with them. Why, I often wake up in the night to see a big
tarantuler on my chest, an' see him wink. Ain't thet so, Jim?"

"Shore as hell," drawled faithful, slow Jim.

"Reminds me how fatal the bite of a centipede is," took up Colonel
Jones, complacently. "Once I was sitting in camp with a hunter, who
suddenly hissed out: 'Jones, for God's sake don't budge! There's a
centipede on your arm!' He pulled his Colt, and shot the blamed
centipede off as clean as a whistle. But the bullet hit a steer in the
leg; and would you believe it, the bullet carried so much poison that
in less than two hours the steer died of blood poisoning. Centipedes
are so poisonous they leave a blue trail on flesh just by crawling over
it. Look there!"

He bared his arm, and there on the brown-corded flesh was a blue trail
of something, that was certain. It might have been made by a centipede.

"This is a likely place for them," put in Wallace, emitting a volume of
smoke and gazing round the cave walls with the eye of a connoisseur.
"My archaeological pursuits have given me great experience with
centipedes, as you may imagine, considering how many old tombs, caves
and cliff-dwellings I have explored. This Algonkian rock is about the
right stratum for centipedes to dig in. They dig somewhat after the
manner of the fluviatile long-tailed decapod crustaceans, of the genera
Thoracostraca, the common crawfish, you know. From that, of course, you
can imagine, if a centipede can bite rock, what a biter he is."

I began to grow weak, and did not wonder to see Jim's long pipe fall
from his lips. Frank looked queer around the gills, so to speak, but
the gaunt Stewart never batted an eye.

"I camped here two years ago," he said, "An' the cave was alive with
rock-rats, mice, snakes, horned-toads, lizards an' a big Gila monster,
besides bugs, scorpions' rattlers, an' as fer tarantulers an'
centipedes--say! I couldn't sleep fer the noise they made fightin'."

"I seen the same," concluded Lawson, as nonchalant as a wild-horse
wrangler well could be. "An' as fer me, now I allus lays perfickly
still when the centipedes an' tarantulers begin to drop from their
holes in the roof, same as them holes up there. An' when they light on
me, I never move, nor even breathe fer about five minutes. Then they
take a notion I'm dead an' crawl off. But sure, if I'd breathed I'd
been a goner!"

All of this was playfully intended for the extinction of an unoffending
and impressionable tenderfoot.

With an admiring glance at my tormentors, I rolled out my sleeping-bag
and crawled into it, vowing I would remain there even if devil-fish,
armed with pikes, invaded our cave.

Late in the night I awoke. The bottom of the canyon and the outer floor
of our cave lay bathed in white, clear moonlight. A dense, gloomy black
shadow veiled the opposite canyon wall. High up the pinnacles and
turrets pointed toward a resplendent moon. It was a weird, wonderful
scene of beauty entrancing, of breathless, dreaming silence that seemed
not of life. Then a hoot-owl lamented dismally, his call fitting the
scene and the dead stillness; the echoes resounded from cliff to cliff,
strangely mocking and hollow, at last reverberating low and mournful in
the distance.

How long I lay there enraptured with the beauty of light and mystery of
shade, thrilling at the lonesome lament of the owl, I have no means to
tell; but I was awakened from my trance by the touch of something
crawling over me. Promptly I raised my head. The cave was as light as
day. There, sitting sociably on my sleeping-bag was a great black
tarantula, as large as my hand.

For one still moment, notwithstanding my contempt for Lawson's advice,
I certainly acted upon it to the letter. If ever I was quiet, and if
ever I was cold, the time was then. My companions snored in blissful
ignorance of my plight. Slight rustling sounds attracted my wary gaze
from the old black sentinel on my knee. I saw other black spiders
running to and fro on the silver, sandy floor. A giant, as large as a
soft-shell crab, seemed to be meditating an assault upon Jones's ear.
Another, grizzled and shiny with age or moonbeams I could not tell
which--pushed long, tentative feelers into Wallace's cap. I saw black
spots darting over the roof. It was not a dream; the cave was alive
with tarantulas!

Not improbably my strong impression that the spider on my knee
deliberately winked at me was the result of memory, enlivening
imagination. But it sufficed to bring to mind, in one rapid, consoling
flash, the irrevocable law of destiny--that the deeds of the wicked
return unto them again.

I slipped back into my sleeping-bag, with a keen consciousness of its
nature, and carefully pulled the flap in place, which almost
hermetically sealed me up.

"Hey! Jones! Wallace! Frank! Jim!" I yelled, from the depths of my safe
refuge.

Wondering cries gave me glad assurance that they had awakened from
their dreams.

"The cave's alive with tarantulas!" I cried, trying to hide my unholy
glee.

"I'll be durned if it ain't!" ejaculated Frank.

"Shore it beats hell!" added Jim, with a shake of his blanket.

"Look out, Jones, there's one on your pillow!" shouted Wallace.

Whack! A sharp blow proclaimed the opening of hostilities.

Memory stamped indelibly every word of that incident; but innate
delicacy prevents the repetition of all save the old warrior's
concluding remarks: "! ! ! place I was ever in! Tarantulas by the
million--centipedes, scorpions, bats! Rattlesnakes, too, I'll swear.
Look out, Wallace! there, under your blanket!"

From the shuffling sounds which wafted sweetly into my bed, I gathered
that my long friend from California must have gone through motions
creditable to a contortionist. An ensuing explosion from Jones
proclaimed to the listening world that Wallace had thrown a tarantula
upon him. Further fearful language suggested the thought that Colonel
Jones had passed on the inquisitive spider to Frank. The reception
accorded the unfortunate tarantula, no doubt scared out of its wits,
began with a wild yell from Frank and ended in pandemonium.

While the confusion kept up, with whacks and blows and threshing about,
with language such as never before had disgraced a group of old
campers, I choked with rapture, and reveled in the sweetness of revenge.

When quiet reigned once more in the black and white canyon, only one
sleeper lay on the moon-silvered sand of the cave.

At dawn, when I opened sleepy eyes, Frank, Slim, Stewart and Lawson had
departed, as pre-arranged, with the outfit, leaving the horses
belonging to us and rations for the day. Wallace and I wanted to climb
the divide at the break, and go home by way of Snake Gulch, and the
Colonel acquiesced with the remark that his sixty-three years had
taught him there was much to see in the world. Coming to undertake it,
we found the climb--except for a slide of weathered rock--no great
task, and we accomplished it in half an hour, with breath to spare and
no mishap to horses.

But descending into Snake Gulch, which was only a mile across the
sparsely cedared ridge, proved to be tedious labor. By virtue of
Satan's patience and skill, I forged ahead; which advantage, however,
meant more risk for me because of the stones set in motion above. They
rolled and bumped and cut into me, and I sustained many a bruise trying
to protect the sinewy slender legs of my horse. The descent ended
without serious mishap.

Snake Gulch had a character and sublimity which cast Nail Canyon into
the obscurity of forgetfulness. The great contrast lay in the diversity
of structure. The rock was bright red, with parapet of yellow, that
leaned, heaved, bulged outward. These emblazoned cliff walls, two
thousand feet high, were cracked from turret to base; they bowled out
at such an angle that we were afraid to ride under them. Mountains of
yellow rock hung balanced, ready to tumble down at the first angry
breath of the gods. We rode among carved stones, pillars, obelisks and
sculptured ruined walls of a fallen Babylon. Slides reaching all the
way across and far up the canyon wall obstructed our passage. On every
stone silent green lizards sunned themselves, gliding swiftly as we
came near to their marble homes.

We came into a region of wind-worn caves, of all sizes and shapes, high
and low on the cliffs; but strange to say, only on the north side of
the canyon they appeared with dark mouths open and uninviting. One,
vast and deep, though far off, menaced us as might the cave of a
tawny-maned king of beasts; yet it impelled, fascinated and drew us on.

"It's a long, hard climb," said Wallace to the Colonel, as we
dismounted.

"Boys, I'm with you," came the reply. And he was with us all the way,
as we clambered over the immense blocks and threaded a passage between
them and pulled weary legs up, one after the other. So steep lay the
jumble of cliff fragments that we lost sight of the cave long before we
got near it. Suddenly we rounded a stone, to halt and gasp at the thing
looming before us.

The dark portal of death or hell might have yawned there. A gloomy
hole, large enough to admit a church, had been hollowed in the cliff by
ages of nature's chiseling.

"Vast sepulcher of Time's past, give up thy dead!" cried Wallace,
solemnly.

"Oh! dark Stygian cave forlorn!" quoted I, as feelingly as my friend.

Jones hauled us down from the clouds.

"Now, I wonder what kind of a prehistoric animal holed in here?" said
he.

Forever the one absorbing interest! If he realized the sublimity of
this place, he did not show it.

The floor of the cave ascended from the very threshold. Stony ridges
circled from wall to wall. We climbed till we were two hundred feet
from the opening, yet we were not half-way to the dome.

Our horses, browsing in the sage far below, looked like ants. So steep
did the ascent become that we desisted; for if one of us had slipped on
the smooth incline, the result would have been terrible. Our voices
rang clear and hollow from the walls. We were so high that the sky was
blotted out by the overhanging square, cornice-like top of the door;
and the light was weird, dim, shadowy, opaque. It was a gray tomb.

"Waa-hoo!" yelled Jones with all the power of his wide, leather lungs.

Thousands of devilish voices rushed at us, seemingly on puffs of wind.
Mocking, deep echoes bellowed from the ebon shades at the back of the
cave, and the walls, taking them up, hurled them on again in fiendish
concatenation.

We did not again break the silence of that tomb, where the spirits of
ages lay in dusty shrouds; and we crawled down as if we had invaded a
sanctuary and invoked the wrath of the gods.

We all proposed names: Montezuma's Amphitheater being the only rival of
Jones's selection, Echo cave, which we finally chose.

Mounting our horses again, we made twenty miles of Snake Gulch by noon,
when we rested for lunch. All the way up we had played the boy's game
of spying for sights, with the honors about even. It was a question if
Snake Gulch ever before had such a raking over. Despite its name,
however, we discovered no snakes.

From the sandy niche of a cliff where we lunched Wallace espied a tomb,
and heralded his discovery with a victorious whoop. Digging in old
ruins roused in him much the same spirit that digging in old books
roused in me. Before we reached him, he had a big bowie-knife buried
deep in the red, sandy floor of the tomb.

This one-time sealed house of the dead had been constructed of small
stones, held together by a cement, the nature of which, Wallace
explained, had never become clear to civilization. It was red in color
and hard as flint, harder than the rocks it glued together. The tomb
was half-round in shape, and its floor was a projecting shelf of cliff
rock. Wallace unearthed bits of pottery, bone and finely braided rope,
all of which, to our great disappointment, crumbled to dust in our
fingers. In the case of the rope, Wallace assured us, this was a sign
of remarkable antiquity.

In the next mile we traversed, we found dozens of these old cells, all
demolished except a few feet of the walls, all despoiled of their
one-time possessions. Wallace thought these depredations were due to
Indians of our own time. Suddenly we came upon Jones, standing under a
cliff, with his neck craned to a desperate angle.

"Now, what's that?" demanded he, pointing upward.

High on the cliff wall appeared a small, round protuberance. It was of
the unmistakably red color of the other tombs; and Wallace, more
excited than he had been in the cougar chase, said it was a sepulcher,
and he believed it had never been opened.

From an elevated point of rock, as high up as I could well climb, I
decided both questions with my glass. The tomb resembled nothing so
much as a mud-wasp's nest, high on a barn wall. The fact that it had
never been broken open quite carried Wallace away with enthusiasm.

"This is no mean discovery, let me tell you that," he declared. "I am
familiar with the Aztec, Toltec and Pueblo ruins, and here I find no
similarity. Besides, we are out of their latitude. An ancient race of
people--very ancient indeed lived in this canyon. How long ago, it is
impossible to tell."

"They must have been birds," said the practical Jones. "Now, how'd that
tomb ever get there? Look at it, will you?"

As near as we could ascertain, it was three hundred feet from the
ground below, five hundred from the rim wall above, and could not
possibly have been approached from the top. Moreover, the cliff wall
was as smooth as a wall of human make.

"There's another one," called out Jones.

"Yes, and I see another; no doubt there are many of them," replied
Wallace. "In my mind, only one thing possible accounts for their
position. You observe they appear to be about level with each other.
Well, once the Canyon floor ran along that line, and in the ages gone
by it has lowered, washed away by the rains."

This conception staggered us, but it was the only one conceivable. No
doubt we all thought at the same time of the little rainfall in that
arid section of Arizona.

"How many years?" queried Jones.

"Years! What are years?" said Wallace. "Thousands of years, ages have
passed since the race who built these tombs lived."

Some persuasion was necessary to drag our scientific friend from the
spot, where obviously helpless to do anything else, he stood and gazed
longingly at the isolated tombs. The canyon widened as we proceeded;
and hundreds of points that invited inspection, such as overhanging
shelves of rock, dark fissures, caverns and ruins had to be passed by,
for lack of time.

Still, a more interesting and important discovery was to come, and the
pleasure and honor of it fell to me. My eyes were sharp and peculiarly
farsighted--the Indian sight, Jones assured me; and I kept them
searching the walls in such places as my companions overlooked.
Presently, under a large, bulging bluff, I saw a dark spot, which took
the shape of a figure. This figure, I recollected, had been presented
to my sight more than once, and now it stopped me. The hard climb up
the slippery stones was fatiguing, but I did not hesitate, for I was
determined to know. Once upon the ledge, I let out a yell that quickly
set my companions in my direction. The figure I had seen was a dark,
red devil, a painted image, rude, unspeakably wild, crudely executed,
but painted by the hand of man. The whole surface of the cliff wall
bore figures of all shapes--men, mammals, birds and strange devices,
some in red paint, mostly in yellow. Some showed the wear of time;
others were clear and sharp.

Wallace puffed up to me, but he had wind enough left for another whoop.
Jones puffed up also, and seeing the first thing a rude sketch of what
might have been a deer or a buffalo, he commented thus: "Darn me if I
ever saw an animal like that? Boys, this is a find, sure as you're
born. Because not even the Piutes ever spoke of these figures. I doubt
if they know they're here. And the cowboys and wranglers, what few ever
get by here in a hundred years, never saw these things. Beats anything
I ever saw on the Mackenzie, or anywhere else."

The meaning of some devices was as mystical as that of others was
clear. Two blood-red figures of men, the larger dragging the smaller by
the hair, while he waved aloft a blood-red hatchet or club, left little
to conjecture. Here was the old battle of men, as old as life. Another
group, two figures of which resembled the foregoing in form and action,
battling over a prostrate form rudely feminine in outline, attested to
an age when men were as susceptible as they are in modern times, but
more forceful and original. An odd yellow Indian waved aloft a red
hand, which striking picture suggested the idea that he was an ancient
Macbeth, listening to the knocking at the gate. There was a character
representing a great chief, before whom many figures lay prostrate,
evidently slain or subjugated. Large red paintings, in the shape of
bats, occupied prominent positions, and must have represented gods or
devils. Armies of marching men told of that blight of nations old or
young--war. These, and birds unnamable, and beasts unclassable, with
dots and marks and hieroglyphics, recorded the history of a bygone
people. Symbols they were of an era that had gone into the dim past,
leaving only these marks, {Symbols recording the history of a bygone
people.} forever unintelligible; yet while they stood, century after
century, ineffaceable, reminders of the glory, the mystery, the sadness
of life.

"How could paint of any kind last so long? asked Jones, shaking his
head doubtfully.

"That is the unsolvable mystery," returned Wallace. "But the records
are there. I am absolutely sure the paintings are at least a thousand
years old. I have never seen any tombs or paintings similar to them.
Snake Gulch is a find, and I shall some day study its wonders."

Sundown caught us within sight of Oak Spring, and we soon trotted into
camp to the welcoming chorus of the hounds. Frank and the others had
reached the cabin some hours before. Supper was steaming on the hot
coals with a delicious fragrance.

Then came the pleasantest time of the day, after a long chase or
jaunt--the silent moments, watching the glowing embers of the fire; the
speaking moments when a red-blooded story rang clear and true; the
twilight moments, when the wood-smoke smelled sweet.

Jones seemed unusually thoughtful. I had learned that this
preoccupation in him meant the stirring of old associations, and I
waited silently. By and by Lawson snored mildly in a corner; Jim and
Frank crawled into their blankets, and all was still. Wallace smoked
his Indian pipe and hunted in firelit dreams.

"Boys," said our leader finally, "somehow the echoes dying away in that
cave reminded me of the mourn of the big white wolves in the Barren
Lands."

Wallace puffed huge clouds of white smoke, and I waited, knowing that I
was to hear at last the story of the Colonel's great adventure in the
Northland.



CHAPTER 8.

NAZA! NAZA! NAZA!

It was a waiting day at Fort Chippewayan. The lonesome, far-northern
Hudson's Bay Trading Post seldom saw such life. Tepees dotted the banks
of the Slave River and lines of blanketed Indians paraded its shores.
Near the boat landing a group of chiefs, grotesque in semi-barbaric,
semicivilized splendor, but black-browed, austere-eyed, stood in savage
dignity with folded arms and high-held heads. Lounging on the grassy
bank were white men, traders, trappers and officials of the post.

All eyes were on the distant curve of the river where, as it lost
itself in a fine-fringed bend of dark green, white-glinting waves
danced and fluttered. A June sky lay blue in the majestic stream;
ragged, spear-topped, dense green trees massed down to the water;
beyond rose bold, bald-knobbed hills, in remote purple relief.

A long Indian arm stretched south. The waiting eyes discerned a black
speck on the green, and watched it grow. A flatboat, with a man
standing to the oars, bore down swiftly.

Not a red hand, nor a white one, offered to help the voyager in the
difficult landing. The oblong, clumsy, heavily laden boat surged with
the current and passed the dock despite the boatman's efforts. He swung
his craft in below upon a bar and roped it fast to a tree. The Indians
crowded above him on the bank. The boatman raised his powerful form
erect, lifted a bronzed face which seemed set in craggy hardness, and
cast from narrow eyes a keen, cool glance on those above. The silvery
gleam in his fair hair told of years.

Silence, impressive as it was ominous, broke only to the rattle of
camping paraphernalia, which the voyager threw to a level, grassy bench
on the bank. Evidently this unwelcome visitor had journeyed from afar,
and his boat, sunk deep into the water with its load of barrels, boxes
and bags, indicated that the journey had only begun. Significant, too,
were a couple of long Winchester rifles shining on a tarpaulin.

The cold-faced crowd stirred and parted to permit the passage of a
tall, thin, gray personage of official bearing, in a faded military
coat.

"Are you the musk-ox hunter?" he asked, in tones that contained no
welcome.

The boatman greeted this peremptory interlocutor with a cool laugh--a
strange laugh, in which the muscles of his face appeared not to play.

"Yes, I am the man," he said.

"The chiefs of the Chippewayan and Great Slave tribes have been
apprised of your coming. They have held council and are here to speak
with you."

At a motion from the commandant, the line of chieftains piled down to
the level bench and formed a half-circle before the voyager. To a man
who had stood before grim Sitting Bull and noble Black Thunder of the
Sioux, and faced the falcon-eyed Geronimo, and glanced over the sights
of a rifle at gorgeous-feathered, wild, free Comanches, this
semi-circle of savages--lords of the north--was a sorry comparison.
Bedaubed and betrinketed, slouchy and slovenly, these low-statured
chiefs belied in appearance their scorn-bright eyes and lofty mien.
They made a sad group.

One who spoke in unintelligible language, rolled out a haughty,
sonorous voice over the listening multitude. When he had finished, a
half-breed interpreter, in the dress of a white man, spoke at a signal
from the commandant.

"He says listen to the great orator of the Chippewayan. He has summoned
all the chiefs of the tribes south of Great Slave Lake. He has held
council. The cunning of the pale-face, who comes to take the musk-oxen,
is well known. Let the pale-face hunter return to his own
hunting-grounds; let him turn his face from the north. Never will the
chiefs permit the white man to take musk-oxen alive from their country.
The Ageter, the Musk-ox, is their god. He gives them food and fur. He
will never come back if he is taken away, and the reindeer will follow
him. The chiefs and their people would starve. They command the
pale-face hunter to go back. They cry Naza! Naza! Naza!"

"Say, for a thousand miles I've heard that word Naza!" returned the
hunter, with mingled curiosity and disgust. "At Edmonton Indian runners
started ahead of me, and every village I struck the redskins would
crowd round me and an old chief would harangue at me, and motion me
back, and point north with Naza! Naza! Naza! What does it mean?"

"No white man knows; no Indian will tell," answered the interpreter.
"The traders think it means the Great Slave, the North Star, the North
Spirit, the North Wind, the North Lights and the musk-ox god."

"Well, say to the chiefs to tell Ageter I have been four moons on the
way after some of his little Ageters, and I'm going to keep on after
them."

"Hunter, you are most unwise," broke in the commandant, in his
officious voice. "The Indians will never permit you to take a musk-ox
alive from the north. They worship him, pray to him. It is a wonder you
have not been stopped."

"Who'll stop me?"

"The Indians. They will kill you if you do not turn back."

"Faugh! to tell an American plainsman that!" The hunter paused a steady
moment, with his eyelids narrowing over slits of blue fire. "There is
no law to keep me out, nothing but Indian superstition and Naza! And
the greed of the Hudson's Bay people. I am an old fox, not to be fooled
by pretty baits. For years the officers of this fur-trading company
have tried to keep out explorers. Even Sir John Franklin, an
Englishman, could not buy food of them. The policy of the company is to
side with the Indians, to keep out traders and trappers. Why? So they
can keep on cheating the poor savages out of clothing and food by
trading a few trinkets and blankets, a little tobacco and rum for
millions of dollars worth of furs. Have I failed to hire man after man,
Indian after Indian, not to know why I cannot get a helper? Have I, a
plainsman, come a thousand miles alone to be scared by you, or a lot of
craven Indians? Have I been dreaming of musk-oxen for forty years, to
slink south now, when I begin to feel the north? Not I."

Deliberately every chief, with the sound of a hissing snake, spat in
the hunter's face. He stood immovable while they perpetrated the
outrage, then calmly wiped his cheeks, and in his strange, cool voice,
addressed the interpreter.

"Tell them thus they show their true qualities, to insult in council.
Tell them they are not chiefs, but dogs. Tell them they are not even
squaws, only poor, miserable starved dogs. Tell them I turn my back on
them. Tell them the paleface has fought real chiefs, fierce, bold, like
eagles, and he turns his back on dogs. Tell them he is the one who
could teach them to raise the musk-oxen and the reindeer, and to keep
out the cold and the wolf. But they are blinded. Tell them the hunter
goes north."

Through the council of chiefs ran a low mutter, as of gathering thunder.

True to his word, the hunter turned his back on them. As he brushed by,
his eye caught a gaunt savage slipping from the boat. At the hunter's
stern call, the Indian leaped ashore, and started to run. He had stolen
a parcel, and would have succeeded in eluding its owner but for an
unforeseen obstacle, as striking as it was unexpected.

A white man of colossal stature had stepped in the thief's passage, and
laid two great hands on him. Instantly the parcel flew from the Indian,
and he spun in the air to fall into the river with a sounding splash.
Yells signaled the surprise and alarm caused by this unexpected
incident. The Indian frantically swam to the shore. Whereupon the
champion of the stranger in a strange land lifted a bag, which gave
forth a musical clink of steel, and throwing it with the camp articles
on the grassy bench, he extended a huge, friendly hand.

"My name is Rea," he said, in deep, cavernous tones.

"Mine is Jones," replied the hunter, and right quickly did he grip the
proffered hand. He saw in Rea a giant, of whom he was but a stunted
shadow. Six and one-half feet Rea stood, with yard-wide shoulders, a
hulk of bone and brawn. His ponderous, shaggy head rested on a bull
neck. His broad face, with its low forehead, its close-shut mastiff
under jaw, its big, opaque eyes, pale and cruel as those of a jaguar,
marked him a man of terrible brute force.

"Free-trader!" called the commandant "Better think twice before you
join fortunes with the musk-ox hunter."

"To hell with you an' your rantin', dog-eared redskins!" cried Rea.
"I've run agin a man of my own kind, a man of my own country, an' I'm
goin' with him."

With this he thrust aside some encroaching, gaping Indians so
unconcernedly and ungently that they sprawled upon the grass.

Slowly the crowd mounted and once more lined the bank.

Jones realized that by some late-turning stroke of fortune, he had
fallen in with one of the few free-traders of the province. These
free-traders, from the very nature of their calling, which was to defy
the fur company, and to trap and trade on their own account--were a
hardy and intrepid class of men. Rea's worth to Jones exceeded that of
a dozen ordinary men. He knew the ways of the north, the language of
the tribes, the habits of animals, the handling of dogs, the uses of
food and fuel. Moreover, it soon appeared that he was a carpenter and
blacksmith.

"There's my kit," he said, dumping the contents of his bag. It
consisted of a bunch of steel traps, some tools, a broken ax, a box of
miscellaneous things such as trappers used, and a few articles of
flannel. "Thievin' redskins," he added, in explanation of his poverty.
"Not much of an outfit. But I'm the man for you. Besides, I had a pal
onct who knew you on the plains, called you 'Buff' Jones. Old Jim Bent
he was."

"I recollect Jim," said Jones. "He went down in Custer's last charge.
So you were Jim's pal. That'd be a recommendation if you needed one.
But the way you chucked the Indian overboard got me."

Rea soon manifested himself as a man of few words and much action. With
the planks Jones had on board he heightened the stern and bow of the
boat to keep out the beating waves in the rapids; he fashioned a
steering-gear and a less awkward set of oars, and shifted the cargo so
as to make more room in the craft.

"Buff, we're in for a storm. Set up a tarpaulin an' make a fire. We'll
pretend to camp to-night. These Indians won't dream we'd try to run the
river after dark, and we'll slip by under cover."

The sun glazed over; clouds moved up from the north; a cold wind swept
the tips of the spruces, and rain commenced to drive in gusts. By the
time it was dark not an Indian showed himself. They were housed from
the storm. Lights twinkled in the teepees and the big log cabins of the
trading company. Jones scouted round till pitchy black night, when a
freezing, pouring blast sent him back to the protection of the
tarpaulin. When he got there he found that Rea had taken it down and
awaited him. "Off!" said the free-trader; and with no more noise than a
drifting feather the boat swung into the current and glided down till
the twinkling fires no longer accentuated the darkness.

By night the river, in common with all swift rivers, had a sullen
voice, and murmured its hurry, its restraint, its menace, its meaning.
The two boat-men, one at the steering gear, one at the oars, faced the
pelting rain and watched the dim, dark line of trees. The craft slid
noiselessly onward into the gloom.

And into Jones's ears, above the storm, poured another sound, a steady,
muffled rumble, like the roll of giant chariot wheels. It had come to
be a familiar roar to him, and the only thing which, in his long life
of hazard, had ever sent the cold, prickling, tight shudder over his
warm skin. Many times on the Athabasca that rumble had presaged the
dangerous and dreaded rapids.

"Hell Bend Rapids!" shouted Rea. "Bad water, but no rocks."

The rumble expanded to a roar, the roar to a boom that charged the air
with heaviness, with a dreamy burr. The whole indistinct world appeared
to be moving to the lash of wind, to the sound of rain, to the roar of
the river. The boat shot down and sailed aloft, met shock on shock,
breasted leaping dim white waves, and in a hollow, unearthly blend of
watery sounds, rode on and on, buffeted, tossed, pitched into a black
chaos that yet gleamed with obscure shrouds of light. Then the
convulsive stream shrieked out a last defiance, changed its course
abruptly to slow down and drown the sound of rapids in muffling
distance. Once more the craft swept on smoothly, to the drive of the
wind and the rush of the rain.

By midnight the storm cleared. Murky cloud split to show shining,
blue-white stars and a fitful moon, that silvered the crests of the
spruces and sometimes hid like a gleaming, black-threaded peak behind
the dark branches.

Jones, a plainsman all his days, wonderingly watched the moon-blanched
water. He saw it shade and darken under shadowy walls of granite, where
it swelled with hollow song and gurgle. He heard again the far-off
rumble, faint on the night. High cliff banks appeared, walled out the
mellow, light, and the river suddenly narrowed. Yawning holes,
whirlpools of a second, opened with a gurgling suck and raced with the
boat.

On the craft flew. Far ahead, a long, declining plane of jumping
frosted waves played dark and white with the moonbeams. The Slave
plunged to his freedom, down his riven, stone-spiked bed, knowing no
patient eddy, and white-wreathed his dark shiny rocks in spume and
spray.



CHAPTER 9.

THE LAND OF THE MUSK-OX

A far cry it was from bright June at Port Chippewayan to dim October on
Great Slave Lake.

Two long, laborious months Rea and Jones threaded the crooked shores of
the great inland sea, to halt at the extreme northern end, where a
plunging rivulet formed the source of a river. Here they found a stone
chimney and fireplace standing among the darkened, decayed ruins of a
cabin.

"We mustn't lose no time," said Rea. "I feel the winter in the wind.
An' see how dark the days are gettin' on us."

"I'm for hunting musk-oxen," replied Jones.

"Man, we're facin' the northern night; we're in the land of the
midnight sun. Soon we'll be shut in for seven months. A cabin we want,
an' wood, an' meat."

A forest of stunted spruce trees edged on the lake, and soon its dreary
solitudes rang to the strokes of axes. The trees were small and uniform
in size. Black stumps protruded, here and there, from the ground,
showing work of the steel in time gone by. Jones observed that the
living trees were no larger in diameter than the stumps, and questioned
Rea in regard to the difference in age.

"Cut twenty-five, mebbe fifty years ago," said the trapper.

"But the living trees are no bigger."

"Trees an' things don't grow fast in the north land."

They erected a fifteen-foot cabin round the stone chimney, roofed it
with poles and branches of spruce and a layer of sand. In digging near
the fireplace Jones unearthed a rusty file and the head of a whisky
keg, upon which was a sunken word in unintelligible letters.

"We've found the place," said Rea. "Frank built a cabin here in 1819.
An' in 1833 Captain Back wintered here when he was in search of Captain
Ross of the vessel Fury. It was those explorin' parties thet cut the
trees. I seen Indian sign out there, made last winter, I reckon; but
Indians never cut down no trees."

The hunters completed the cabin, piled cords of firewood outside,
stowed away the kegs of dried fish and fruits, the sacks of flour,
boxes of crackers, canned meats and vegetables, sugar, salt, coffee,
tobacco--all of the cargo; then took the boat apart and carried it up
the bank, which labor took them less than a week.

Jones found sleeping in the cabin, despite the fire, uncomfortably
cold, because of the wide chinks between the logs. It was hardly better
than sleeping under the swaying spruces. When he essayed to stop up the
crack, a task by no means easy, considering the lack of material--Rea
laughed his short "Ho! Ho!" and stopped him with the word, "Wait."
Every morning the green ice extended farther out into the lake; the sun
paled dim and dimmer; the nights grew colder. On October 8th the
thermometer registered several degrees below zero; it fell a little
more next night and continued to fall.

"Ho! Ho!" cried Rea. "She's struck the toboggan, an' presently she'll
commence to slide. Come on, Buff, we've work to do."

He caught up a bucket, made for their hole in the ice, rebroke a
six-inch layer, the freeze of a few hours, and filling his bucket,
returned to the cabin. Jones had no inkling of the trapper's intention,
and wonderingly he soused his bucket full of water and followed.

By the time he had reached the cabin, a matter of some thirty or forty
good paces, the water no longer splashed from his pail, for a thin film
of ice prevented. Rea stood fifteen feet from the cabin, his back to
the wind, and threw the water. Some of it froze in the air, most of it
froze on the logs. The simple plan of the trapper to incase the cabin
with ice was easily divined. All day the men worked, easing only when
the cabin resembled a glistening mound. It had not a sharp corner nor a
crevice. Inside it was warm and snug, and as light as when the chinks
were open.

A slight moderation of the weather brought the snow. Such snow! A
blinding white flutter of grey flakes, as large as feathers! All day
they rustle softly; all night they swirled, sweeping, seeping brushing
against the cabin. "Ho! Ho!" roared Rea. "'Tis good; let her snow, an'
the reindeer will migrate. We'll have fresh meat." The sun shone again,
but not brightly. A nipping wind came down out of the frigid north and
crusted the snows. The third night following the storm, when the
hunters lay snug under their blankets, a commotion outside aroused them.

"Indians," said Rea, "come north for reindeer."

Half the night, shouting and yelling, barking dogs, hauling of sleds
and cracking of dried-skin tepees murdered sleep for those in the
cabin. In the morning the level plain and edge of the forest held an
Indian village. Caribou hides, strung on forked poles, constituted
tent-like habitations with no distinguishable doors. Fires smoked in
the holes in the snow. Not till late in the day did any life manifest
itself round the tepees, and then a group of children, poorly clad in
ragged pieces of blankets and skins, gaped at Jones. He saw their
pinched, brown faces, staring, hungry eyes, naked legs and throats, and
noted particularly their dwarfish size. When he spoke they fled
precipitously a little way, then turned. He called again, and all ran
except one small lad. Jones went into the cabin and came out with a
handful of sugar in square lumps.

"Yellow Knife Indians," said Rea. "A starved tribe! We're in for it."

Jones made motions to the lad, but he remained still, as if transfixed,
and his black eyes stared wonderingly.

"Molar nasu (white man good)," said Rea.

The lad came out of his trance and looked back at his companions, who
edged nearer. Jones ate a lump of sugar, then handed one to the little
Indian. He took it gingerly, put it into his mouth and immediately
jumped up and down.

"Hoppiesharnpoolie! Hoppiesharnpoolie!" he shouted to his brothers and
sisters. They came on the run.

"Think he means sweet salt," interpreted Rea. "Of course these beggars
never tasted sugar."

The band of youngsters trooped round Jones, and after tasting the white
lumps, shrieked in such delight that the braves and squaws shuffled out
of the tepees.

In all his days Jones had never seen such miserable Indians. Dirty
blankets hid all their person, except straggling black hair, hungry,
wolfish eyes and moccasined feet. They crowded into the path before the
cabin door and mumbled and stared and waited. No dignity, no
brightness, no suggestion of friendliness marked this peculiar attitude.

"Starved!" exclaimed Rea. "They've come to the lake to invoke the Great
Spirit to send the reindeer. Buff, whatever you do, don't feed them. If
you do, we'll have them on our hands all winter. It's cruel, but, man,
we're in the north!"

Notwithstanding the practical trapper's admonition Jones could not
resist the pleading of the children. He could not stand by and see them
starve. After ascertaining there was absolutely nothing to eat in the
tepees, he invited the little ones into the cabin, and made a great pot
of soup, into which he dropped compressed biscuits. The savage children
were like wildcats. Jones had to call in Rea to assist him in keeping
the famished little aborigines from tearing each other to pieces. When
finally they were all fed, they had to be driven out of the cabin.

"That's new to me," said Jones. "Poor little beggars!"

Rea doubtfully shook his shaggy head.

Next day Jones traded with the Yellow Knives. He had a goodly supply of
baubles, besides blankets, gloves and boxes of canned goods, which he
had brought for such trading. He secured a dozen of the large-boned,
white and black Indian dogs, huskies, Rea called them--two long sleds
with harness and several pairs of snowshoes. This trade made Jones rub
his hands in satisfaction, for during all the long journey north he had
failed to barter for such cardinal necessities to the success of his
venture.

"Better have doled out the grub to them in rations," grumbled Rea.

Twenty-four hours sufficed to show Jones the wisdom of the trapper's
words, for in just that time the crazed, ignorant savages had glutted
the generous store of food, which should have lasted them for weeks.
The next day they were begging at the cabin door. Rea cursed and
threatened them with his fists, but they returned again and again.

Days passed. All the time, in light and dark, the Indians filled the
air with dismal chant and doleful incantations to the Great Spirit, and
the tum! tum! tum! tum! of tomtoms, a specific feature of their wild
prayer for food.

But the white monotony of the rolling land and level lake remained
unbroken. The reindeer did not come. The days became shorter, dimmer,
darker. The mercury kept on the slide.

Forty degrees below zero did not trouble the Indians. They stamped till
they dropped, and sang till their voices vanished, and beat the tomtoms
everlastingly. Jones fed the children once each day, against the
trapper's advice.

One day, while Rea was absent, a dozen braves succeeded in forcing an
entrance, and clamored so fiercely, and threatened so desperately, that
Jones was on the point of giving them food when the door opened to
admit Rea.

With a glance he saw the situation. He dropped the bucket he carried,
threw the door wide open and commenced action. Because of his great
bulk he seemed slow, but every blow of his sledge-hammer fist knocked a
brave against the wall, or through the door into the snow. When he
could reach two savages at once, by way of diversion, he swung their
heads together with a crack. They dropped like dead things. Then he
handled them as if they were sacks of corn, pitching them out into the
snow. In two minutes the cabin was clear. He banged the door and
slipped the bar in place.

"Buff, I'm goin' to get mad at these thievin' red, skins some day," he
said gruffly. The expanse of his chest heaved slightly, like the slow
swell of a calm ocean, but there was no other indication of unusual
exertion.

Jones laughed, and again gave thanks for the comradeship of this
strange man.

Shortly afterward, he went out for wood, and as usual scanned the
expanse of the lake. The sun shone mistier and warmer, and frost
feathers floated in the air. Sky and sun and plain and lake--all were
gray. Jones fancied he saw a distant moving mass of darker shade than
the gray background. He called the trapper.

"Caribou," said Rea instantly. "The vanguard of the migration. Hear the
Indians! Hear their cry: "Aton! Aton!" they mean reindeer. The idiots
have scared the herd with their infernal racket, an' no meat will they
get. The caribou will keep to the ice, an' man or Indian can't stalk
them there."

For a few moments his companion surveyed the lake and shore with a
plainsman's eye, then dashed within, to reappear with a Winchester in
each hand. Through the crowd of bewailing, bemoaning Indians; he sped,
to the low, dying bank. The hard crust of snow upheld him. The gray
cloud was a thousand yards out upon the lake and moving southeast. If
the caribou did not swerve from this course they would pass close to a
projecting point of land, a half-mile up the lake. So, keeping a wary
eye upon them, the hunter ran swiftly. He had not hunted antelope and
buffalo on the plains all his life without learning how to approach
moving game. As long as the caribou were in action, they could not tell
whether he moved or was motionless. In order to tell if an object was
inanimate or not, they must stop to see, of which fact the keen hunter
took advantage. Suddenly he saw the gray mass slow down and bunch up.
He stopped running, to stand like a stump. When the reindeer moved
again, he moved, and when they slackened again, he stopped and became
motionless. As they kept to their course, he worked gradually closer
and closer. Soon he distinguished gray, bobbing heads. When the leader
showed signs of halting in his slow trot the hunter again became a
statue. He saw they were easy to deceive; and, daringly confident of
success, he encroached on the ice and closed up the gap till not more
than two hundred yards separated him from the gray, bobbing, antlered
mass.

Jones dropped on one knee. A moment only his eyes lingered admiringly
on the wild and beautiful spectacle; then he swept one of the rifles to
a level. Old habit made the little beaded sight cover first the stately
leader. Bang! The gray monarch leaped straight forward, forehoofs up,
antlered head back, to fall dead with a crash. Then for a few moments
the Winchester spat a deadly stream of fire, and when emptied was
thrown down for the other gun, which in the steady, sure hands of the
hunter belched death to the caribou.

The herd rushed on, leaving the white surface of the lake gray with a
struggling, kicking, bellowing heap. When Jones reached the caribou he
saw several trying to rise on crippled legs. With his knife he killed
these, not without some hazard to himself. Most of the fallen ones were
already dead, and the others soon lay still. Beautiful gray creatures
they were, almost white, with wide-reaching, symmetrical horns.

A medley of yells arose from the shore, and Rea appeared running with
two sleds, with the whole tribe of Yellow Knives pouring out of the
forest behind him.

"Buff, you're jest what old Jim said you was," thundered Rea, as he
surveyed the gray pile. "Here's winter meat, an' I'd not have given a
biscuit for all the meat I thought you'd get."

"Thirty shots in less than thirty seconds," said Jones, "An' I'll bet
every ball I sent touched hair. How many reindeer?"

"Twenty! twenty! Buff, or I've forgot how to count. I guess mebbe you
can't handle them shootin' arms. Ho! here comes the howlin' redskins."

Rea whipped out a bowie knife and began disemboweling the reindeer. He
had not proceeded far in his task when the crazed savages were around
him. Every one carried a basket or receptacle, which he swung aloft,
and they sang, prayed, rejoiced on their knees. Jones turned away from
the sickening scenes that convinced him these savages were little
better than cannibals. Rea cursed them, and tumbled them over, and
threatened them with the big bowie. An altercation ensued, heated on
his side, frenzied on theirs. Thinking some treachery might befall his
comrade, Jones ran into the thick of the group.

"Share with them, Rea, share with them."

Whereupon the giant hauled out ten smoking carcasses. Bursting into a
babel of savage glee and tumbling over one another, the Indians pulled
the caribou to the shore.

"Thievin' fools," growled Rea, wiping the sweat from his brow. "Said
they'd prevailed on the Great Spirit to send the reindeer. Why, they'd
never smelled warm meat but for you. Now, Buff, they'll gorge every
hair, hide an' hoof of their share in less than a week. Thet's the last
we do for the damned cannibals. Didn't you see them eatin' of the raw
innards?--faugh! I'm calculatin' we'll see no more reindeer. It's late
for the migration. The big herd has driven southward. But we're lucky,
thanks to your prairie trainin'. Come on now with the sleds, or we'll
have a pack of wolves to fight."

By loading three reindeer on each sled, the hunters were not long in
transporting them to the cabin. "Buff, there ain't much doubt about
them keepin' nice and cool," said Rea. "They'll freeze, an' we can skin
them when we want."

That night the starved wolf dogs gorged themselves till they could not
rise from the snow. Likewise the Yellow Knives feasted. How long the
ten reindeer might have served the wasteful tribe, Rea and Jones never
found out. The next day two Indians arrived with dog-trains, and their
advent was hailed with another feast, and a pow-wow that lasted into
the night.

"Guess we're goin' to get rid of our blasted hungry neighbors," said
Rea, coming in next morning with the water pail, "An' I'll be durned,
Buff, if I don't believe them crazy heathen have been told about you.
Them Indians was messengers. Grab your gun, an' let's walk over and
see."

The Yellow Knives were breaking camp, and the hunters were at once
conscious of the difference in their bearing. Rea addressed several
braves, but got no reply. He laid his broad hand on the old wrinkled
chief, who repulsed him, and turned his back. With a growl, the trapper
spun the Indian round, and spoke as many words of the language as he
knew. He got a cold response, which ended in the ragged old chief
starting up, stretching a long, dark arm northward, and with eyes fixed
in fanatical subjection, shouting: "Naza! Naza! Naza!"

"Heathen!" Rea shook his gun in the faces of the messengers. "It'll go
bad with you to come Nazain' any longer on our trail. Come, Buff, clear
out before I get mad."

When they were once more in the cabin, Rea told Jones that the
messengers had been sent to warn the Yellow Knives not to aid the white
hunters in any way. That night the dogs were kept inside, and the men
took turns in watching. Morning showed a broad trail southward. And
with the going of the Yellow Knives the mercury dropped to fifty, and
the long, twilight winter night fell.

So with this agreeable riddance and plenty of meat and fuel to cheer
them, the hunters sat down in their snug cabin to wait many months for
daylight.

Those few intervals when the wind did not blow were the only times Rea
and Jones got out of doors. To the plainsman, new to the north, the dim
gray world about him was of exceeding interest. Out of the twilight
shone a wan, round, lusterless ring that Rea said was the sun. The
silence and desolation were heart-numbing.

"Where are the wolves?" asked Jones of Rea.

"Wolves can't live on snow. They're farther south after caribou, or
farther north after musk-ox."

In those few still intervals Jones remained out as long as he dared,
with the mercury sinking to -sixty degrees. He turned from the wonder
of the unreal, remote sun, to the marvel in the north--Aurora
borealis--ever-present, ever-changing, ever-beautiful! and he gazed in
rapt attention.

"Polar lights," said Rea, as if he were speaking of biscuits. "You'll
freeze. It's gettin' cold."

Cold it became, to the matter of -seventy degrees. Frost covered the
walls of the cabin and the roof, except just over the fire. The
reindeer were harder than iron. A knife or an ax or a steel-trap burned
as if it had been heated in fire, and stuck to the hand. The hunters
experienced trouble in breathing; the air hurt their lungs.

The months dragged. Rea grew more silent day by day, and as he sat
before the fire his wide shoulders sagged lower and lower. Jones,
unaccustomed to the waiting, the restraint, the barrier of the north,
worked on guns, sleds, harness, till he felt he would go mad. Then to
save his mind he constructed a windmill of caribou hides and pondered
over it trying to invent, to put into practical use an idea he had once
conceived.

Hour after hour he lay under his blankets unable to sleep, and listened
to the north wind. Sometimes Rea mumbled in his slumbers; once his
giant form started up, and he muttered a woman's name. Shadows from the
fire flickered on the walls, visionary, spectral shadows, cold and
gray, fitting the north. At such times he longed with all the power of
his soul to be among those scenes far southward, which he called home.
For days Rea never spoke a word, only gazed into the fire, ate and
slept. Jones, drifting far from his real self, feared the strange mood
of the trapper and sought to break it, but without avail. More and more
he reproached himself, and singularly on the one fact that, as he did
not smoke himself, he had brought only a small store of tobacco. Rea,
inordinate and inveterate smoker, had puffed away all the weed in
clouds of white, then had relapsed into gloom.



CHAPTER 10.

SUCCESS AND FAILURE

At last the marvel in the north dimmed, the obscure gray shade lifted,
the hope in the south brightened, and the mercury climbed reluctantly,
with a tyrant's hate to relinquish power.

Spring weather at twenty-five below zero! On April 12th a small band of
Indians made their appearance. Of the Dog tribe were they, an offcast
of the Great Slaves, according to Rea, and as motley, starring and
starved as the Yellow Knives. But they were friendly, which presupposed
ignorance of the white hunters, and Rea persuaded the strongest brave
to accompany them as guide northward after musk-oxen.

On April 16th, having given the Indians several caribou carcasses, and
assuring them that the cabin was protected by white spirits, Rea and
Jones, each with sled and train of dogs, started out after their guide,
who was similarly equipped, over the glistening snow toward the north.
They made sixty miles the first day, and pitched their Indian tepee on
the shores of Artillery Lake. Traveling northeast, they covered its
white waste of one hundred miles in two days. Then a day due north,
over rolling, monotonously snowy plain; devoid of rock, tree or shrub,
brought them into a country of the strangest, queerest little spruce
trees, very slender, and none of them over fifteen feet in height. A
primeval forest of saplings.

"Ditchen Nechila," said the guide.

"Land of Sticks Little," translated Rea.

An occasional reindeer was seen and numerous foxes and hares trotted
off into the woods, evincing more curiosity than fear. All were silver
white, even the reindeer, at a distance, taking the hue of the north.
Once a beautiful creature, unblemished as the snow it trod, ran up a
ridge and stood watching the hunters. It resembled a monster dog, only
it was inexpressibly more wild looking.

"Ho! Ho! there you are!" cried Rea, reaching for his Winchester. "Polar
wolf! Them's the white devils we'll have hell with."

As if the wolf understood, he lifted his white, sharp head and uttered
a bark or howl that was like nothing so much as a haunting, unearthly
mourn. The animal then merged into the white, as if he were really a
spirit of the world whence his cry seemed to come.

In this ancient forest of youthful appearing trees, the hunters cut
firewood to the full carrying capacity of the sleds. For five days the
Indian guide drove his dogs over the smooth crust, and on the sixth
day, about noon, halting in a hollow, he pointed to tracks in the snow
and called out: "Ageter! Ageter! Ageter!"

The hunters saw sharply defined hoof-marks, not unlike the tracks of
reindeer, except that they were longer. The tepee was set up on the
spot and the dogs unharnessed.

The Indian led the way with the dogs, and Rea and Jones followed,
slipping over the hard crust without sinking in and traveling swiftly.
Soon the guide, pointing, again let out the cry: "Ageter!" at the same
moment loosing the dogs.

Some few hundred yards down the hollow, a number of large black
animals, not unlike the shaggy, humpy buffalo, lumbered over the snow.
Jones echoed Rea's yell, and broke into a run, easily distancing the
puffing giant.

The musk-oxen squared round to the dogs, and were soon surrounded by
the yelping pack. Jones came up to find six old bulls uttering grunts
of rage and shaking ram-like horns at their tormentors. Notwithstanding
that for Jones this was the cumulation of years of desire, the crowning
moment, the climax and fruition of long-harbored dreams, he halted
before the tame and helpless beasts, with joy not unmixed with pain.

"It will be murder!" he exclaimed. "It's like shooting down sheep."

Rea came crashing up behind him and yelled, "Get busy. We need fresh
meat, an' I want the skins."

The bulls succumbed to well-directed shots, and the Indian and Rea
hurried back to camp with the dogs to fetch the sleds, while Jones
examined with warm interest the animals he had wanted to see all his
life. He found the largest bull approached within a third of the size
of a buffalo. He was of a brownish-black color and very like a large,
woolly ram. His head was broad, with sharp, small ears; the horns had
wide and flattened bases and lay flat on the head, to run down back of
the eyes, then curve forward to a sharp point. Like the bison, the musk
ox had short, heavy limbs, covered with very long hair, and small, hard
hoofs with hairy tufts inside the curve of bone, which probably served
as pads or checks to hold the hoof firm on ice. His legs seemed out of
proportion to his body.

Two musk-oxen were loaded on a sled and hauled to camp in one trip.
Skinning them was but short work for such expert hands. All the choice
cuts of meat were saved. No time was lost in broiling a steak, which
they found sweet and juicy, with a flavor of musk that was disagreeable.

"Now, Rea, for the calves," exclaimed Jones, "And then we're homeward
bound."

"I hate to tell this redskin," replied Rea. "He'll be like the others.
But it ain't likely he'd desert us here. He's far from his base, with
nothin' but thet old musket." Rea then commanded the attention of the
brave, and began to mangle the Great Slave and Yellow Knife languages.
Of this mixture Jones knew but few words. "Ageter nechila," which Rea
kept repeating, he knew, however, meant "musk-oxen little."

The guide stared, suddenly appeared to get Rea's meaning, then
vigorously shook his head and gazed at Jones in fear and horror.
Following this came an action as singular as inexplicable. Slowly
rising, he faced the north, lifted his hand, and remained statuesque in
his immobility. Then he began deliberately packing his blankets and
traps on his sled, which had not been unhitched from the train of dogs.

"Jackoway ditchen hula," he said, and pointed south.

"Jackoway ditchen hula," echoed Rea. "The damned Indian says 'wife
sticks none.' He's goin' to quit us. What do you think of thet? His
wife's out of wood. Jackoway out of wood, an' here we are two days from
the Arctic Ocean. Jones, the damned heathen don't go back!"

The trapper coolly cocked his rifle. The savage, who plainly saw and
understood the action, never flinched. He turned his breast to Rea, and
there was nothing in his demeanor to suggest his relation to a craven
tribe.

"Good heavens, Rea, don't kill him!" exclaimed Jones, knocking up the
leveled rifle.

"Why not, I'd like to know?" demanded Rea, as if he were considering
the fate of a threatening beast. "I reckon it'd be a bad thing for us
to let him go."

"Let him go," said Jones. "We are here on the ground. We have dogs and
meat. We'll get our calves and reach the lake as soon as he does, and
we might get there before."

"Mebbe we will," growled Rea.

No vacillation attended the Indian's mood. From friendly guide, he had
suddenly been transformed into a dark, sullen savage. He refused the
musk-ox meat offered by Jones, and he pointed south and looked at the
white hunters as if he asked them to go with him. Both men shook their
heads in answer. The savage struck his breast a sounding blow and with
his index finger pointed at the white of the north, he shouted
dramatically: "Naza! Naza! Naza!"

He then leaped upon his sled, lashed his dogs into a run, and without
looking back disappeared over a ridge.

The musk-ox hunters sat long silent. Finally Rea shook his shaggy locks
and roared. "Ho! Ho! Jackoway out of wood! Jackoway out of wood!
Jackoway out of wood!"

On the day following the desertion, Jones found tracks to the north of
the camp, making a broad trail in which were numerous little imprints
that sent him flying back to get Rea and the dogs. Muskoxen in great
numbers had passed in the night, and Jones and Rea had not trailed the
herd a mile before they had it in sight. When the dogs burst into full
cry, the musk-oxen climbed a high knoll and squared about to give
battle.

"Calves! Calves! Calves!" cried Jones.

"Hold back! Hold back! Thet's a big herd, an' they'll show fight."

As good fortune would have it, the herd split up into several sections,
and one part, hard pressed by the dogs, ran down the knoll, to be
cornered under the lee of a bank. The hunters, seeing this small
number, hurried upon them to find three cows and five badly frightened
little calves backed against the bank of snow, with small red eyes
fastened on the barking, snapping dogs.

To a man of Jones's experience and skill, the capturing of the calves
was a ridiculously easy piece of work. The cows tossed their heads,
watched the dogs, and forgot their young. The first cast of the lasso
settled over the neck of a little fellow. Jones hauled him out over the
slippery snow and laughed as he bound the hairy legs. In less time than
he had taken to capture one buffalo calf, with half the escort, he had
all the little musk-oxen bound fast. Then he signaled this feat by
pealing out an Indian yell of victory.

"Buff, we've got 'em," cried Rea; "An' now for the hell of it gettin'
'em home. I'll fetch the sleds. You might as well down thet best cow
for me. I can use another skin."

Of all Jones's prizes of captured wild beasts--which numbered nearly
every species common to western North America--he took greatest pride
in the little musk-oxen. In truth, so great had been his passion to
capture some of these rare and inaccessible mammals, that he considered
the day's world the fulfillment of his life's purpose. He was happy.
Never had he been so delighted as when, the very evening of their
captivity, the musk-oxen, evincing no particular fear of him, began to
dig with sharp hoofs into the snow for moss. And they found moss, and
ate it, which solved Jones's greatest problem. He had hardly dared to
think how to feed them, and here they were picking sustenance out of
the frozen snow.

"Rea, will you look at that! Rea, will you look at that!" he kept
repeating. "See, they're hunting, feed."

And the giant, with his rare smile, watched him play with the calves.
They were about two and a half feet high, and resembled long-haired
sheep. The ears and horns were undiscernible, and their color
considerably lighter than that of the matured beasts.

"No sense of fear of man," said the life-student of animals. "But they
shrink from the dogs."

In packing for the journey south, the captives were strapped on the
sleds. This circumstance necessitated a sacrifice of meat and wood,
which brought grave, doubtful shakes of Rea's great head.

Days of hastening over the icy snow, with short hours for sleep and
rest, passed before the hunters awoke to the consciousness that they
were lost. The meat they had packed had gone to feed themselves and the
dogs. Only a few sticks of wood were left.

"Better kill a calf, an' cook meat while we've got little wood left,"
suggested Rea.

"Kill one of my calves? I'd starve first!" cried Jones.

The hungry giant said no more.

They headed southwest. All about them glared the grim monotony of the
arctics. No rock or bush or tree made a welcome mark upon the hoary
plain Wonderland of frost, white marble desert, infinitude of gleaming
silences!

Snow began to fall, making the dogs flounder, obliterating the sun by
which they traveled. They camped to wait for clearing weather. Biscuits
soaked in tea made their meal. At dawn Jones crawled out of the tepee.
The snow had ceased. But where were the dogs? He yelled in alarm. Then
little mounds of white, scattered here and there became animated,
heaved, rocked and rose to dogs. Blankets of snow had been their
covering.

Rea had ceased his "Jackoway out of wood," for a reiterated question:
"Where are the wolves?"

"Lost," replied Jones in hollow humor.

Near the close of that day, in which they had resumed travel, from the
crest of a ridge they descried a long, low, undulating dark line. It
proved to be the forest of "Little sticks," where, with grateful
assurance of fire and of soon finding their old trail, they made camp.

"We've four biscuits left, an' enough tea for one drink each," said
Rea. "I calculate we're two hundred miles from Great Slave Lake. Where
are the wolves?"

At that moment the night wind wafted through the forest a long,
haunting mourn. The calves shifted uneasily; the dogs raised sharp
noses to sniff the air, and Rea, settling back against a tree, cried
out: "Ho! Ho!" Again the savage sound, a keen wailing note with the
hunger of the northland in it, broke the cold silence. "You'll see a
pack of real wolves in a minute," said Rea. Soon a swift pattering of
feet down a forest slope brought him to his feet with a curse to reach
a brawny hand for his rifle. White streaks crossed the black of the
tree trunks; then indistinct forms, the color of snow, swept up, spread
out and streaked to and fro. Jones thought the great, gaunt, pure white
beasts the spectral wolves of Rea's fancy, for they were silent, and
silent wolves must belong to dreams only.

"Ho! Ho!" yelled Rea. "There's green-fire eyes for you, Buff. Hell
itself ain't nothin' to these white devils. Get the calves in the
tepee, an' stand ready to loose the dogs, for we've got to fight."

Raising his rifle he opened fire upon the white foe. A struggling,
rustling sound followed the shots. But whether it was the threshing
about of wolves dying in agony, or the fighting of the fortunate ones
over those shot, could not be ascertained in the confusion.

Following his example Jones also fired rapidly on the other side of the
tepee. The same inarticulate, silently rustling wrestle succeeded this
volley.

"Wait!" cried Rea. "Be sparin' of cartridges."

The dogs strained at their chains and bravely bayed the wolves. The
hunters heaped logs and brush on the fire, which, blazing up, sent a
bright light far into the woods. On the outer edge of that circle moved
the white, restless, gliding forms.

"They're more afraid of fire than of us," said Jones.

So it proved. When the fire burned and crackled they kept well in the
background. The hunters had a long respite from serious anxiety, during
which time they collected all the available wood at hand. But at
midnight, when this had been mostly consumed, the wolves grew bold
again.

"Have you any shots left for the 45-90, besides what's in the
magazine?" asked Rea.

"Yes, a good handful."

"Well, get busy."

With careful aim Jones emptied the magazine into the gray, gliding,
groping mass. The same rustling, shuffling, almost silent strife ensued.

"Rea, there's something uncanny about those brutes. A silent pack of
wolves!"

"Ho! Ho!" rolled the giant's answer through the woods.

For the present the attack appeared to have been effectually checked.
The hunters, sparingly adding a little of their fast diminishing pile
of fuel to the fire, decided to lie down for much needed rest, but not
for sleep. How long they lay there, cramped by the calves, listening
for stealthy steps, neither could tell; it might have been moments and
it might have been hours. All at once came a rapid rush of pattering
feet, succeeded by a chorus of angry barks, then a terrible commingling
of savage snarls, growls, snaps and yelps.

"Out!" yelled Rea. "They're on the dogs!"

Jones pushed his cocked rifle ahead of him and straightened up outside
the tepee. A wolf, large as a panther and white as the gleaming snow,
sprang at him. Even as he discharged his rifle, right against the
breast of the beast, he saw its dripping jaws, its wicked green eyes,
like spurts of fire and felt its hot breath. It fell at his feet and
writhed in the death struggle. Slender bodies of black and white,
whirling and tussling together, sent out fiendish uproar. Rea threw a
blazing stick of wood among them, which sizzled as it met the furry
coats, and brandishing another he ran into the thick of the fight.
Unable to stand the proximity of fire, the wolves bolted and loped off
into the woods.

"What a huge brute!" exclaimed Jones, dragging the one he had shot into
the light. It was a superb animal, thin, supple, strong, with a coat of
frosty fur, very long and fine. Rea began at once to skin it, remarking
that he hoped to find other pelts in the morning.

Though the wolves remained in the vicinity of camp, none ventured near.
The dogs moaned and whined; their restlessness increased as dawn
approached, and when the gray light came, Jones founds that some of
them had been badly lacerated by the fangs of the wolves. Rea hunted
for dead wolves and found not so much as a piece of white fur.

Soon the hunters were speeding southward. Other than a disposition to
fight among themselves, the dogs showed no evil effects of the attack.
They were lashed to their best speed, for Rea said the white rangers of
the north would never quit their trail. All day the men listened for
the wild, lonesome, haunting mourn. But it came not.

A wonderful halo of white and gold, that Rea called a sun-dog, hung in
the sky all afternoon, and dazzlingly bright over the dazzling world of
snow circled and glowed a mocking sun, brother of the desert mirage,
beautiful illusion, smiling cold out of the polar blue.

The first pale evening star twinkled in the east when the hunters made
camp on the shore of Artilery Lake. At dusk the clear, silent air
opened to the sound of a long, haunting mourn.

"Ho! Ho!" called Rea. His hoarse, deep voice rang defiance to the foe.

While he built a fire before the tepee, Jones strode up and down,
suddenly to whip out his knife and make for the tame little musk-oxen,
now digging the snow. Then he wheeled abruptly and held out the blade
to Rea.

"What for?" demanded the giant.

"We've got to eat," said Jones. "And I can't kill one of them. I can't,
so you do it."

"Kill one of our calves?" roared Rea. "Not till hell freezes over! I
ain't commenced to get hungry. Besides, the wolves are going to eat us,
calves and all."

Nothing more was said. They ate their last biscuit. Jones packed the
calves away in the tepee, and turned to the dogs. All day they had
worried him; something was amiss with them, and even as he went among
them a fierce fight broke out. Jones saw it was unusual, for the
attacked dogs showed craven fear, and the attacking ones a howling,
savage intensity that surprised him. Then one of the vicious brutes
rolled his eyes, frothed at the mouth, shuddered and leaped in his
harness, vented a hoarse howl and fell back shaking and retching.

"My God! Rea!" cried Jones in horror. "Come here! Look! That dog is
dying of rabies! Hydrophobia! The white wolves have hydrophobia!"

"If you ain't right!" exclaimed Rea. "I seen a dog die of thet onct,
an' he acted like this. An' thet one ain't all. Look, Buff! look at
them green eyes! Didn't I say the white wolves was hell? We'll have to
kill every dog we've got."

Jones shot the dog, and soon afterward three more that manifested signs
of the disease. It was an awful situation. To kill all the dogs meant
simply to sacrifice his life and Rea's; it meant abandoning hope of
ever reaching the cabin. Then to risk being bitten by one of the
poisoned, maddened brutes, to risk the most horrible of agonizing
deaths--that was even worse.

"Rea, we've one chance," cried Jones, with pale face. "Can you hold the
dogs, one by one, while muzzle them?"

"Ho! Ho!" replied the giant. Placing his bowie knife between his teeth,
with gloved hands he seized and dragged one of the dogs to the
campfire. The animal whined and protested, but showed no ill spirit.
Jones muzzled his jaws tightly with strong cords. Another and another
were tied up, then one which tried to snap at Jones was nearly crushed
by the giant's grip. The last, a surly brute, broke out into mad
ravings the moment he felt the touch of Jones's hands, and writhing,
frothing, he snapped Jones's sleeve. Rea jerked him loose and held him
in the air with one arm, while with the other he swung the bowie. They
hauled the dead dogs out on the snow, and returning to the fire sat
down to await the cry they expected.

Presently, as darkness fastened down tight, it came--the same cry,
wild, haunting, mourning. But for hours it was not repeated.

"Better rest some," said Rea; "I'll call you if they come."

Jones dropped to sleep as he touched his blankets. Morning dawned for
him, to find the great, dark, shadowy figure of the giant nodding over
the fire.

"How's this? Why didn't you call me?" demanded Jones.

"The wolves only fought a little over the dead dogs."

On the instant Jones saw a wolf skulking up the bank. Throwing up his
rifle, which he had carried out of the tepee, he took a snap-shot at
the beast. It ran off on three legs, to go out of sight over the hank.
Jones scrambled up the steep, slippery place, and upon arriving at the
ridge, which took several moments of hard work, he looked everywhere
for the wolf. In a moment he saw the animal, standing still some
hundred or more paces down a hollow. With the quick report of Jones's
second shot, the wolf fell and rolled over. The hunter ran to the spot
to find the wolf was dead. Taking hold of a front paw, he dragged the
animal over the snow to camp. Rea began to skin the animal, when
suddenly he exclaimed:

"This fellow's hind foot is gone!"

"That's strange. I saw it hanging by the skin as the wolf ran up the
bank. I'll look for it."

By the bloody trail on the snow he returned to the place where the wolf
had fallen, and thence back to the spot where its leg had been broken
by the bullet. He discovered no sign of the foot.

"Didn't find it, did you?" said Rea.

"No, and it appears odd to me. The snow is so hard the foot could not
have sunk."

"Well, the wolf ate his foot, thet's what," returned Rea. "Look at them
teeth marks!"

"Is it possible?" Jones stared at the leg Rea held up.

"Yes, it is. These wolves are crazy at times. You've seen thet. An' the
smell of blood, an' nothin' else, mind you, in my opinion, made him eat
his own' foot. We'll cut him open."

Impossible as the thing seemed to Jones--and he could not but believe
further evidence of his own' eyes--it was even stranger to drive a
train of mad dogs. Yet that was what Rea and he did, and lashed them,
beat them to cover many miles in the long day's journey. Rabies had
broken out in several dogs so alarmingly that Jones had to kill them at
the end of the run. And hardly had the sound of the shots died when
faint and far away, but clear as a bell, bayed on the wind the same
haunting mourn of a trailing wolf.

"Ho! Ho! where are the wolves?" cried Rea.

A waiting, watching, sleepless night followed. Again the hunters faced
the south. Hour after hour, riding, running, walking, they urged the
poor, jaded, poisoned dogs. At dark they reached the head of Artillery
Lake. Rea placed the tepee between two huge stones. Then the hungry
hunters, tired, grim, silent, desperate, awaited the familiar cry.

It came on the cold wind, the same haunting mourn, dreadful in its
significance.

Absence of fire inspirited the wary wolves. Out of the pale gloom gaunt
white forms emerged, agile and stealthy, slipping on velvet-padded
feet, closer, closer, closer. The dogs wailed in terror.

"Into the tepee!" yelled Rea.

Jones plunged in after his comrade. The despairing howls of the dogs,
drowned in more savage, frightful sounds, knelled one tragedy and
foreboded a more terrible one. Jones looked out to see a white mass,
like leaping waves of a rapid.

"Pump lead into thet!" cried Rea.

Rapidly Jones emptied his rifle into the white fray. The mass split;
gaunt wolves leaped high to fall back dead; others wriggled and limped
away; others dragged their hind quarters; others darted at the tepee.

"No more cartridges!" yelled Jones.

The giant grabbed the ax, and barred the door of the tepee. Crash! the
heavy iron cleaved the skull of the first brute. Crash! it lamed the
second. Then Rea stood in the narrow passage between the rocks, waiting
with uplifted ax. A shaggy, white demon, snapping his jaws, sprang like
a dog. A sodden, thudding blow met him and he slunk away without a cry.
Another rabid beast launched his white body at the giant. Like a flash
the ax descended. In agony the wolf fell, to spin round and round,
running on his hind legs, while his head and shoulders and forelegs
remained in the snow. His back was broken.

Jones crouched in the opening of the tepee, knife in hand. He doubted
his senses. This was a nightmare. He saw two wolves leap at once. He
heard the crash of the ax; he saw one wolf go down and the other slip
under the swinging weapon to grasp the giant's hip. Jones's heard the
rend of cloth, and then he pounced like a cat, to drive his knife into
the body of the beast. Another nimble foe lunged at Rea, to sprawl
broken and limp from the iron. It was a silent fight. The giant shut
the way to his comrade and the calves; he made no outcry; he needed but
one blow for every beast; magnificent, he wielded death and faced
it--silent. He brought the white wild dogs of the north down with
lightning blows, and when no more sprang to the attack, down on the
frigid silence he rolled his cry: "Ho! Ho!"

"Rea! Rea! how is it with you?" called Jones, climbing out.

"A torn coat--no more, my lad."

Three of the poor dogs were dead; the fourth and last gasped at the
hunters and died.

The wintry night became a thing of half-conscious past, a dream to the
hunters, manifesting its reality only by the stark, stiff bodies of
wolves, white in the gray morning.

"If we can eat, we'll make the cabin," said Rea. "But the dogs an'
wolves are poison."

"Shall I kill a calf?" asked Jones.

"Ho! Ho! when hell freezes over--if we must!"

Jones found one 45-90 cartridge in all the outfit, and with that in the
chamber of his rifle, once more struck south. Spruce trees began to
show on the barrens and caribou trails roused hope in the hearts of the
hunters.

"Look in the spruces," whispered Jones, dropping the rope of his sled.
Among the black trees gray objects moved.

"Caribou!" said Rea. "Hurry! Shoot! Don't miss!"

But Jones waited. He knew the value of the last bullet. He had a
hunter's patience. When the caribou came out in an open space, Jones
whistled. It was then the rifle grew set and fixed; it was then the red
fire belched forth.

At four hundred yards the bullet took some fraction of time to strike.
What a long time that was! Then both hunters heard the spiteful spat of
the lead. The caribou fell, jumped up, ran down the slope, and fell
again to rise no more.

An hour of rest, with fire and meat, changed the world to the hunters;
still glistening, it yet had lost its bitter cold its deathlike clutch.

"What's this?" cried Jones.

Moccasin tracks of different sizes, all toeing north, arrested the
hunters.

"Pointed north! Wonder what thet means?" Rea plodded on, doubtfully
shaking his head.

Night again, clear, cold, silver, starlit, silent night! The hunters
rested, listening ever for the haunting mourn. Day again, white,
passionless, monotonous, silent day. The hunters traveled on--on--on,
ever listening for the haunting mourn.

Another dusk found them within thirty miles of their cabin. Only one
more day now.

Rea talked of his furs, of the splendid white furs he could not bring.
Jones talked of his little muskoxen calves and joyfully watched them
dig for moss in the snow.

Vigilance relaxed that night. Outworn nature rebelled, and both hunters
slept.

Rea awoke first, and kicking off the blankets, went out. His terrible
roar of rage made Jones fly to his side.

Under the very shadow of the tepee, where the little musk-oxen had been
tethered, they lay stretched out pathetically on crimson snow--stiff
stone-cold, dead. Moccasin tracks told the story of the tragedy.

Jones leaned against his comrade.

The giant raised his huge fist.

"Jackoway out of wood! Jackoway out of wood!"

Then he choked.

The north wind, blowing through the thin, dark, weird spruce trees,
moaned and seemed to sigh, "Naza! Naza! Naza!"



CHAPTER 11.

ON TO THE SIWASH

"Who all was doin' the talkin' last night?" asked Frank next morning,
when we were having a late breakfast. "Cause I've a joke on somebody.
Jim he talks in his sleep often, an' last night after you did finally
get settled down, Jim he up in his sleep an' says: 'Shore he's windy as
hell! Shore he's windy as hell'!"

At this cruel exposure of his subjective wanderings, Jim showed extreme
humiliation; but Frank's eyes fairly snapped with the fun he got out of
telling it. The genial foreman loved a joke. The week's stay at Oak, in
which we all became thoroughly acquainted, had presented Jim as always
the same quiet character, easy, slow, silent, lovable. In his brother
cowboy, however, we had discovered in addition to his fine, frank,
friendly spirit, an overwhelming fondness for playing tricks. This
boyish mischievousness, distinctly Arizonian, reached its acme whenever
it tended in the direction of our serious leader.

Lawson had been dispatched on some mysterious errand about which my
curiosity was all in vain. The order of the day was leisurely to get in
readiness, and pack for our journey to the Siwash on the morrow. I
watered my horse, played with the hounds, knocked about the cliffs,
returned to the cabin, and lay down on my bed. Jim's hands were white
with flour. He was kneading dough, and had several low, flat pans on
the table. Wallace and Jones strolled in, and later Frank, and they all
took various positions before the fire. I saw Frank, with the quickness
of a sleight-of-hand performer, slip one of the pans of dough on the
chair Jones had placed by the table. Jim did not see the action;
Jones's and Wallace's backs were turned to Frank, and he did not know I
was in the cabin. The conversation continued on the subject of Jones's
big bay horse, which, hobbles and all, had gotten ten miles from camp
the night before.

"Better count his ribs than his tracks," said Frank, and went on
talking as easily and naturally as if he had not been expecting a very
entertaining situation.

But no one could ever foretell Colonel Jones's actions. He showed every
intention of seating himself in the chair, then walked over to his pack
to begin searching for something or other. Wallace, however, promptly
took the seat; and what began to be funnier than strange, he did not
get up. Not unlikely this circumstance was owing to the fact that
several of the rude chairs had soft layers of old blanket tacked on
them. Whatever were Frank's internal emotions, he presented a
remarkably placid and commonplace exterior; but when Jim began to
search for the missing pan of dough, the joker slowly sagged in his
chair.

"Shore that beats hell!" said Jim. "I had three pans of dough. Could
the pup have taken one?"

Wallace rose to his feet, and the bread pan clattered to the floor,
with a clang and a clank, evidently protesting against the indignity it
had suffered. But the dough stayed with Wallace, a great white
conspicuous splotch on his corduroys. Jim, Frank and Jones all saw it
at once.

"Why--Mr. Wal--lace--you set--in the dough!" exclaimed Frank, in a
queer, strangled voice. Then he exploded, while Jim fell over the table.

It seemed that those two Arizona rangers, matured men though they were,
would die of convulsions. I laughed with them, and so did Wallace,
while he brought his one-handled bowie knife into novel use. Buffalo
Jones never cracked a smile, though he did remark about the waste of
good flour.

Frank's face was a study for a psychologist when Jim actually
apologized to Wallace for being so careless with his pans. I did not
betray Frank, but I resolved to keep a still closer watch on him. It
was partially because of this uneasy sense of his trickiness in the
fringe of my mind that I made a discovery. My sleeping-bag rested on a
raised platform in one corner, and at a favorable moment I examined the
bag. It had not been tampered with, but I noticed a string turning out
through a chink between the logs. I found it came from a thick layer of
straw under my bed, and had been tied to the end of a flatly coiled
lasso. Leaving the thing as it was, I went outside and carelessly
chased the hounds round the cabin. The string stretched along the logs
to another chink, where it returned into the cabin at a point near
where Frank slept. No great power of deduction was necessary to
acquaint me with full details of the plot to spoil my slumbers. So I
patiently awaited developments.

Lawson rode in near sundown with the carcasses of two beasts of some
species hanging over his saddle. It turned out that Jones had planned a
surprise for Wallace and me, and it could hardly have been a more
enjoyable one, considering the time and place. We knew he had a flock
of Persian sheep on the south slope of Buckskin, but had no idea it was
within striking distance of Oak. Lawson had that day hunted up the
shepherd and his sheep, to return to us with two sixty-pound Persian
lambs. We feasted at suppertime on meat which was sweet, juicy, very
tender and of as rare a flavor as that of the Rocky Mountain sheep.

My state after supper was one of huge enjoyment and with intense
interest I awaited Frank's first spar for an opening. It came
presently, in a lull of the conversation.

"Saw a big rattler run under the cabin to-day," he said, as if he were
speaking of one of Old Baldy's shoes. "I tried to get a whack at him,
but he oozed away too quick."

"Shore I seen him often," put in Jim. Good, old, honest Jim, led away
by his trickster comrade! It was very plain. So I was to be frightened
by snakes.

"These old canyon beds are ideal dens for rattle snakes," chimed in my
scientific California friend. "I have found several dens, but did not
molest them as this is a particularly dangerous time of the year to
meddle with the reptiles. Quite likely there's a den under the cabin."

While he made this remarkable statement, he had the grace to hide his
face in a huge puff of smoke. He, too, was in the plot. I waited for
Jones to come out with some ridiculous theory or fact concerning the
particular species of snake, but as he did not speak, I concluded they
had wisely left him out of the secret. After mentally debating a
moment, I decided, as it was a very harmless joke, to help Frank into
the fulfillment of his enjoyment.

"Rattlesnakes!" I exclaimed. "Heavens! I'd die if I heard one, let
alone seeing it. A big rattler jumped at me one day, and I've never
recovered from the shock."

Plainly, Frank was delighted to hear of my antipathy and my unfortunate
experience, and he proceeded to expatiate on the viciousness of
rattlesnakes, particularly those of Arizona. If I had believed the
succeeding stories, emanating from the fertile brains of those three
fellows, I should have made certain that Arizona canyons were Brazilian
jungles. Frank's parting shot, sent in a mellow, kind voice, was the
best point in the whole trick. "Now, I'd be nervous if I had a sleepin'
bag like yours, because it's just the place for a rattler to ooze into."

In the confusion and dim light of bedtime I contrived to throw the end
of my lasso over the horn of a saddle hanging on the wall, with the
intention of augmenting the noise I soon expected to create; and I
placed my automatic rifle and .38 S. and W. Special within easy reach
of my hand. Then I crawled into my bag and composed myself to listen.
Frank soon began to snore, so brazenly, so fictitiously, that I
wondered at the man's absorbed intensity in his joke; and I was at
great pains to smother in my breast a violent burst of riotous
merriment. Jones's snores, however, were real enough, and this made me
enjoy the situation all the more; because if he did not show a mild
surprise when the catastrophe fell, I would greatly miss my guess. I
knew the three wily conspirators were wide-awake. Suddenly I felt a
movement in the straw under me and a faint rustling. It was so soft, so
sinuous, that if I had not known it was the lasso, I would assuredly
have been frightened. I gave a little jump, such as one will make
quickly in bed. Then the coil ran out from under the straw. How subtly
suggestive of a snake! I made a slight outcry, a big jump, paused a
moment for effectiveness in which time Frank forgot to snore--then let
out a tremendous yell, grabbed my guns, sent twelve thundering shots
through the roof and pulled my lasso.

Crash! the saddle came down, to be followed by sounds not on Frank's
programme and certainly not calculated upon by me. But they were all
the more effective. I gathered that Lawson, who was not in the secret,
and who was a nightmare sort of sleeper anyway, had knocked over Jim's
table, with its array of pots and pans and then, unfortunately for
Jones had kicked that innocent person in the stomach.

As I lay there in my bag, the very happiest fellow in the wide world,
the sound of my mirth was as the buzz of the wings of a fly to the
mighty storm. Roar on roar filled the cabin.

When the three hypocrites recovered sufficiently from the startling
climax to calm Lawson, who swore the cabin had been attacked by
Indians; when Jones stopped roaring long enough to hear it was only a
harmless snake that had caused the trouble, we hushed to repose once
more--not, however, without hearing some trenchant remarks from the
boiling Colonel anent fun and fools, and the indubitable fact that
there was not a rattlesnake on Buckskin Mountain.

Long after this explosion had died away, I heard, or rather felt, a
mysterious shudder or tremor of the cabin, and I knew that Frank and
Jim were shaking with silent laughter. On my own score, I determined to
find if Jones, in his strange make-up, had any sense of humor, or
interest in life, or feeling, or love that did not center and hinge on
four-footed beasts. In view of the rude awakening from what, no doubt,
were pleasant dreams of wonderful white and green animals, combining
the intelligence of man and strength of brutes--a new species
creditable to his genius--I was perhaps unjust in my conviction as to
his lack of humor. And as to the other question, whether or not he had
any real human feeling for the creatures built in his own image, that
was decided very soon and unexpectedly.

The following morning, as soon as Lawson got in with the horses, we
packed and started. Rather sorry was I to bid good-by to Oak Spring.
Taking the back trail of the Stewarts, we walked the horses all day up
a slowly narrowing, ascending canyon. The hounds crossed coyote and
deer trails continually, but made no break. Sounder looked up as if to
say he associated painful reminiscences with certain kinds of tracks.
At the head of the canyon we reached timber at about the time dusk
gathered, and we located for the night. Being once again nearly nine
thousand feet high, we found the air bitterly cold, making a blazing
fire most acceptable.

In the haste to get supper we all took a hand, and some one threw upon
our tarpaulin tablecloth a tin cup of butter mixed with carbolic
acid--a concoction Jones had used to bathe the sore feet of the dogs.
Of course I got hold of this, spread a generous portion on my hot
biscuit, placed some red-hot beans on that, and began to eat like a
hungry hunter. At first I thought I was only burned. Then I recognized
the taste and burn of the acid and knew something was wrong. Picking up
the tin, I examined it, smelled the pungent odor and felt a queer numb
sense of fear. This lasted only for a moment, as I well knew the use
and power of the acid, and had not swallowed enough to hurt me. I was
about to make known my mistake in a matter-of-fact way, when it flashed
over me the accident could be made to serve a turn.

"Jones!" I cried hoarsely. "What's in this butter?"

"Lord! you haven't eaten any of that. Why, I put carbolic acid in it."

"Oh--oh--oh--I'm poisoned! I ate nearly all of it! Oh--I'm burning up!
I'm dying!" With that I began to moan and rock to and fro and hold my
stomach.

Consternation preceded shock. But in the excitement of the moment,
Wallace--who, though badly scared, retained his wits made for me with a
can of condensed milk. He threw me back with no gentle hand, and was
squeezing the life out of me to make me open my mouth, when I gave him
a jab in his side. I imagined his surprise, as this peculiar reception
of his first-aid-to-the-injured made him hold off to take a look at me,
and in this interval I contrived to whisper to him: "Joke! Joke! you
idiot! I'm only shamming. I want to see if I can scare Jones and get
even with Frank. Help me out! Cry! Get tragic!"

From that moment I shall always believe that the stage lost a great
tragedian in Wallace. With a magnificent gesture he threw the can of
condensed milk at Jones, who was so stunned he did not try to dodge.
"Thoughtless man! Murderer! it's too late!" cried Wallace, laying me
back across his knees. "It's too late. His teeth are locked. He's far
gone. Poor boy! poor boy! Who's to tell his mother?"

I could see from under my hat-brim that the solemn, hollow voice had
penetrated the cold exterior of the plainsman. He could not speak; he
clasped and unclasped his big hands in helpless fashion. Frank was as
white as a sheet. This was simply delightful to me. But the expression
of miserable, impotent distress on old Jim's sun-browned face was more
than I could stand, and I could no longer keep up the deception. Just
as Wallace cried out to Jones to pray--I wished then I had not weakened
so soon--I got up and walked to the fire.

"Jim, I'll have another biscuit, please."

His under jaw dropped, then he nervously shoveled biscuits at me. Jones
grabbed my hand and cried out with a voice that was new to me: "You can
eat? You're better? You'll get over it?"

"Sure. Why, carbolic acid never phases me. I've often used it for
rattlesnake bites. I did not tell you, but that rattler at the cabin
last night actually bit me, and I used carbolic to cure the poison."

Frank mumbled something about horses, and faded into the gloom. As for
Jones, he looked at me rather incredulously, and the absolute, almost
childish gladness he manifested because I had been snatched from the
grave, made me regret my deceit, and satisfied me forever on one score.

On awakening in the morning I found frost half an inch thick covered my
sleeping-bag, whitened the ground, and made the beautiful silver spruce
trees silver in hue as well as in name.

We were getting ready for an early start, when two riders, with
pack-horses jogging after them, came down the trail from the direction
of Oak Spring. They proved to be Jeff Clarke, the wild-horse wrangler
mentioned by the Stewarts, and his helper. They were on the way into
the breaks for a string of pintos. Clarke was a short, heavily bearded
man, of jovial aspect. He said he had met the Stewarts going into
Fredonia, and being advised of our destination, had hurried to come up
with us. As we did not know, except in a general way, where we were
making for, the meeting was a fortunate event.

Our camping site had been close to the divide made by one of the long,
wooded ridges sent off by Buckskin Mountain, and soon we were
descending again. We rode half a mile down a timbered slope, and then
out into a beautiful, flat forest of gigantic pines. Clarke informed us
it was a level bench some ten miles long, running out from the slopes
of Buckskin to face the Grand Canyon on the south, and the 'breaks of
the Siwash on the west. For two hours we rode between the stately lines
of trees, and the hoofs of the horses gave forth no sound. A long,
silvery grass, sprinkled with smiling bluebells, covered the ground,
except close under the pines, where soft red mats invited lounging and
rest. We saw numerous deer, great gray mule deer, almost as large as
elk. Jones said they had been crossed with elk once, which accounted
for their size. I did not see a stump, or a burned tree, or a windfall
during the ride.

Clarke led us to the rim of the canyon. Without any preparation--for
the giant trees hid the open sky--we rode right out to the edge of the
tremendous chasm. At first I did not seem to think; my faculties were
benumbed; only the pure sensorial instinct of the savage who sees, but
does not feel, made me take note of the abyss. Not one of our party had
ever seen the canyon from this side, and not one of us said a word. But
Clarke kept talking.

"Wild place this is hyar," he said. "Seldom any one but horse wranglers
gits over this far. I've hed a bunch of wild pintos down in a canyon
below fer two years. I reckon you can't find no better place fer camp
than right hyar. Listen. Do you hear thet rumble? Thet's Thunder Falls.
You can only see it from one place, an' thet far off, but thar's brooks
you can git at to water the hosses. Fer thet matter, you can ride up
the slopes an' git snow. If you can git snow close, it'd be better, fer
thet's an all-fired bad trail down fer water."

"Is this the cougar country the Stewarts talked about?" asked Jones.

"Reckon it is. Cougars is as thick in hyar as rabbits in a spring-hole
canyon. I'm on the way now to bring up my pintos. The cougars hev cost
me hundreds I might say thousands of dollars. I lose hosses all the
time; an' damn me, gentlemen, I've never raised a colt. This is the
greatest cougar country in the West. Look at those yellow crags! Thar's
where the cougars stay. No one ever hunted 'em. It seems to me they
can't be hunted. Deer and wild hosses by the thousand browse hyar on
the mountain in summer, an' down in the breaks in winter. The cougars
live fat. You'll find deer and wild-hoss carcasses all over this
country. You'll find lions' dens full of bones. You'll find warm deer
left for the coyotes. But whether you'll find the cougars, I can't say.
I fetched dogs in hyar, an' tried to ketch Old Tom. I've put them on
his trail an' never saw hide nor hair of them again. Jones, it's no
easy huntin' hyar."

"Well, I can see that," replied our leader. "I never hunted lions in
such a country, and never knew any one who had. We'll have to learn
how. We've the time and the dogs, all we need is the stuff in us."

"I hope you fellars git some cougars, an' I believe you will. Whatever
you do, kill Old Tom."

"We'll catch him alive. We're not on a hunt to kill cougars," said
Jones.

"What!" exclaimed Clarke, looking from Jones to us. His rugged face
wore a half-smile.

"Jones ropes cougars, an' ties them up," replied Frank.

"I'm -- -- if he'll ever rope Old Tom," burst out Clarke, ejecting a
huge quid of tobacco. "Why, man alive! it'd be the death of you to git
near thet old villain. I never seen him, but I've seen his tracks fer
five years. They're larger than any hoss tracks you ever seen. He'll
weigh over three hundred, thet old cougar. Hyar, take a look at my
man's hoss. Look at his back. See them marks? Wal, Old Tom made them,
an' he made them right in camp last fall, when we were down in the
canyon."

The mustang to which Clarke called our attention was a sleek cream and
white pinto. Upon his side and back were long regular scars, some an
inch wide, and bare of hair.

"How on earth did he get rid of the cougar?" asked Jones.

"I don't know. Perhaps he got scared of the dogs. It took thet pinto a
year to git well. Old Tom is a real lion. He'll kill a full-grown hoss
when he wants, but a yearlin' colt is his especial likin'. You're sure
to run acrost his trail, an' you'll never miss it. Wal, if I find any
cougar sign down in the canyon, I'll build two fires so as to let you
know. Though no hunter, I'm tolerably acquainted with the varmints. The
deer an' hosses are rangin' the forest slopes now, an' I think the
cougars come up over the rim rock at night an' go back in the mornin'.
Anyway, if your dogs can follow the trails, you've got sport, an'
more'n sport comin' to you. But take it from me--don't try to rope Old
Tom."

After all our disappointments in the beginning of the expedition, our
hardship on the desert, our trials with the dogs and horses, it was
real pleasure to make permanent camp with wood, water and feed at hand,
a soul-stirring, ever-changing picture before us, and the certainty
that we were in the wild lairs of the lions--among the Lords of the
Crags!

While we were unpacking, every now and then I would straighten up and
gaze out beyond. I knew the outlook was magnificent and sublime beyond
words, but as yet I had not begun to understand it. The great pine
trees, growing to the very edge of the rim, received their full quota
of appreciation from me, as did the smooth, flower-decked aisles
leading back into the forest.

The location we selected for camp was a large glade, fifty paces or
more from the precipice far enough, the cowboys averred, to keep our
traps from being sucked down by some of the whirlpool winds, native to
the spot. In the center of this glade stood a huge gnarled and blasted
old pine, that certainly by virtue of hoary locks and bent shoulders
had earned the right to stand aloof from his younger companions. Under
this tree we placed all our belongings, and then, as Frank so
felicitously expressed it, we were free to "ooze round an' see things."

I believe I had a sort of subconscious, selfish idea that some one
would steal the canyon away from me if I did not hurry to make it mine
forever; so I sneaked off, and sat under a pine growing on the very
rim. At first glance, I saw below me, seemingly miles away, a wild
chaos of red and buff mesas rising out of dark purple clefts. Beyond
these reared a long, irregular tableland, running south almost to the
extent of my vision, which I remembered Clarke had called Powell's
Plateau. I remembered, also, that he had said it was twenty miles
distant, was almost that many miles long, was connected to the mainland
of Buckskin Mountain by a very narrow wooded dip of land called the
Saddle, and that it practically shut us out of a view of the Grand
Canyon proper. If that was true, what, then, could be the name of the
canyon at my feet? Suddenly, as my gaze wandered from point to point,
it was attested by a dark, conical mountain, white-tipped, which rose
in the notch of the Saddle. What could it mean? Were there such things
as canyon mirages? Then the dim purple of its color told of its great
distance from me; and then its familiar shape told I had come into my
own again--I had found my old friend once more. For in all that plateau
there was only one snow-capped mountain--the San Francisco Peak; and
there, a hundred and fifty, perhaps two hundred miles away, far beyond
the Grand Canyon, it smiled brightly at me, as it had for days and days
across the desert.

Hearing Jones yelling for somebody or everybody, I jumped up to find a
procession heading for a point farther down the rim wall, where our
leader stood waving his arms. The excitement proved to have been caused
by cougar signs at the head of the trail where Clarke had started down.

"They're here, boys, they're here," Jones kept repeating, as he showed
us different tracks. "This sign is not so old. Boys, to-morrow we'll
get up a lion, sure as you're born. And if we do, and Sounder sees him,
then we've got a lion-dog! I'm afraid of Don. He has a fine nose; he
can run and fight, but he's been trained to deer, and maybe I can't
break him. Moze is still uncertain. If old Jude only hadn't been lamed!
She would be the best of the lot. But Sounder is our hope. I'm almost
ready to swear by him."

All this was too much for me, so I slipped off again to be alone, and
this time headed for the forest. Warm patches of sunlight, like gold,
brightened the ground; dark patches of sky, like ocean blue, gleamed
between the treetops. Hardly a rustle of wind in the fine-toothed green
branches disturbed the quiet. When I got fully out of sight of camp, I
started to run as if I were a wild Indian. My running had no aim; just
sheer mad joy of the grand old forest, the smell of pine, the wild
silence and beauty loosed the spirit in me so it had to run, and I ran
with it till the physical being failed.

While resting on a fragrant bed of pine needles, endeavoring to regain
control over a truant mind, trying to subdue the encroaching of the
natural man on the civilized man, I saw gray objects moving under the
trees. I lost them, then saw them, and presently so plainly that, with
delight on delight, I counted seventeen deer pass through an open arch
of dark green. Rising to my feet, I ran to get round a low mound. They
saw me and bounded away with prodigiously long leaps. Bringing their
forefeet together, stiff-legged under them, they bounced high, like
rubber balls, yet they were graceful.

The forest was so open that I could watch them for a long way; and as I
circled with my gaze, a glimpse of something white arrested my
attention. A light, grayish animal appeared to be tearing at an old
stump. Upon nearer view, I recognized a wolf, and he scented or sighted
me at the same moment, and loped off into the shadows of the trees.
Approaching the spot where I had marked him I found he had been feeding
from the carcass of a horse. The remains had been only partly eaten,
and were of an animal of the mustang build that had evidently been
recently killed. Frightful lacerations under the throat showed where a
lion had taken fatal hold. Deep furrows in the ground proved how the
mustang had sunk his hoofs, reared and shaken himself. I traced roughly
defined tracks fifty paces to the lee of a little bank, from which I
concluded the lion had sprung.

I gave free rein to my imagination and saw the forest dark, silent,
peopled by none but its savage denizens, The lion crept like a shadow,
crouched noiselessly down, then leaped on his sleeping or browsing
prey. The lonely night stillness split to a frantic snort and scream of
terror, and the stricken mustang with his mortal enemy upon his back,
dashed off with fierce, wild love of life. As he went he felt his foe
crawl toward his neck on claws of fire; he saw the tawny body and the
gleaming eyes; then the cruel teeth snapped with the sudden bite, and
the woodland tragedy ended.

On the spot I conceived an antipathy toward lions. It was born of the
frightful spectacle of what had once been a glossy, prancing mustang,
of the mute, sickening proof of the survival of the fittest, of the law
that levels life.

Upon telling my camp-fellows about my discovery, Jones and Wallace
walked out to see it, while Jim told me the wolf I had seen was a
"lofer," one of the giant buffalo wolves of Buckskin; and if I would
watch the carcass in the mornings and evenings, I would "shore as hell
get a plunk at him."

White pine burned in a beautiful, clear blue flame, with no smoke; and
in the center of the campfire left a golden heart. But Jones would not
have any sitting up, and hustled us off to bed, saying we would be
"blamed" glad of it in about fifteen hours. I crawled into my
sleeping-bag, made a hood of my Navajo blanket, and peeping from under
it, watched the fire and the flickering shadows. The blaze burned down
rapidly. Then the stars blinked. Arizona stars would be moons in any
other State! How serene, peaceful, august, infinite and wonderfully
bright! No breeze stirred the pines. The clear tinkle of the cowbells
on the hobbled horses rang from near and distant parts of the forest.
The prosaic bell of the meadow and the pasture brook, here, in this
environment, jingled out different notes, as clear, sweet, musical as
silver bells.



CHAPTER 12.

OLD TOM

At daybreak our leader routed us out. The frost mantled the ground so
heavily that it looked like snow, and the rare atmosphere bit like the
breath of winter. The forest stood solemn and gray; the canyon lay
wrapped in vapory slumber.

Hot biscuits and coffee, with a chop or two of the delicious Persian
lamb meat, put a less Spartan tinge on the morning, and gave Wallace
and me more strength--we needed not incentive to leave the fire, hustle
our saddles on the horses and get in line with our impatient leader.
The hounds scampered over the frost, shoving their noses at the tufts
of grass and bluebells. Lawson and Jim remained in camp; the rest of us
trooped southwest.

A mile or so in that direction, the forest of pine ended abruptly, and
a wide belt of low, scrubby old trees, breast high to a horse, fringed
the rim of the canyon and appeared to broaden out and grow wavy
southward. The edge of the forest was as dark and regular as if a band
of woodchoppers had trimmed it. We threaded our way through this
thicket, all peering into the bisecting deer trails for cougar tracks
in the dust.

"Bring the dogs! Hurry!" suddenly called Jones from a thicket.

We lost no time complying, and found him standing in a trail, with his
eyes on the sand. "Take a look, boys. A good-sized male cougar passed
here last night. Hyar, Sounder, Don, Moze, come on!"

It was a nervous, excited pack of hounds. Old Jude got to Jones first,
and she sang out; then Sounder opened with his ringing bay, and before
Jones could mount, a string of yelping dogs sailed straight for the
forest.

"Ooze along, boys!" yelled Frank, wheeling Spot.

With the cowboy leading, we strung into the pines, and I found myself
behind. Presently even Wallace disappeared. I almost threw the reins at
Satan, and yelled for him to go. The result enlightened me. Like an
arrow from a bow, the black shot forward. Frank had told me of his
speed, that when he found his stride it was like riding a flying
feather to be on him. Jones, fearing he would kill me, had cautioned me
always to hold him in, which I had done. Satan stretched out with long
graceful motions; he did not turn aside for logs, but cleared them with
easy and powerful spring, and he swerved only slightly to the trees.
This latter, I saw at once, made the danger for me. It became a matter
of saving my legs and dodging branches. The imperative need of this
came to me with convincing force. I dodged a branch on one tree, only
to be caught square in the middle by a snag on another. Crack! If the
snag had not broken, Satan would have gone on riderless, and I would
have been left hanging, a pathetic and drooping monition to the risks
of the hunt. I kept ducking my head, now and then falling flat over the
pommel to avoid a limb that would have brushed me off, and hugging the
flanks of my horse with my knees. Soon I was at Wallace's heels, and
had Jones in sight. Now and then glimpses of Frank's white horse
gleamed through the trees.

We began to circle toward the south, to go up and down shallow hollows,
to find the pines thinning out; then we shot out of the forest into the
scrubby oak. Riding through this brush was the cruelest kind of work,
but Satan kept on close to the sorrel. The hollows began to get deeper,
and the ridges between them narrower. No longer could we keep a
straight course.

On the crest of one of the ridges we found Jones awaiting us. Jude,
Tige and Don lay panting at his feet. Plainly the Colonel appeared
vexed.

"Listen," he said, when we reined in.

We complied, but did not hear a sound.

"Frank's beyond there some place," continued Jones, "but I can't see
him, nor hear the hounds anymore. Don and Tige split again on deer
trails. Old Jude hung on the lion track, but I stopped her here.
There's something I can't figure. Moze held a beeline southwest, and he
yelled seldom. Sounder gradually stopped baying. Maybe Frank can tell
us something."

Jones's long drawn-out signal was answered from the direction he
expected, and after a little time, Frank's white horse shone out of the
gray-green of a ledge a mile away.

This drew my attention to our position. We were on a high ridge out in
the open, and I could see fifty miles of the shaggy slopes of Buckskin.
Southward the gray, ragged line seemed to stop suddenly, and beyond it
purple haze hung over a void I knew to be the canyon. And facing west,
I came, at last, to understand perfectly the meaning of the breaks in
the Siwash. They were nothing more than ravines that headed up on the
slopes and ran down, getting steeper and steeper, though scarcely
wider, to break into the canyon. Knife-crested ridges rolled westward,
wave on wave, like the billows of a sea. I appreciated that these
breaks were, at their sources, little washes easy to jump across, and
at their mouths a mile deep and impassable. Huge pine trees shaded
these gullies, to give way to the gray growth of stunted oak, which in
turn merged into the dark green of pinyon. A wonderful country for deer
and lions, it seemed to me, but impassable, all but impossible for a
hunter.

Frank soon appeared, brushing through the bending oaks, and Sounder
trotted along behind him.

"Where's Moze?" inquired Jones.

"The last I heard of Moze he was out of the brush, goin' across the
pinyon flat, right for the canyon. He had a hot trail."

"Well, we're certain of one thing; if it was a deer, he won't come back
soon, and if it was a lion, he'll tree it, lose the scent, and come
back. We've got to show the hounds a lion in a tree. They'd run a hot
trail, bump into a tree, and then be at fault. What was wrong with
Sounder?"

"I don't know. He came back to me."

"We can't trust him, or any of them yet. Still, maybe they're doing
better than we know."

The outcome of the chase, so favorably started was a disappointment,
which we all felt keenly. After some discussion, we turned south,
intending to ride down to the rim wall and follow it back to camp. I
happened to turn once, perhaps to look again at the far-distant pink
cliffs of Utah, or the wave-like dome of Trumbull Mountain, when I saw
Moze trailing close behind me. My yell halted the Colonel.

"Well, I'll be darned!" ejaculated he, as Moze hove in sight. "Come
hyar, you rascal!"

He was a tired dog, but had no sheepish air about him, such as he had
worn when lagging in from deer chases. He wagged his tail, and flopped
down to pant and pant, as if to say: "What's wrong with you guys?"

"Boys, for two cents I'd go back and put Jude on that trail. It's just
possible that Moze treed a lion. But--well, I expect there's more
likelihood of his chasing the lion over the rim; so we may as well keep
on. The strange thing is that Sounder wasn't with Moze. There may have
been two lions. You see we are up a tree ourselves. I have known lions
to run in pairs, and also a mother keep four two-year-olds with her.
But such cases are rare. Here, in this country, though, maybe they run
round and have parties."

As we left the breaks behind we got out upon a level pinyon flat. A few
cedars grew with the pinyons. Deer runways and trails were thick.

"Boys, look at that," said Jones. "This is great lion country, the best
I ever saw."

He pointed to the sunken, red, shapeless remain of two horses, and near
them a ghastly scattering of bleached bones. "A lion-lair right here on
the flat. Those two horses were killed early this spring, and I see no
signs of their carcasses having been covered with brush and dirt. I've
got to learn lion lore over again, that's certain."

As we paused at the head of a depression, which appeared to be a gap in
the rim wall, filled with massed pinyons and splintered piles of yellow
stone, caught Sounder going through some interesting moves. He stopped
to smell a bush. Then he lifted his head, and electrified me with a
great, deep sounding bay.

"Hi! there, listen to that!" yelled Jones "What's Sounder got? Give him
room--don't run him down. Easy now, old dog, easy, easy!"

Sounder suddenly broke down a trail. Moze howled, Don barked, and Tige
let out his staccato yelp. They ran through the brush here, there,
every where. Then all at once old Jude chimed in with her mellow voice,
and Jones tumbled off his horse.

"By the Lord Harry! There's something here."

"Here, Colonel, here's the bush Sounder smelt and there's a sandy trail
under it," I called.

"There go Don an' Tige down into the break!" cried Frank. "They've got
a hot scent!"

Jones stooped over the place I designated, to jerk up with reddening
face, and as he flung himself into the saddle roared out: "After
Sounder! Old Tom! Old Tom! Old Tom!"

We all heard Sounder, and at the moment of Jones's discovery, Moze got
the scent and plunged ahead of us.

"Hi! Hi! Hi! Hi!" yelled the Colonel. Frank sent Spot forward like a
white streak. Sounder called to us in irresistible bays, which Moze
answered, and then crippled Jude bayed in baffled impotent distress.

The atmosphere was charged with that lion. As if by magic, the
excitation communicated itself to all, and men, horses and dogs acted
in accord. The ride through the forest had been a jaunt. This was a
steeplechase, a mad, heedless, perilous, glorious race. And we had for
a pacemaker a cowboy mounted on a tireless mustang.

Always it seemed to me, while the wind rushed, the brush whipped, I saw
Frank far ahead, sitting his saddle as if glued there, holding his
reins loosely forward. To see him ride so was a beautiful sight. Jones
let out his Comanche yell at every dozen jumps and Wallace sent back a
thrilling "Waa-hoo-o!" In the excitement I had again checked my horse,
and when Jones remembered, and loosed the bridle, how the noble animal
responded! The pace he settled into dazed me; I could hardly
distinguish the deer trail down which he was thundering. I lost my
comrades ahead; the pinyons blurred in my sight; I only faintly heard
the hounds. It occurred to me we were making for the breaks, but I did
not think of checking Satan. I thought only of flying on faster and
faster.

"On! On! old fellow! Stretch out! Never lose this race! We've got to be
there at the finish!" I called to Satan, and he seemed to understand
and stretched lower, farther, quicker.

The brush pounded my legs and clutched and tore my clothes; the wind
whistled; the pinyon branches cut and whipped my face. Once I dodged to
the left, as Satan swerved to the right, with the result that I flew
out of the saddle, and crashed into a pinyon tree, which marvelously
brushed me back into the saddle. The wild yells and deep bays sounded
nearer. Satan tripped and plunged down, throwing me as gracefully as an
aerial tumbler wings his flight. I alighted in a bush, without feeling
of scratch or pain. As Satan recovered and ran past, I did not seek to
make him stop, but getting a good grip on the pommel, I vaulted up
again. Once more he raced like a wild mustang. And from nearer and
nearer in front pealed the alluring sounds of the chase.

Satan was creeping close to Wallace and Jones, with Frank looming white
through the occasional pinyons. Then all dropped out of sight, to
appear again suddenly. They had reached the first break. Soon I was
upon it. Two deer ran out of the ravine, almost brushing my horse in
the haste. Satan went down and up in a few giant strides. Only the
narrow ridge separated us from another break. It was up and down then
for Satan, a work to which he manfully set himself. Occasionally I saw
Wallace and Jones, but heard them oftener. All the time the breaks grew
deeper, till finally Satan had to zigzag his way down and up.
Discouragement fastened on me, when from the summit of the next ridge I
saw Frank far down the break, with Jones and Wallace not a quarter of a
mile away from him. I sent out a long, exultant yell as Satan crashed
into the hard, dry wash in the bottom of the break.

I knew from the way he quickened under me that he intended to overhaul
somebody. Perhaps because of the clear going, or because my frenzy had
cooled to a thrilling excitement which permitted detail, I saw clearly
and distinctly the speeding horsemen down the ravine. I picked out the
smooth pieces of ground ahead, and with the slightest touch of the rein
on his neck, guided Satan into them. How he ran! The light, quick beats
of his hoofs were regular, pounding. Seeing Jones and Wallace sail high
into the air, I knew they had jumped a ditch. Thus prepared, I managed
to stick on when it yawned before me; and Satan, never slackening,
leaped up and up, giving me a new swing.

Dust began to settle in little clouds before me; Frank, far ahead, had
turned his mustang up the side of the break; Wallace, within hailing
distance, now turned to wave me a hand. The rushing wind fairly sang in
my ears; the walls of the break were confused blurs of yellow and
green; at every stride Satan seemed to swallow a rod of the white trail.

Jones began to scale the ravine, heading up obliquely far on the side
of where Frank had vanished, and as Wallace followed suit, I turned
Satan. I caught Wallace at the summit, and we raced together out upon
another flat of pinyon. We heard Frank and Jones yelling in a way that
caused us to spur our horses frantically. Spot, gleaming white near a
clump of green pinyons, was our guiding star. That last quarter of a
mile was a ringing run, a ride to remember.

As our mounts crashed back with stiff forelegs and haunches, Wallace
and I leaped off and darted into the clump of pinyons, whence issued a
hair-raising medley of yells and barks. I saw Jones, then Frank, both
waving their arms, then Moze and Sounder running wildly, airlessly
about.

"Look there!" rang in my ear, and Jones smashed me on the back with a
blow, which at any ordinary time would have laid me flat.

In a low, stubby pinyon tree, scarce twenty feet from us, was a tawny
form. An enormous mountain lion, as large as an African lioness, stood
planted with huge, round legs on two branches; and he faced us
gloomily, neither frightened nor fierce. He watched the running dogs
with pale, yellow eyes, waved his massive head and switched a long,
black tufted tail.

"It's Old Tom! sure as you're born! It's Old Tom!" yelled Jones.
"There's no two lions like that in one country. Hold still now. Jude is
here, and she'll see him, she'll show him to the other hounds. Hold
still!"

We heard Jude coming at a fast pace for a lame dog, and we saw her
presently, running with her nose down for a moment, then up. She
entered the clump of trees, and bumped her nose against the pinyon Old
Tom was in, and looked up like a dog that knew her business. The series
of wild howls she broke into quickly brought Sounder and Moze to her
side. They, too, saw the big lion, not fifteen feet over their heads.

We were all yelling and trying to talk at once, in some such state as
the dogs.

"Hyar, Moze! Come down out of that!" hoarsely shouted Jones.

Moze had begun to climb the thick, many-branched, low pinyon tree. He
paid not the slightest attention to Jones, who screamed and raged at
him.

"Cover the lion!" cried he to me. "Don't shoot unless he crouches to
jump on me."

The little beaded front-sight wavered slightly as I held my rifle
leveled at the grim, snarling face, and out of the corner of my eye, as
it were, I saw Jones dash in under the lion and grasp Moze by the hind
leg and haul him down. He broke from Jones and leaped again to the
first low branch. His master then grasped his collar and carried him to
where we stood and held him choking.

"Boys, we can't keep Tom up there. When he jumps, keep out of his way.
Maybe we can chase him up a better tree."

Old Tom suddenly left the branches, swinging violently; and hitting the
ground like a huge cat on springs, he bounded off, tail up, in a most
ludicrous manner. His running, however, did not lack speed, for he
quickly outdistanced the bursting hounds.

A stampede for horses succeeded this move. I had difficulty in closing
my camera, which I had forgotten until the last moment, and got behind
the others. Satan sent the dust flying and the pinyon branches
crashing. Hardly had I time to bewail my ill-luck in being left, when I
dashed out of a thick growth of trees to come upon my companions, all
dismounted on the rim of the Grand Canyon.

"He's gone down! He's gone down!" raged Jones, stamping the ground.
"What luck! What miserable luck! But don't quit; spread along the rim,
boys, and look for him. Cougars can't fly. There's a break in the rim
somewhere."

The rock wall, on which we dizzily stood, dropped straight down for a
thousand feet, to meet a long, pinyon-covered slope, which graded a
mile to cut off into what must have been the second wall. We were far
west of Clarke's trail now, and faced a point above where Kanab Canyon,
a red gorge a mile deep, met the great canyon. As I ran along the rim,
looking for a fissure or break, my gaze seemed impellingly drawn by the
immensity of this thing I could not name, and for which I had as yet no
intelligible emotion.

Two "Waa-hoos" in the rear turned me back in double-quick time, and
hastening by the horses, I found the three men grouped at the head of a
narrow break.

"He went down here. Wallace saw him round the base of that tottering
crag."

The break was wedge-shaped, with the sharp end off toward the rim, and
it descended so rapidly as to appear almost perpendicular. It was a
long, steep slide of small, weathered shale, and a place that no man in
his right senses would ever have considered going down. But Jones,
designating Frank and me, said in his cool, quick voice:

"You fellows go down. Take Jude and Sounder in leash. If you find his
trail below along the wall, yell for us. Meanwhile, Wallace and I will
hang over the rim and watch for him."

Going down, in one sense, was much easier than had appeared, for the
reason that once started we moved on sliding beds of weathered stone.
Each of us now had an avalanche for a steed. Frank forged ahead with a
roar, and then seeing danger below, tried to get out of the mass. But
the stones were like quicksand; every step he took sunk him in deeper.
He grasped the smooth cliff, to find holding impossible. The slide
poured over a fall like so much water. He reached and caught a branch
of a pinyon, and lifting his feet up, hung on till the treacherous area
of moving stones had passed.

While I had been absorbed in his predicament, my avalanche augmented
itself by slide on slide, perhaps loosened by his; and before I knew
it, I was sailing down with ever-increasing momentum. The sensation was
distinctly pleasant, and a certain spirit, before restrained in me, at
last ran riot. The slide narrowed at the drop where Frank had jumped,
and the stones poured over in a stream. I jumped also, but having a
rifle in one hand, failed to hold, and plunged down into the slide
again. My feet were held this time, as in a vise. I kept myself upright
and waited. Fortunately, the jumble of loose stone slowed and stopped,
enabling me to crawl over to one side where there was comparatively
good footing. Below us, for fifty yards was a sheet of rough stone, as
bare as washed granite well could be. We slid down this in regular
schoolboy fashion, and had reached another restricted neck in the
fissure, when a sliding crash above warned us that the avalanches had
decided to move of their own free will. Only a fraction of a moment had
we to find footing along the yellow cliff, when, with a cracking roar,
the mass struck the slippery granite. If we had been on that slope, our
lives would not have been worth a grain of the dust flying in clouds
above us. Huge stones, that had formed the bottom of the slides, shot
ahead, and rolling, leaping, whizzed by us with frightful velocity, and
the remainder groaned and growled its way down, to thunder over the
second fall and die out in a distant rumble.

The hounds had hung back, and were not easily coaxed down to us. From
there on, down to the base of the gigantic cliff, we descended with
little difficulty.

"We might meet the old gray cat anywheres along here," said Frank.

The wall of yellow limestone had shelves, ledges, fissures and cracks,
any one of which might have concealed a lion. On these places I turned
dark, uneasy glances. It seemed to me events succeeded one another so
rapidly that I had no time to think, to examine, to prepare. We were
rushed from one sensation to another.

"Gee! look here," said Frank; "here's his tracks. Did you ever see the
like of that?"

Certainly I had never fixed my eyes on such enormous cat-tracks as
appeared in the yellow dust at the base of the rim wall. The mere sight
of them was sufficient to make a man tremble.

"Hold in the dogs, Frank," I called. "Listen. I think I heard a yell."

From far above came a yell, which, though thinned out by distance, was
easily recognized as Jones's. We returned to the opening of the break,
and throwing our heads back, looked up the slide to see him coming down.

"Wait for me! Wait for me! I saw the lion go in a cave. Wait for me!"

With the same roar and crack and slide of rocks as had attended our
descent, Jones bore down on us. For an old man it was a marvelous
performance. He walked on the avalanches as though he wore seven-league
boots, and presently, as we began to dodge whizzing bowlders, he
stepped down to us, whirling his coiled lasso. His jaw bulged out; a
flash made fire in his cold eyes.

"Boys, we've got Old Tom in a corner. I worked along the rim north and
looked over every place I could. Now, maybe you won't believe it, but I
heard him pant. Yes, sir, he panted like the tired lion he is. Well,
presently I saw him lying along the base of the rim wall. His tongue
was hanging out. You see, he's a heavy lion, and not used to running
long distances. Come on, now. It's not far. Hold in the dogs. You there
with the rifle, lead off, and keep your eyes peeled."

Single file, we passed along in the shadow of the great cliff. A wide
trail had been worn in the dust.

"A lion run-way," said Jones. "Don't you smell the cat?"

Indeed, the strong odor of cat was very pronounced; and that, without
the big fresh tracks, made the skin on my face tighten and chill. As we
turned a jutting point in the wall, a number of animals, which I did
not recognize, plunged helter-skelter down the canyon slope.

"Rocky Mountain sheep!" exclaimed Jones. "Look! Well, this is a
discovery. I never heard of a bighorn in the Canyon."

It was indicative of the strong grip Old Tom had on us that we at once
forgot the remarkable fact of coming upon those rare sheep in such a
place.

Jones halted us presently before a deep curve described by the rim
wall, the extreme end of which terminated across the slope in an
impassable projecting corner.

"See across there, boys. See that black hole. Old Tom's in there."

"What's your plan?" queried the cowboy sharply.

"Wait. We'll slip up to get better lay of the land."

We worked our way noiselessly along the rim-wall curve for several
hundred yards and came to a halt again, this time with a splendid
command of the situation. The trail ended abruptly at the dark cave, so
menacingly staring at us, and the corner of the cliff had curled back
upon itself. It was a box-trap, with a drop at the end, too great for
any beast, a narrow slide of weathered stone running down, and the rim
wall trail. Old Tom would plainly be compelled to choose one of these
directions if he left his cave.

"Frank, you and I will keep to the wall and stop near that scrub
pinyon, this side of the hole. If I rope him, I can use that tree."

Then he turned to me:

"Are you to be depended on here?"

"I? What do you want me to do?" I demanded, and my whole breast seemed
to sink in.

"You cut across the head of this slope and take up your position in the
slide below the cave, say just by that big stone. From there you can
command the cave, our position and your own. Now, if it is necessary to
kill this lion to save me or Frank, or, of course, yourself, can you be
depended upon to kill him?"

I felt a queer sensation around my heart and a strange tightening of
the skin upon my face! What a position for me to be placed in! For one
instant I shook like a quivering aspen leaf. Then because of the pride
of a man, or perhaps inherited instincts cropping out at this perilous
moment, I looked up and answered quietly:

"Yes. I will kill him!"

"Old Tom is cornered, and he'll come out. He can run only two ways:
along this trail, or down that slide. I'll take my stand by the scrub
pinyon there so I can get a hitch if I rope him. Frank, when I give the
word, let the dogs go. Grey, you block the slide. If he makes at us,
even if I do get my rope on him, kill him! Most likely he'll jump down
hill--then you'll HAVE to kill him! Be quick. Now loose the hounds. Hi!
Hi! Hi! Hi!"

I jumped into the narrow slide of weathered stone and looked up.
Jones's stentorian yell rose high above the clamor of the hounds. He
whirled his lasso.

A huge yellow form shot over the trail and hit the top of the slide
with a crash. The lasso streaked out with arrowy swiftness, circled,
and snapped viciously close to Old Tom's head. "Kill him! Kill him!"
roared Jones. Then the lion leaped, seemingly into the air above me.
Instinctively I raised my little automatic rifle. I seemed to hear a
million bellowing reports. The tawny body, with its grim, snarling
face, blurred in my sight. I heard a roar of sliding stones at my feet.
I felt a rush of wind. I caught a confused glimpse of a whirling wheel
of fur, rolling down the slide.

Then Jones and Frank were pounding me, and yelling I know not what.
From far above came floating down a long "Waa-hoo!" I saw Wallace
silhouetted against the blue sky. I felt the hot barrel of my rifle,
and shuddered at the bloody stones below me--then, and then only, did I
realize, with weakening legs, that Old Tom had jumped at me, and had
jumped to his death.



CHAPTER 13.

SINGING CLIFFS

Old Tom had rolled two hundred yards down the canyon, leaving a red
trail and bits of fur behind him. When I had clambered down to the
steep slide where he had lodged, Sounder and Jude had just decided he
was no longer worth biting, and were wagging their tails. Frank was
shaking his head, and Jones, standing above the lion, lasso in hand,
wore a disconsolate face.

"How I wish I had got the rope on him!"

"I reckon we'd be gatherin' up the pieces of you if you had," said
Frank, dryly.

We skinned the old king on the rocky slope of his mighty throne, and
then, beginning to feel the effects of severe exertion, we cut across
the slope for the foot of the break. Once there, we gazed up in
disarray. That break resembled a walk of life--how easy to slip down,
how hard to climb! Even Frank, inured as he was to strenuous toil,
began to swear and wipe his sweaty brow before we had made one-tenth of
the ascent. It was particularly exasperating, not to mention the danger
of it, to work a few feet up a slide, and then feel it start to move.
We had to climb in single file, which jeopardized the safety of those
behind the leader. Sometimes we were all sliding at once, like boys on
a pond, with the difference that we were in danger. Frank forged ahead,
turning to yell now and then for us to dodge a cracking stone. Faithful
old Jude could not get up in some places, so laying aside my rifle, I
carried her, and returned for the weapon. It became necessary,
presently, to hide behind cliff projections to escape the avalanches
started by Frank, and to wait till he had surmounted the break. Jones
gave out completely several times, saying the exertion affected his
heart. What with my rifle, my camera and Jude, I could offer him no
assistance, and was really in need of that myself. When it seemed as if
one more step would kill us, we reached the rim, and fell panting with
labored chests and dripping skins. We could not speak. Jones had worn a
pair of ordinary shoes without thick soles and nails, and it seemed
well to speak of them in the past tense. They were split into ribbons
and hung on by the laces. His feet were cut and bruised.

On the way back to camp, we encountered Moze and Don coming out of the
break where we had started Sounder on the trail. The paws of both
hounds were yellow with dust, which proved they had been down under the
rim wall. Jones doubted not in the least that they had chased a lion.

Upon examination, this break proved to be one of the two which Clarke
used for trails to his wild horse corral in the canyon. According to
him, the distance separating them was five miles by the rim wall, and
less than half that in a straight line. Therefore, we made for the
point of the forest where it ended abruptly in the scrub oak. We got
into camp, a fatigued lot of men, horses and dogs. Jones appeared
particularly happy, and his first move, after dismounting, was to
stretch out the lion skin and measure it.

"Ten feet, three inches and a half!" he sang out.

"Shore it do beat hell!" exclaimed Jim in tones nearer to excitement
than any I had ever heard him use.

"Old Tom beats, by two inches, any cougar I ever saw," continued Jones.
"He must have weighed more than three hundred. We'll set about curing
the hide. Jim, stretch it well on a tree, and we'll take a hand in
peeling off the fat."

All of the party worked on the cougar skin that afternoon. The gristle
at the base of the neck, where it met the shoulders, was so tough and
thick we could not scrape it thin. Jones said this particular spot was
so well protected because in fighting, cougars were most likely to bite
and claw there. For that matter, the whole skin was tough, tougher than
leather; and when it dried, it pulled all the horseshoe nails out of
the pine tree upon which we had it stretched.

About time for the sun to set, I strolled along the rim wall to look
into the canyon. I was beginning to feel something of its character and
had growing impressions. Dark purple smoke veiled the clefts deep down
between the mesas. I walked along to where points of cliff ran out like
capes and peninsulas, all seamed, cracked, wrinkled, scarred and yellow
with age, with shattered, toppling ruins of rocks ready at a touch to
go thundering down. I could not resist the temptation to crawl out to
the farthest point, even though I shuddered over the yard-wide ridges;
and when once seated on a bare promontory, two hundred feet from the
regular rim wall, I felt isolated, marooned.

The sun, a liquid red globe, had just touched its under side to the
pink cliffs of Utah, and fired a crimson flood of light over the
wonderful mountains, plateaus, escarpments, mesas, domes and turrets or
the gorge. The rim wall of Powell's Plateau was a thin streak of fire;
the timber above like grass of gold; and the long slopes below shaded
from bright to dark. Point Sublime, bold and bare, ran out toward the
plateau, jealously reaching for the sun. Bass's Tomb peeped over the
Saddle. The Temple of Vishnu lay bathed in vapory shading clouds, and
the Shinumo Altar shone with rays of glory.

The beginning of the wondrous transformation, the dropping of the day's
curtain, was for me a rare and perfect moment. As the golden splendor
of sunset sought out a peak or mesa or escarpment, I gave it a name to
suit my fancy; and as flushing, fading, its glory changed, sometimes I
rechristened it. Jupiter's Chariot, brazen wheeled, stood ready to roll
into the clouds. Semiramis's Bed, all gold, shone from a tower of
Babylon. Castor and Pollux clasped hands over a Stygian river. The Spur
of Doom, a mountain shaft as red as hell, and inaccessible,
insurmountable, lured with strange light. Dusk, a bold, black dome, was
shrouded by the shadow of a giant mesa. The Star of Bethlehem glittered
from the brow of Point Sublime. The Wraith, fleecy, feathered curtain
of mist, floated down among the ruins of castles and palaces, like the
ghost of a goddess. Vales of Twilight, dim, dark ravines, mystic homes
of specters, led into the awful Valley of the Shadow, clothed in purple
night.

Suddenly, as the first puff of the night wind fanned my cheek, a
strange, sweet, low moaning and sighing came to my ears. I almost
thought I was in a dream. But the canyon, now blood-red, was there in
overwhelming reality, a profound, solemn, gloomy thing, but real. The
wind blew stronger, and then I was to a sad, sweet song, which lulled
as the wind lulled. I realized at once that the sound was caused by the
wind blowing into the peculiar formations of the cliffs. It changed,
softened, shaded, mellowed, but it was always sad. It rose from low,
tremulous, sweetly quavering sighs, to a sound like the last woeful,
despairing wail of a woman. It was the song of the sea sirens and the
music of the waves; it had the soft sough of the night wind in the
trees, and the haunting moan of lost spirits.

With reluctance I turned my back to the gorgeously changing spectacle
of the canyon and crawled in to the rim wall. At the narrow neck of
stone I peered over to look down into misty blue nothingness.

That night Jones told stories of frightened hunters, and assuaged my
mortification by saying "buck-fever" was pardonable after the danger
had passed, and especially so in my case, because of the great size and
fame of Old Tom.

"The worst case of buck-fever I ever saw was on a buffalo hunt I had
with a fellow named Williams," went on Jones. "I was one of the scouts
leading a wagon-train west on the old Santa Fe trail. This fellow said
he was a big hunter, and wanted to kill buffalo, so I took him out. I
saw a herd making over the prairie for a hollow where a brook ran, and
by hard work, got in ahead of them. I picked out a position just below
the edge of the bank, and we lay quiet, waiting. From the direction of
the buffalo, I calculated we'd be just about right to get a shot at no
very long range. As it was, I suddenly heard thumps on the ground, and
cautiously raising my head, saw a huge buffalo bull just over us, not
fifteen feet up the bank. I whispered to Williams: 'For God's sake,
don't shoot, don't move!' The bull's little fiery eyes snapped, and he
reared. I thought we were goners, for when a bull comes down on
anything with his forefeet, it's done for. But he slowly settled back,
perhaps doubtful. Then, as another buffalo came to the edge of the
bank, luckily a little way from us, the bull turned broadside,
presenting a splendid target. Then I whispered to Williams: 'Now's your
chance. Shoot!' I waited for the shot, but none came. Looking at
Williams, I saw he was white and trembling. Big drops of sweat stood
out on his brow his teeth chattered, and his hands shook. He had
forgotten he carried a rifle."

"That reminds me," said Frank. "They tell a story over at Kanab on a
Dutchman named Schmitt. He was very fond of huntin', an' I guess had
pretty good success after deer an' small game. One winter he was out in
the Pink Cliffs with a Mormon named Shoonover, an' they run into a
lammin' big grizzly track, fresh an' wet. They trailed him to a clump
of chaparral, an' on goin' clear round it, found no tracks leadin' out.
Shoonover said Schmitt commenced to sweat. They went back to the place
where the trail led in, an' there they were, great big silver tip
tracks, bigger'n hoss-tracks, so fresh thet water was oozin' out of
'em. Schmitt said: 'Zake, you go in und ged him. I hef took sick right
now.'"

Happy as we were over the chase of Old Tom, and our prospects for
Sounder, Jude and Moze had seen a lion in a tree--we sought our
blankets early. I lay watching the bright stars, and listening to the
roar of the wind in the pines. At intervals it lulled to a whisper, and
then swelled to a roar, and then died away. Far off in the forest a
coyote barked once. Time and time again, as I was gradually sinking
into slumber, the sudden roar of the wind startled me. I imagined it
was the crash of rolling, weathered stone, and I saw again that huge
outspread flying lion above me.

I awoke sometime later to find Moze had sought the warmth of my side,
and he lay so near my arm that I reached out and covered him with an
end of the blanket I used to break the wind. It was very cold and the
time must have been very late, for the wind had died down, and I heard
not a tinkle from the hobbled horses. The absence of the cowbell music
gave me a sense of loneliness, for without it the silence of the great
forest was a thing to be felt.

This oppressiveness, however, was broken by a far-distant cry, unlike
any sound I had ever heard. Not sure of myself, I freed my ears from
the blanketed hood and listened. It came again, a wild cry, that made
me think first of a lost child, and then of the mourning wolf of the
north. It must have been a long distance off in the forest. An interval
of some moments passed, then it pealed out again, nearer this time, and
so human that it startled me. Moze raised his head and growled low in
his throat and sniffed the keen air.

"Jones, Jones," I called, reaching over to touch the old hunter.

He awoke at once, with the clear-headedness of the light sleeper.

"I heard the cry of some beast," I said, "And it was so weird, so
strange. I want to know what it was."

Such a long silence ensued that I began to despair of hearing the cry
again, when, with a suddenness which straightened the hair on my head,
a wailing shriek, exactly like a despairing woman might give in death
agony, split the night silence. It seemed right on us.

"Cougar! Cougar! Cougar!" exclaimed Jones.

"What's up?" queried Frank, awakened by the dogs.

Their howling roused the rest of the party, and no doubt scared the
cougar, for his womanish screech was not repeated. Then Jones got up
and gatherered his blankets in a roll.

"Where you oozin' for now?" asked Frank, sleepily.

"I think that cougar just came up over the rim on a scouting hunt, and
I'm going to go down to the head of the trail and stay there till
morning. If he returns that way, I'll put him up a tree."

With this, he unchained Sounder and Don, and stalked off under the
trees, looking like an Indian. Once the deep bay of Sounder rang out;
Jones's sharp command followed, and then the familiar silence
encompassed the forest and was broken no more.

When I awoke all was gray, except toward the canyon, where the little
bit of sky I saw through the pines glowed a delicate pink. I crawled
out on the instant, got into my boots and coat, and kicked the
smoldering fire. Jim heard me, and said:

"Shore you're up early."

"I'm going to see the sunrise from the north rim of the Grand Canon," I
said, and knew when I spoke that very few men, out of all the millions
of travelers, had ever seen this, probably the most surpassingly
beautiful pageant in the world. At most, only a few geologists,
scientists, perhaps an artist or two, and horse wranglers, hunters and
prospectors have ever reached the rim on the north side; and these men,
crossing from Bright Angel or Mystic Spring trails on the south rim,
seldom or never get beyond Powell's Plateau.

The frost cracked under my boots like frail ice, and the bluebells
peeped wanly from the white. When I reached the head of Clarke's trail
it was just daylight; and there, under a pine, I found Jones rolled in
his blankets, with Sounder and Moze asleep beside him. I turned without
disturbing him, and went along the edge of the forest, but back a
little distance from the rim wall.

I saw deer off in the woods, and tarrying, watched them throw up
graceful heads, and look and listen. The soft pink glow through the
pines deepened to rose, and suddenly I caught a point of red fire. Then
I hurried to the place I had named Singing Cliffs, and keeping my eyes
fast on the stone beneath me, trawled out to the very farthest point,
drew a long, breath, and looked eastward.

The awfulness of sudden death and the glory of heaven stunned me! The
thing that had been mystery at twilight, lay clear, pure, open in the
rosy hue of dawn. Out of the gates of the morning poured a light which
glorified the palaces and pyramids, purged and purified the afternoon's
inscrutable clefts, swept away the shadows of the mesas, and bathed
that broad, deep world of mighty mountains, stately spars of rock,
sculptured cathedrals and alabaster terraces in an artist's dream of
color. A pearl from heaven had burst, flinging its heart of fire into
this chasm. A stream of opal flowed out of the sun, to touch each peak,
mesa, dome, parapet, temple and tower, cliff and cleft into the
new-born life of another day.

I sat there for a long time and knew that every second the scene
changed, yet I could not tell how. I knew I sat high over a hole of
broken, splintered, barren mountains; I knew I could see a hundred
miles of the length of it, and eighteen miles of the width of it, and a
mile of the depth of it, and the shafts and rays of rose light on a
million glancing, many-hued surfaces at once; but that knowledge was no
help to me. I repeated a lot of meaningless superlatives to myself, and
I found words inadequate and superfluous. The spectacle was too elusive
and too great. It was life and death, heaven and hell.

I tried to call up former favorite views of mountain and sea, so as to
compare them with this; but the memory pictures refused to come, even
with my eyes closed. Then I returned to camp, with unsettled, troubled
mind, and was silent, wondering at the strange feeling burning within
me.

Jones talked about our visitor of the night before, and said the trail
near where he had slept showed only one cougar track, and that led down
into the canyon. It had surely been made, he thought, by the beast we
had heard. Jones signified his intention of chaining several of the
hounds for the next few nights at the head of this trail; so if the
cougar came up, they would scent him and let us know. From which it was
evident that to chase a lion bound into the canyon and one bound out
were two different things.

The day passed lazily, with all of us resting on the warm, fragrant
pine-needle beds, or mending a rent in a coat, or working on some camp
task impossible of commission on exciting days.

About four o'clock, I took my little rifle and walked off through the
woods in the direction of the carcass where I had seen the gray wolf.
Thinking it best to make a wide detour, so as to face the wind, I
circled till I felt the breeze was favorable to my enterprise, and then
cautiously approached the hollow were the dead horse lay. Indian
fashion, I slipped from tree to tree, a mode of forest travel not
without its fascination and effectiveness, till I reached the height of
a knoll beyond which I made sure was my objective point. On peeping out
from behind the last pine, I found I had calculated pretty well, for
there was the hollow, the big windfall, with its round, starfish-shaped
roots exposed to the bright sun, and near that, the carcass. Sure
enough, pulling hard at it, was the gray-white wolf I recognized as my
"lofer."

But he presented an exceedingly difficult shot. Backing down the ridge,
I ran a little way to come up behind another tree, from which I soon
shifted to a fallen pine. Over this I peeped, to get a splendid view of
the wolf. He had stopped tugging at the horse, and stood with his nose
in the air. Surely he could not have scented me, for the wind was
strong from him to me; neither could he have heard my soft footfalls on
the pine needles; nevertheless, he was suspicious. Loth to spoil the
picture he made, I risked a chance, and waited. Besides, though I
prided myself on being able to take a fair aim, I had no great hope
that I could hit him at such a distance. Presently he returned to his
feeding, but not for long. Soon he raised his long, fine-pointed head,
and trotted away a few yards, stopped to sniff again, then went back to
his gruesome work.

At this juncture, I noiselessly projected my rifle barrel over the log.
I had not, however, gotten the sights in line with him, when he trotted
away reluctantly, and ascended the knoll on his side of the hollow. I
lost him, and had just begun sourly to call myself a mollycoddle
hunter, when he reappeared. He halted in an open glade, on the very
crest of the knoll, and stood still as a statue wolf, a white,
inspiriting target, against a dark green background. I could not stifle
a rush of feeling, for I was a lover of the beautiful first, and a
hunter secondly; but I steadied down as the front sight moved into the
notch through which I saw the black and white of his shoulder.

Spang! How the little Remington sang! I watched closely, ready to send
five more missiles after the gray beast. He jumped spasmodically, in a
half-curve, high in the air, with loosely hanging head, then dropped in
a heap. I yelled like a boy, ran down the hill, up the other side of
the hollow, to find him stretched out dead, a small hole in his
shoulder where the bullet had entered, a great one where it had come
out.

The job I made of skinning him lacked some hundred degrees the
perfection of my shot, but I accomplished it, and returned to camp in
triumph.

"Shore I knowed you'd plunk him," said Jim very much pleased. "I shot
one the other day same way, when he was feedin' off a dead horse. Now
thet's a fine skin. Shore you cut through once or twice. But he's only
half lofer, the other half in plain coyote. Thet accounts fer his
feedin' on dead meat."

My naturalist host and my scientific friend both remarked somewhat
grumpily that I seemed to get the best of all the good things. I might
have retaliated that I certainly had gotten the worst of all the bad
jokes; but, being generously happy over my prize, merely remarked: "If
you want fame or wealth or wolves, go out and hunt for them."

Five o'clock supper left a good margin of day, in which my thoughts
reverted to the canyon. I watched the purple shadows stealing out of
their caverns and rolling up about the base of the mesas. Jones came
over to where I stood, and I persuaded him to walk with me along the
rim wall. Twilight had stealthily advanced when we reached the Singing
Cliffs, and we did not go out upon my promontory, but chose a more
comfortable one nearer the wall.

The night breeze had not sprung up yet, so the music of the cliffs was
hushed.

"You cannot accept the theory of erosion to account for this chasm?" I
asked my companion, referring to a former conversation.

"I can for this part of it. But what stumps me is the mountain range
three thousand feet high, crossing the desert and the canyon just above
where we crossed the river. How did the river cut through that without
the help of a split or earthquake?"

"I'll admit that is a poser to me as well as to you. But I suppose
Wallace could explain it as erosion. He claims this whole western
country was once under water, except the tips of the Sierra Nevada
mountains. There came an uplift of the earth's crust, and the great
inland sea began to run out, presumably by way of the Colorado. In so
doing it cut out the upper canyon, this gorge eighteen miles wide. Then
came a second uplift, giving the river a much greater impetus toward
the sea, which cut out the second, or marble canyon. Now as to the
mountain range crossing the canyon at right angles. It must have come
with the second uplift. If so, did it dam the river back into another
inland sea, and then wear down into that red perpendicular gorge we
remember so well? Or was there a great break in the fold of granite,
which let the river continue on its way? Or was there, at that
particular point, a softer stone, like this limestone here, which
erodes easily?"

"You must ask somebody wiser than I."

"Well, let's not perplex our minds with its origin. It is, and that's
enough for any mind. Ah! listen! Now you will hear my Singing Cliffs."

From out of the darkening shadows murmurs rose on the softly rising
wind. This strange music had a depressing influence; but it did not
fill the heart with sorrow, only touched it lightly. And when, with the
dying breeze, the song died away, it left the lonely crags lonelier for
its death.

The last rosy gleam faded from the tip of Point Sublime; and as if that
were a signal, in all the clefts and canyons below, purple, shadowy
clouds marshaled their forces and began to sweep upon the battlements,
to swing colossal wings into amphitheaters where gods might have
warred, slowly to enclose the magical sentinels. Night intervened, and
a moving, changing, silent chaos pulsated under the bright stars.

"How infinite all this is! How impossible to understand!" I exclaimed.

"To me it is very simple," replied my comrade. "The world is strange.
But this canyon--why, we can see it all! I can't make out why people
fuss so over it. I only feel peace. It's only bold and beautiful,
serene and silent."

With the words of this quiet old plainsman, my sentimental passion
shrank to the true appreciation of the scene. Self passed out to the
recurring, soft strains of cliff song. I had been reveling in a species
of indulgence, imagining I was a great lover of nature, building
poetical illusions over storm-beaten peaks. The truth, told by one who
had lived fifty years in the solitudes, among the rugged mountains,
under the dark trees, and by the sides of the lonely streams, was the
simple interpretation of a spirit in harmony with the bold, the
beautiful, the serene, the silent.

He meant the Grand Canyon was only a mood of nature, a bold promise, a
beautiful record. He meant that mountains had sifted away in its dust,
yet the canyon was young. Man was nothing, so let him be humble. This
cataclysm of the earth, this playground of a river was not inscrutable;
it was only inevitable--as inevitable as nature herself. Millions of
years in the bygone ages it had lain serene under a half moon; it would
bask silent under a rayless sun, in the onward edge of time.

It taught simplicity, serenity, peace. The eye that saw only the
strife, the war, the decay, the ruin, or only the glory and the
tragedy, saw not all the truth. It spoke simply, though its words were
grand: "My spirit is the Spirit of Time, of Eternity, of God. Man is
little, vain, vaunting. Listen. To-morrow he shall be gone. Peace!
Peace!"



CHAPTER 14.

ALL HEROES BUT ONE

As we rode up the slope of Buckskin, the sunrise glinted red-gold
through the aisles of frosted pines, giving us a hunter's glad greeting.

With all due respect to, and appreciation of, the breaks of the Siwash,
we unanimously decided that if cougars inhabited any other section of
canyon country, we preferred it, and were going to find it. We had
often speculated on the appearance of the rim wall directly across the
neck of the canyon upon which we were located. It showed a long stretch
of breaks, fissures, caves, yellow crags, crumbled ruins and clefts
green with pinyon pine. As a crow flies, it was only a mile or two
straight across from camp, but to reach it, we had to ascend the
mountain and head the canyon which deeply indented the slope.

A thousand feet or more above the level bench, the character of the
forest changed; the pines grew thicker, and interspersed among them
were silver spruces and balsams. Here in the clumps of small trees and
underbrush, we began to jump deer, and in a few moments a greater
number than I had ever seen in all my hunting experiences loped within
range of my eye. I could not look out into the forest where an aisle or
lane or glade stretched to any distance, without seeing a big gray deer
cross it. Jones said the herds had recently come up from the breaks,
where they had wintered. These deer were twice the size of the Eastern
species, and as fat as well-fed cattle. They were almost as tame, too.
A big herd ran out of one glade, leaving behind several curious does,
which watched us intently for a moment, then bounded off with the
stiff, springy bounce that so amused me.

Sounder crossed fresh trails one after another; Jude, Tige and Ranger
followed him, but hesitated often, barked and whined; Don started off
once, to come sneaking back at Jones's stern call. But surly old Moze
either would not or could not obey, and away he dashed. Bang! Jones
sent a charge of fine shot after him. He yelped, doubled up as if
stung, and returned as quickly as he had gone.

"Hyar, you white and black coon dog," said Jones, "get in behind, and
stay there."

We turned to the right after a while and got among shallow ravines.
Gigantic pines grew on the ridges and in the hollows, and everywhere
bluebells shone blue from the white frost. Why the frost did not kill
these beautiful flowers was a mystery to me. The horses could not step
without crushing them.

Before long, the ravines became so deep that we had to zigzag up and
down their sides, and to force our horses through the aspen thickets in
the hollows. Once from a ridge I saw a troop of deer, and stopped to
watch them. Twenty-seven I counted outright, but there must have been
three times that number. I saw the herd break across a glade, and
watched them until they were lost in the forest. My companions having
disappeared, I pushed on, and while working out of a wide, deep hollow,
I noticed the sunny patches fade from the bright slopes, and the golden
streaks vanish among the pines. The sky had become overcast, and the
forest was darkening. The "Waa-hoo," I cried out returned in echo only.
The wind blew hard in my face, and the pines began to bend and roar. An
immense black cloud enveloped Buckskin.

Satan had carried me no farther than the next ridge, when the forest
frowned dark as twilight, and on the wind whirled flakes of snow. Over
the next hollow, a white pall roared through the trees toward me.
Hardly had I time to get the direction of the trail, and its relation
to the trees nearby, when the storm enfolded me. Of his own accord
Satan stopped in the lee of a bushy spruce. The roar in the pines
equaled that of the cave under Niagara, and the bewildering, whirling
mass of snow was as difficult to see through as the tumbling, seething
waterfall.

I was confronted by the possibility of passing the night there, and
calming my fears as best I could, hastily felt for my matches and
knife. The prospect of being lost the next day in a white forest was
also appalling, but I soon reassured myself that the storm was only a
snow squall, and would not last long. Then I gave myself up to the
pleasure and beauty of it. I could only faintly discern the dim trees;
the limbs of the spruce, which partially protected me, sagged down to
my head with their burden; I had but to reach out my hand for a
snowball. Both the wind and snow seemed warm. The great flakes were
like swan feathers on a summer breeze. There was something joyous in
the whirl of snow and roar of wind. While I bent over to shake my
holster, the storm passed as suddenly as it had come. When I looked up,
there were the pines, like pillars of Parian marble, and a white
shadow, a vanishing cloud fled, with receding roar, on the wings of the
wind. Fast on this retreat burst the warm, bright sun.

I faced my course, and was delighted to see, through an opening where
the ravine cut out of the forest, the red-tipped peaks of the canyon,
and the vaulted dome I had named St. Marks. As I started, a new and
unexpected after-feature of the storm began to manifest itself. The sun
being warm, even to melt the snow, and under the trees a heavy rain
fell, and in the glades and hollows a fine mist blew. Exquisite
rainbows hung from white-tipped branches and curved over the hollows.
Glistening patches of snow fell from the pines, and broke the showers.

In a quarter of an hour, I rode out of the forest to the rim wall on
dry ground. Against the green pinyons Frank's white horse stood out
conspicuously, and near him browsed the mounts of Jim and Wallace. The
boys were not in evidence. Concluding they had gone down over the rim,
I dismounted and kicked off my chaps, and taking my rifle and camera,
hurried to look the place over.

To my surprise and interest, I found a long section of rim wall in
ruins. It lay in a great curve between the two giant capes; and many
short, sharp, projecting promontories, like the teeth of a saw,
overhung the canyon. The slopes between these points of cliff were
covered with a deep growth of pinyon, and in these places descent would
be easy. Everywhere in the corrugated wall were rents and rifts; cliffs
stood detached like islands near a shore; yellow crags rose out of
green clefts; jumble of rocks, and slides of rim wall, broken into
blocks, massed under the promontories.

The singular raggedness and wildness of the scene took hold of me, and
was not dispelled until the baying of Sounder and Don roused action in
me. Apparently the hounds were widely separated. Then I heard Jim's
yell. But it ceased when the wind lulled, and I heard it no more.
Running back from the point, I began to go down. The way was steep,
almost perpendicular; but because of the great stones and the absence
of slides, was easy. I took long strides and jumps, and slid over
rocks, and swung on pinyon branches, and covered distance like a
rolling stone. At the foot of the rim wall, or at a line where it would
have reached had it extended regularly, the slope became less
pronounced. I could stand up without holding on to a support. The
largest pinyons I had seen made a forest that almost stood on end.
These trees grew up, down, and out, and twisted in curves, and many
were two feet in thickness. During my descent, I halted at intervals to
listen, and always heard one of the hounds, sometimes several. But as I
descended for a long time, and did not get anywhere or approach the
dogs, I began to grow impatient.

A large pinyon, with a dead top, suggested a good outlook, so I climbed
it, and saw I could sweep a large section of the slope. It was a
strange thing to look down hill, over the tips of green trees. Below,
perhaps four hundred yards, was a slide open for a long way; all the
rest was green incline, with many dead branches sticking up like spars,
and an occasional crag. From this perch I heard the hounds; then
followed a yell I thought was Jim's, and after it the bellowing of
Wallace's rifle. Then all was silent. The shots had effectually checked
the yelping of the hounds. I let out a yell. Another cougar that Jones
would not lasso! All at once I heard a familiar sliding of small rocks
below me, and I watched the open slope with greedy eyes.

Not a bit surprised was I to see a cougar break out of the green, and
go tearing down the slide. In less than six seconds, I had sent six
steel-jacketed bullets after him. Puffs of dust rose closer and closer
to him as each bullet went nearer the mark and the last showered him
with gravel and turned him straight down the canyon slope.

I slid down the dead pinyon and jumped nearly twenty feet to the soft
sand below, and after putting a loaded clip in my rifle, began kangaroo
leaps down the slope. When I reached the point where the cougar had
entered the slide, I called the hounds, but they did not come nor
answer me. Notwithstanding my excitement, I appreciated the distance to
the bottom of the slope before I reached it. In my haste, I ran upon
the verge of a precipice twice as deep as the first rim wall, but one
glance down sent me shatteringly backward.

With all the breath I had left I yelled: "Waa-hoo! Waa-hoo!" From the
echoes flung at me, I imagined at first that my friends were right on
my ears. But no real answer came. The cougar had probably passed along
this second rim wall to a break, and had gone down. His trail could
easily be taken by any of the hounds. Vexed and anxious, I signaled
again and again. Once, long after the echo had gone to sleep in some
hollow canyon, I caught a faint "Wa-a-ho-o-o!" But it might have come
from the clouds. I did not hear a hound barking above me on the slope;
but suddenly, to my amazement, Sounder's deep bay rose from the abyss
below. I ran along the rim, called till I was hoarse, leaned over so
far that the blood rushed to my head, and then sat down. I concluded
this canyon hunting could bear some sustained attention and thought, as
well as frenzied action.

Examination of my position showed how impossible it was to arrive at
any clear idea of the depth or size, or condition of the canyon slopes
from the main rim wall above. The second wall--a stupendous,
yellow-faced cliff two thousand feet high--curved to my left round to a
point in front of me. The intervening canyon might have been a half
mile wide, and it might have been ten miles. I had become disgusted
with judging distance. The slope above this second wall facing me ran
up far above my head; it fairly towered, and this routed all my former
judgments, because I remembered distinctly that from the rim this
yellow and green mountain had appeared an insignificant little ridge.
But it was when I turned to gaze up behind me that I fully grasped the
immensity of the place. This wall and slope were the first two steps
down the long stairway of the Grand Canyon, and they towered over me,
straight up a half-mile in dizzy height. To think of climbing it took
my breath away.

Then again Sounder's bay floated distinctly to me, but it seemed to
come from a different point. I turned my ear to the wind, and in the
succeeding moments I was more and more baffled. One bay sounded from
below and next from far to the right; another from the left. I could
not distinguish voice from echo. The acoustic properties of the
amphitheater beneath me were too wonderful for my comprehension.

As the bay grew sharper, and correspondingly more significant, I became
distracted, and focused a strained vision on the canyon deeps. I looked
along the slope to the notch where the wall curved and followed the
base line of the yellow cliff. Quite suddenly I saw a very small black
object moving with snail-like slowness. Although it seemed impossible
for Sounder to be so small, I knew it was he. Having something now to
judge distance from, I conceived it to be a mile, without the drop. If
I could hear Sounder, he could hear me, so I yelled encouragement. The
echoes clapped back at me like so many slaps in the face. I watched the
hound until he disappeared among broken heaps of stone, and long after
that his bay floated to me.

Having rested, I essayed the discovery of some of my lost companions or
the hounds, and began to climb. Before I started, however, I was wise
enough to study the rim wall above, to familiarize myself with the
break so I would have a landmark. Like horns and spurs of gold the
pinnacles loomed up. Massed closely together, they were not unlike an
astounding pipe-organ. I had a feeling of my littleness, that I was
lost, and should devote every moment and effort to the saving of my
life. It did not seem possible I could be hunting. Though I climbed
diagonally, and rested often, my heart pumped so hard I could hear it.
A yellow crag, with a round head like an old man's cane, appealed to me
as near the place where I last heard from Jim, and toward it I labored.
Every time I glanced up, the distance seemed the same. A climb which I
decided would not take more than fifteen minutes, required an hour.

While resting at the foot of the crag, I heard more baying of hounds,
but for my life I could not tell whether the sound came from up or
down, and I commenced to feel that I did not much care. Having signaled
till I was hoarse, and receiving none but mock answers, I decided that
if my companions had not toppled over a cliff, they were wisely
withholding their breath.

Another stiff pull up the slope brought me under the rim wall, and
there I groaned, because the wall was smooth and shiny, without a
break. I plodded slowly along the base, with my rifle ready. Cougar
tracks were so numerous I got tired of looking at them, but I did not
forget that I might meet a tawny fellow or two among those narrow
passes of shattered rock, and under the thick, dark pinyons. Going on
in this way, I ran point-blank into a pile of bleached bones before a
cave. I had stumbled on the lair of a lion and from the looks of it one
like that of Old Tom. I flinched twice before I threw a stone into the
dark-mouthed cave. What impressed me as soon as I found I was in no
danger of being pawed and clawed round the gloomy spot, was the fact of
the bones being there. How did they come on a slope where a man could
hardly walk? Only one answer seemed feasible. The lion had made his
kill one thousand feet above, had pulled his quarry to the rim and
pushed it over. In view of the theory that he might have had to drag
his victim from the forest, and that very seldom two lions worked
together, the fact of the location of the bones as startling. Skulls of
wild horses and deer, antlers and countless bones, all crushed into
shapelessness, furnished indubitable proof that the carcasses had
fallen from a great height. Most remarkable of all was the skeleton of
a cougar lying across that of a horse. I believed--I could not help but
believe that the cougar had fallen with his last victim.

Not many rods beyond the lion den, the rim wall split into towers,
crags and pinnacles. I thought I had found my pipe organ, and began to
climb toward a narrow opening in the rim. But I lost it. The
extraordinarily cut-up condition of the wall made holding to one
direction impossible. Soon I realized I was lost in a labyrinth. I
tried to find my way down again, but the best I could do was to reach
the verge of a cliff, from which I could see the canyon. Then I knew
where I was, yet I did not know, so I plodded wearily back. Many a
blind cleft did I ascend in the maze of crags. I could hardly crawl
along, still I kept at it, for the place was conducive to dire
thoughts. A tower of Babel menaced me with tons of loose shale. A tower
that leaned more frightfully than the Tower of Pisa threatened to build
my tomb. Many a lighthouse-shaped crag sent down little scattering
rocks in ominous notice.

After toiling in and out of passageways under the shadows of these
strangely formed cliffs, and coming again and again to the same point,
a blind pocket, I grew desperate. I named the baffling place Deception
Pass, and then ran down a slide. I knew if I could keep my feet I could
beat the avalanche. More by good luck than management I outran the
roaring stones and landed safely. Then rounding the cliff below, I
found myself on a narrow ledge, with a wall to my left, and to the
right the tips of pinyon trees level with my feet.

Innocently and wearily I passed round a pillar-like corner of wall, to
come face to face with an old lioness and cubs. I heard the mother
snarl, and at the same time her ears went back flat, and she crouched.
The same fire of yellow eyes, the same grim snarling expression so
familiar in my mind since Old Tom had leaped at me, faced me here.

My recent vow of extermination was entirely forgotten and one frantic
spring carried me over the ledge.

Crash! I felt the brushing and scratching of branches, and saw a green
blur. I went down straddling limbs and hit the ground with a thump.
Fortunately, I landed mostly on my feet, in sand, and suffered no
serious bruise. But I was stunned, and my right arm was numb for a
moment. When I gathered myself together, instead of being grateful the
ledge had not been on the face of Point Sublime--from which I would
most assuredly have leaped--I was the angriest man ever let loose in
the Grand Canyon.

Of course the cougars were far on their way by that time, and were
telling neighbors about the brave hunter's leap for life; so I devoted
myself to further efforts to find an outlet. The niche I had jumped
into opened below, as did most of the breaks, and I worked out of it to
the base of the rim wall, and tramped a long, long mile before I
reached my own trail leading down. Resting every five steps, I climbed
and climbed. My rifle grew to weigh a ton; my feet were lead; the
camera strapped to my shoulder was the world. Soon climbing meant
trapeze work--long reach of arm, and pull of weight, high step of foot,
and spring of body. Where I had slid down with ease, I had to strain
and raise myself by sheer muscle. I wore my left glove to tatters and
threw it away to put the right one on my left hand. I thought many
times I could not make another move; I thought my lungs would burst,
but I kept on. When at last I surmounted the rim, I saw Jones, and
flopped down beside him, and lay panting, dripping, boiling, with
scorched feet, aching limbs and numb chest.

"I've been here two hours," he said, "and I knew things were happening
below; but to climb up that slide would kill me. I am not young any
more, and a steep climb like this takes a young heart. As it was I had
enough work. Look!" He called my attention to his trousers. They had
been cut to shreds, and the right trouser leg was missing from the knee
down. His shin was bloody. "Moze took a lion along the rim, and I went
after him with all my horse could do. I yelled for the boys, but they
didn't come. Right here it is easy to go down, but below, where Moze
started this lion, it was impossible to get over the rim. The lion lit
straight out of the pinyons. I lost ground because of the thick brush
and numerous trees. Then Moze doesn't bark often enough. He treed the
lion twice. I could tell by the way he opened up and bayed. The rascal
coon-dog climbed the trees and chased the lion out. That's what Moze
did! I got to an open space and saw him, and was coming up fine when he
went down over a hollow which ran into the canyon. My horse tripped and
fell, turning clear over with me before he threw me into the brush. I
tore my clothes, and got this bruise, but wasn't much hurt. My horse is
pretty lame."

I began a recital of my experience, modestly omitting the incident
where I bravely faced an old lioness. Upon consulting my watch, I found
I had been almost four hours climbing out. At that moment, Frank poked
a red face over the rim. He was in shirt sleeves, sweating freely, and
wore a frown I had never seen before. He puffed like a porpoise, and at
first could hardly speak.

"Where were--you--all?" he panted. "Say! but mebbe this hasn't been a
chase! Jim and Wallace an' me went tumblin' down after the dogs, each
one lookin' out for his perticilar dog, an' darn me if I don't believe
his lion, too. Don took one oozin' down the canyon, with me hot-footin'
it after him. An' somewhere he treed thet lion, right below me, in a
box canyon, sort of an offshoot of the second rim, an' I couldn't
locate him. I blamed near killed myself more'n once. Look at my
knuckles! Barked em slidin' about a mile down a smooth wall. I thought
once the lion had jumped Don, but soon I heard him barkin' again. All
thet time I heard Sounder, an' once I heard the pup. Jim yelled, an'
somebody was shootin'. But I couldn't find nobody, or make nobody hear
me. Thet canyon is a mighty deceivin' place. You'd never think so till
you go down. I wouldn't climb up it again for all the lions in
Buckskin. Hello, there comes Jim oozin' up."

Jim appeared just over the rim, and when he got up to us, dusty, torn
and fagged out, with Don, Tige and Ranger showing signs of collapse, we
all blurted out questions. But Jim took his time.

"Shore thet canyon is one hell of a place," he began finally. "Where
was everybody? Tige and the pup went down with me an' treed a cougar.
Yes, they did, an' I set under a pinyon holdin' the pup, while Tige
kept the cougar treed. I yelled an' yelled. After about an hour or two,
Wallace came poundin' down like a giant. It was a sure thing we'd get
the cougar; an' Wallace was takin' his picture when the blamed cat
jumped. It was embarrassin', because he wasn't polite about how he
jumped. We scattered some, an' when Wallace got his gun, the cougar was
humpin' down the slope, an' he was goin' so fast an' the pinyons was so
thick thet Wallace couldn't get a fair shot, an' missed. Tige an' the
pup was so scared by the shots they wouldn't take the trail again. I
heard some one shoot about a million times, an' shore thought the
cougar was done for. Wallace went plungin' down the slope an' I
followed. I couldn't keep up with him--he shore takes long steps--an' I
lost him. I'm reckonin' he went over the second wall. Then I made
tracks for the top. Boys, the way you can see an' hear things down in
thet canyon, an' the way you can't hear an' see things is pretty funny."

"If Wallace went over the second rim wall, will he get back to-day?" we
all asked.

"Shore, there's no tellin'."

We waited, lounged, and slept for three hours, and were beginning to
worry about our comrade when he hove in sight eastward, along the rim.
He walked like a man whose next step would be his last. When he reached
us, he fell flat, and lay breathing heavily for a while.

"Somebody once mentioned Israel Putnam's ascent of a hill," he said
slowly. "With all respect to history and a patriot, I wish to say
Putnam never saw a hill!"

"Ooze for camp," called out Frank.

Five o'clock found us round a bright fire, all casting ravenous eyes at
a smoking supper. The smell of the Persian meat would have made a wolf
of a vegetarian. I devoured four chops, and could not have been counted
in the running. Jim opened a can of maple syrup which he had been
saving for a grand occasion, and Frank went him one better with two
cans of peaches. How glorious to be hungry--to feel the craving for
food, and to be grateful for it, to realize that the best of life lies
in the daily needs of existence, and to battle for them!

Nothing could be stronger than the simple enumeration and statement of
the facts of Wallace's experience after he left Jim. He chased the
cougar, and kept it in sight, until it went over the second rim wall.
Here he dropped over a precipice twenty feet high, to alight on a
fan-shaped slide which spread toward the bottom. It began to slip and
move by jerks, and then started off steadily, with an increasing roar.
He rode an avalanche for one thousand feet. The jar loosened bowlders
from the walls. When the slide stopped, Wallace extricated his feet and
began to dodge the bowlders. He had only time to jump over the large
ones or dart to one side out of their way. He dared not run. He had to
watch them coming. One huge stone hurtled over his head and smashed a
pinyon tree below.

When these had ceased rolling, and he had passed down to the red shale,
he heard Sounder baying near, and knew a cougar had been treed or
cornered. Hurdling the stones and dead pinyons, Wallace ran a mile down
the slope, only to find he had been deceived in the direction. He
sheered off to the left. Sounder's illusive bay came up from a deep
cleft. Wallace plunged into a pinyon, climbed to the ground, skidded
down a solid slide, to come upon an impassable the obstacle in the form
of a solid wall of red granite. Sounder appeared and came to him,
evidently having given up the chase.

Wallace consumed four hours in making the ascent. In the notch of the
curve of the second rim wall, he climbed the slippery steps of a
waterfall. At one point, if he had not been six feet five inches tall
he would have been compelled to attempt retracing his trail--an
impossible task. But his height enabled him to reach a root, by which
he pulled himself up. Sounder he lassoed a la Jones, and hauled up. At
another spot, which Sounder climbed, he lassoed a pinyon above, and
walked up with his feet slipping from under him at every step. The
knees of his corduroy trousers were holes, as were the elbows of his
coat. The sole of his left boot, which he used most in climbing--was
gone, and so was his hat.



CHAPTER 15.

JONES ON COUGARS

The mountain lion, or cougar, of our Rocky Mountain region, is nothing
more nor less than the panther. He is a little different in shape,
color and size, which vary according to his environment. The panther of
the Rockies is usually light, taking the grayish hue of the rocks. He
is stockier and heavier of build, and stronger of limb than the Eastern
species, which difference comes from climbing mountains and springing
down the cliffs after his prey.

In regions accessible to man, or where man is encountered even rarely,
the cougar is exceedingly shy, seldom or never venturing from cover
during the day. He spends the hours of daylight high on the most rugged
cliffs, sleeping and basking in the sunshine, and watching with
wonderfully keen sight the valleys below. His hearing equals his sight,
and if danger threatens, he always hears it in time to skulk away
unseen. At night he steals down the mountain side toward deer or elk he
has located during the day. Keeping to the lowest ravines and thickets,
he creeps upon his prey. His cunning and ferocity are keener and more
savage in proportion to the length of time he has been without food. As
he grows hungrier and thinner, his skill and fierce strategy
correspondingly increase. A well-fed cougar will creep upon and secure
only about one in seven of the deer, elk, antelope or mountain sheep
that he stalks. But a starving cougar is another animal. He creeps like
a snake, is as sure on the scent as a vulture, makes no more noise than
a shadow, and he hides behind a stone or bush that would scarcely
conceal a rabbit. Then he springs with terrific force, and intensity of
purpose, and seldom fails to reach his victim, and once the claws of a
starved lion touch flesh, they never let go.

A cougar seldom pursues his quarry after he has leaped and missed,
either from disgust or failure, or knowledge that a second attempt
would be futile. The animal making the easiest prey for the cougar is
the elk. About every other elk attacked falls a victim. Deer are more
fortunate, the ratio being one dead to five leaped at. The antelope,
living on the lowlands or upland meadows, escapes nine times out of
ten; and the mountain sheep, or bighorn, seldom falls to the onslaught
of his enemy.

Once the lion gets a hold with the great forepaw, every movement of the
struggling prey sinks the sharp, hooked claws deeper. Then as quickly
as is possible, the lion fastens his teeth in the throat of his prey
and grips till it is dead. In this way elk have carried lions for many
rods. The lion seldom tears the skin of the neck, and never, as is
generally supposed, sucks the blood of its victim; but he cuts into the
side, just behind the foreshoulder, and eats the liver first. He rolls
the skin back as neatly and tightly as a person could do it. When he
has gorged himself, he drags the carcass into a ravine or dense
thicket, and rakes leaves, sticks or dirt over it to hide it from other
animals. Usually he returns to his cache on the second night, and after
that the frequency of his visits depends on the supply of fresh prey.
In remote regions, unfrequented by man, the lion will guard his cache
from coyote and buzzards.

In sex there are about five female lions to one male. This is caused by
the jealous and vicious disposition of the male. It is a fact that the
old Toms kill every young lion they can catch. Both male and female of
the litter suffer alike until after weaning time, and then only the
males. In this matter wise animal logic is displayed by the Toms. The
domestic cat, to some extent, possesses the same trait. If the litter
is destroyed, the mating time is sure to come about regardless of the
season. Thus this savage trait of the lions prevents overproduction,
and breeds a hardy and intrepid race. If by chance or that cardinal
feature of animal life--the survival of the fittest--a young male lion
escapes to the weaning time, even after that he is persecuted. Young
male lions have been killed and found to have had their flesh beaten
until it was a mass of bruises and undoubtedly it had been the work of
an old Tom. Moreover, old males and females have been killed, and found
to be in the same bruised condition. A feature, and a conclusive one,
is the fact that invariably the female is suckling her young at this
period, and sustains the bruises in desperately defending her litter.

It is astonishing how cunning, wise and faithful an old lioness is. She
seldom leaves her kittens. From the time they are six weeks old she
takes them out to train them for the battles of life, and the struggle
continues from birth to death. A lion hardly ever dies naturally. As
soon as night descends, the lioness stealthily stalks forth, and
because of her little ones, takes very short steps. The cubs follow,
stepping in their mother's tracks. When she crouches for game, each
little lion crouches also, and each one remains perfectly still until
she springs, or signals them to come. If she secures the prey, they all
gorge themselves. After the feast the mother takes her back trail,
stepping in the tracks she made coming down the mountain. And the cubs
are very careful to follow suit, and not to leave marks of their trail
in the soft snow. No doubt this habit is practiced to keep their deadly
enemies in ignorance of their existence. The old Toms and white hunters
are their only foes. Indians never kill a lion. This trick of the lions
has fooled many a hunter, concerning not only the direction, but
particularly the number.

The only successful way to hunt lions is with trained dogs. A good
hound can trail them for several hours after the tracks have been made,
and on a cloudy or wet day can hold the scent much longer. In snow the
hound can trail for three or four days after the track has been made.

When Jones was game warden of the Yellowstone National Park, he had
unexampled opportunities to hunt cougars and learn their habits. All
the cougars in that region of the Rockies made a rendezvous of the game
preserve. Jones soon procured a pack of hounds, but as they had been
trained to run deer, foxes and coyotes he had great trouble. They would
break on the trail of these animals, and also on elk and antelope just
when this was farthest from his wish. He soon realized that to train
the hounds was a sore task. When they refused to come back at his call,
he stung them with fine shot, and in this manner taught obedience. But
obedience was not enough; the hounds must know how to follow and tree a
lion. With this in mind, Jones decided to catch a lion alive and give
his dogs practical lessons.

A few days after reaching this decision, he discovered the tracks of
two lions in the neighborhood of Mt. Everett. The hounds were put on
the trail and followed it into an abandoned coal shaft. Jones
recognized this as his opportunity, and taking his lasso and an extra
rope, he crawled into the hole. Not fifteen feet from the opening sat
one of the cougars, snarling and spitting. Jones promptly lassoed it,
passed his end of the lasso round a side prop of the shaft, and out to
the soldiers who had followed him. Instructing them not to pull till he
called, he cautiously began to crawl by the cougar, with the intention
of getting farther back and roping its hind leg, so as to prevent
disaster when the soldiers pulled it out. He accomplished this, not
without some uneasiness in regard to the second lion, and giving the
word to his companions, soon had his captive hauled from the shaft and
tied so tightly it could not move.

Jones took the cougar and his hounds to an open place in the park,
where there were trees, and prepared for a chase. Loosing the lion, he
held his hounds back a moment, then let them go. Within one hundred
yards the cougar climbed a tree, and the dogs saw the performance.
Taking a forked stick, Jones mounted up to the cougar, caught it under
the jaw with the stick, and pushed it out. There was a fight, a
scramble, and the cougar dashed off to run up another tree. In this
manner, he soon trained his hounds to the pink of perfection.

Jones discovered, while in the park, that the cougar is king of all the
beasts of North America. Even a grizzly dashed away in great haste when
a cougar made his appearance. At the road camp, near Mt. Washburn,
during the fall of 1904, the bears, grizzlies and others, were always
hanging round the cook tent. There were cougars also, and almost every
evening, about dusk, a big fellow would come parading past the tent.
The bears would grunt furiously and scamper in every direction. It was
easy to tell when a cougar was in the neighborhood, by the peculiar
grunts and snorts of the bears, and the sharp, distinct, alarmed yelps
of coyotes. A lion would just as lief kill a coyote as any other animal
and he would devour it, too. As to the fighting of cougars and
grizzlies, that was a mooted question, with the credit on the side of
the former.

The story of the doings of cougars, as told in the snow, was intensely
fascinating and tragic! How they stalked deer and elk, crept to within
springing distance, then crouched flat to leap, was as easy to read as
if it had been told in print. The leaps and bounds were beyond belief.
The longest leap on a level measured eighteen and one-half feet. Jones
trailed a half-grown cougar, which in turn was trailing a big elk. He
found where the cougar had struck his game, had clung for many rods, to
be dashed off by the low limb of a spruce tree. The imprint of the body
of the cougar was a foot deep in the snow; blood and tufts of hair
covered the place. But there was no sign of the cougar renewing the
chase.

In rare cases cougars would refuse to run, or take to trees. One day
Jones followed the hounds, eight in number, to come on a huge Tom
holding the whole pack at bay. He walked to and fro, lashing his tail
from side to side, and when Jones dashed up, he coolly climbed a tree.
Jones shot the cougar, which, in falling, struck one of the hounds,
crippling him. This hound would never approach a tree after this
incident, believing probably that the cougar had sprung upon him.

Usually the hounds chased their quarry into a tree long before Jones
rode up. It was always desirable to kill the animal with the first
shot. If the cougar was wounded, and fell or jumped among the dogs,
there was sure to be a terrible fight, and the best dogs always
received serious injuries, if they were not killed outright. The lion
would seize a hound, pull him close, and bite him in the brain.

Jones asserted that a cougar would usually run from a hunter, but that
this feature was not to be relied upon. And a wounded cougar was as
dangerous as a tiger. In his hunts Jones carried a shotgun, and shells
loaded with ball for the cougar, and others loaded with fine shot for
the hounds. One day, about ten miles from the camp, the hounds took a
trail and ran rapidly, as there were only a few inches of snow. Jones
found a large lion had taken refuge in a tree that had fallen against
another, and aiming at the shoulder of the beast, he fired both
barrels. The cougar made no sign he had been hit. Jones reloaded and
fired at the head. The old fellow growled fiercely, turned in the tree
and walked down head first, something he would not have been able to do
had the tree been upright. The hounds were ready for him, but wisely
attacked in the rear. Realizing he had been shooting fine shot at the
animal, Jones began a hurried search for a shell loaded with ball. The
lion made for him, compelling him to dodge behind trees. Even though
the hounds kept nipping the cougar, the persistent fellow still pursued
the hunter. At last Jones found the right shell, just as the cougar
reached for him. Major, the leader of the hounds, darted bravely in,
and grasped the leg of the beast just in the nick of time. This enabled
Jones to take aim and fire at close range, which ended the fight. Upon
examination, it was discovered the cougar had been half-blinded by the
fine shot, which accounted for the ineffectual attempts he had made to
catch Jones.

The mountain lion rarely attacks a human being for the purpose of
eating. When hungry he will often follow the tracks of people, and
under favorable circumstances may ambush them. In the park where game
is plentiful, no one has ever known a cougar to follow the trail of a
person; but outside the park lions have been known to follow hunters,
and particularly stalk little children. The Davis family, living a few
miles north of the park, have had children pursued to the very doors of
their cabin. And other families relate similar experiences. Jones heard
of only one fatality, but he believes that if the children were left
alone in the woods, the cougars would creep closer and closer, and when
assured there was no danger, would spring to kill.

Jones never heard the cry of a cougar in the National Park, which
strange circumstance, considering the great number of the animals
there, he believed to be on account of the abundance of game. But he
had heard it when a boy in Illinois, and when a man all over the West,
and the cry was always the same, weird and wild, like the scream of a
terrified woman. He did not understand the significance of the cry,
unless it meant hunger, or the wailing mourn of a lioness for her
murdered cubs.

The destructiveness of this savage species was murderous. Jones came
upon one old Tom's den, where there was a pile of nineteen elk, mostly
yearlings. Only five or six had been eaten. Jones hunted this old
fellow for months, and found that the lion killed on the average three
animals a week. The hounds got him up at length, and chased him to the
Yellowstone River, which he swam at a point impassable for man or
horse. One of the dogs, a giant bloodhound named Jack, swam the swift
channel, kept on after the lion, but never returned. All cougars have
their peculiar traits and habits, the same as other creatures, and all
old Toms have strongly marked characteristics, but this one was the
most destructive cougar Jones ever knew.

During Jones's short sojourn as warden in the park, he captured
numerous cougars alive, and killed seventy-two.



CHAPTER 16.

KITTY

It seemed my eyelids had scarcely touched when Jones's exasperating,
yet stimulating, yell aroused me. Day was breaking. The moon and stars
shone with wan luster. A white, snowy frost silvered the forest. Old
Moze had curled close beside me, and now he gazed at me reproachfully
and shivered. Lawson came hustling in with the horses. Jim busied
himself around the campfire. My fingers nearly froze while I saddled my
horse.

At five o'clock we were trotting up the slope of Buckskin, bound for
the section of ruined rim wall where we had encountered the convention
of cougars. Hoping to save time, we took a short cut, and were soon
crossing deep ravines.

The sunrise coloring the purple curtain of cloud over the canyon was
too much for me, and I lagged on a high ridge to watch it, thus falling
behind my more practical companions. A far-off "Waa-hoo!" brought me to
a realization of the day's stern duty and I hurried Satan forward on
the trail.

I came suddenly upon our leader, leading his horse through the scrub
pinyon on the edge of the canyon, and I knew at once something had
happened, for he was closely scrutinizing the ground.

"I declare this beats me all hollow!" began Jones. "We might be hunting
rabbits instead of the wildest animals on the continent. We jumped a
bunch of lions in this clump of pinyon. There must have been at least
four. I thought first we'd run upon an old lioness with cubs, but all
the trails were made by full-grown lions. Moze took one north along the
rim, same as the other day, but the lion got away quick. Frank saw one
lion. Wallace is following Sounder down into the first hollow. Jim has
gone over the rim wall after Don. There you are! Four lions playing tag
in broad daylight on top of this wall! I'm inclined to believe Clarke
didn't exaggerate. But confound the luck! the hounds have split again.
They're doing their best, of course, and it's up to us to stay with
them. I'm afraid we'll lose some of them. Hello! I hear a signal.
That's from Wallace. Waa-hoo! Waa-hoo! There he is, coming out of the
hollow."

The tall Californian reached us presently with Sounder beside him. He
reported that the hound had chased a lion into an impassable break. We
then joined Frank on a jutting crag of the canyon wall.

"Waa-hoo!" yelled Jones. There was no answer except the echo, and it
rolled up out of the chasm with strange, hollow mockery.

"Don took a cougar down this slide," said Frank. "I saw the brute, an'
Don was makin' him hump. A--ha! There! Listen to thet!"

From the green and yellow depths soared the faint yelp of a hound.

"That's Don! that's Don!" cried Jones. "He's hot on something. Where's
Sounder? Hyar, Sounder! By George! there he goes down the slide. Hear
him! He's opened up! Hi! Hi! Hi!"

The deep, full mellow bay of the hound came ringing on the clear air.

"Wallace, you go down. Frank and I will climb out on that pointed crag.
Grey, you stay here. Then we'll have the slide between us. Listen and
watch!"

From my promontory I watched Wallace go down with his gigantic strides,
sending the rocks rolling and cracking; and then I saw Jones and Frank
crawl out to the end of a crumbling ruin of yellow wall which
threatened to go splintering and thundering down into the abyss.

I thought, as I listened to the penetrating voice of the hound, that
nowhere on earth could there be a grander scene for wild action, wild
life. My position afforded a commanding view over a hundred miles of
the noblest and most sublime work of nature. The rim wall where I stood
sheered down a thousand feet, to meet a long wooded slope which cut
abruptly off into another giant precipice; a second long slope
descended, and jumped off into what seemed the grave of the world. Most
striking in that vast void were the long, irregular points of rim wall,
protruding into the Grand Canyon. From Point Sublime to the Pink Cliffs
of Utah there were twelve of these colossal capes, miles apart, some
sharp, some round, some blunt, all rugged and bold. The great chasm in
the middle was full of purple smoke. It seemed a mighty sepulcher from
which misty fumes rolled upward. The turrets, mesas, domes, parapets
and escarpments of yellow and red rock gave the appearance of an
architectural work of giant hands. The wonderful river of silt, the
blood-red, mystic and sullen Rio Colorado, lay hidden except in one
place far away, where it glimmered wanly. Thousands of colors were
blended before my rapt gaze. Yellow predominated, as the walls and
crags lorded it over the lower cliffs and tables; red glared in the
sunlight; green softened these two, and then purple and violet, gray,
blue and the darker hues shaded away into dim and distinct obscurity.

Excited yells from my companions on the other crag recalled me to the
living aspect of the scene. Jones was leaning far down in a niche, at
seeming great hazard of life, yelling with all the power of his strong
lungs. Frank stood still farther out on a cracked point that made me
tremble, and his yell reenforced Jones's. From far below rolled up a
chorus of thrilling bays and yelps, and Jim's call, faint, but distinct
on that wonderfully thin air, with its unmistakable note of warning.

Then on the slide I saw a lion headed for the rim wall and climbing
fast. I added my exultant cry to the medley, and I stretched my arms
wide to that illimitable void and gloried in a moment full to the brim
of the tingling joy of existence. I did not consider how painful it
must have been to the toiling lion. It was only the spell of wild
environment, of perilous yellow crags, of thin, dry air, of voice of
man and dog, of the stinging expectation of sharp action, of life.

I watched the lion growing bigger and bigger. I saw Don and Sounder run
from the pinyon into the open slide, and heard their impetuous burst of
wild yelps as they saw their game. Then Jones's clarion yell made me
bound for my horse. I reached him, was about to mount, when Moze came
trotting toward me. I caught the old gladiator. When he heard the
chorus from below, he plunged like a mad bull. With both arms round him
I held on. I vowed never to let him get down that slide. He howled and
tore, but I held on. My big black horse with ears laid back stood like
a rock.

I heard the pattering of little sliding rocks below; stealthy padded
footsteps and hard panting breaths, almost like coughs; then the lion
passed out of the slide not twenty feet away. He saw us, and sprang
into the pinyon scrub with the leap of a scared deer.

Samson himself could no longer have held Moze. Away he darted with his
sharp, angry bark. I flung myself upon Satan and rode out to see Jones
ahead and Frank flashing through the green on the white horse.

At the end of the pinyon thicket Satan overhauled Jones's bay, and we
entered the open forest together. We saw Frank glinting across the dark
pines.

"Hi! Hi!" yelled the Colonel.

No need was there to whip or spur those magnificent horses. They were
fresh; the course was open, and smooth as a racetrack, and the
impelling chorus of the hounds was in full blast. I gave Satan a loose
rein, and he stayed neck and neck with the bay. There was not a log,
nor a stone, nor a gully. The hollows grew wider and shallower as we
raced along, and presently disappeared altogether. The lion was running
straight from the canyon, and the certainty that he must sooner or
later take to a tree, brought from me a yell of irresistible wild joy.

"Hi! Hi! Hi!" answered Jones.

The whipping wind with its pine-scented fragrance, warm as the breath
of summer, was intoxicating as wine. The huge pines, too kingly for
close communion with their kind, made wide arches under which the
horses stretched out long and low, with supple, springy, powerful
strides. Frank's yell rang clear as a bell. We saw him curve to the
right, and took his yell as a signal for us to cut across. Then we
began to close in on him, and to hear more distinctly the baying of the
hounds.

"Hi! Hi! Hi! Hi!" bawled Jones, and his great trumpet voice rolled down
the forest glades.

"Hi! Hi! Hi! Hi!" I screeched, in wild recognition of the spirit of the
moment.

Fast as they were flying, the bay and the black responded to our cries,
and quickened, strained and lengthened under us till the trees sped by
in blurs.

There, plainly in sight ahead ran the hounds, Don leading, Sounder
next, and Moze not fifty yards, behind a desperately running lion.

There are all-satisfying moments of life. That chase through the open
forest, under the stately pines, with the wild, tawny quarry in plain
sight, and the glad staccato yelps of the hounds filling my ears and
swelling my heart, with the splendid action of my horse carrying me on
the wings of the wind, was glorious answer and fullness to the call and
hunger of a hunter's blood.

But as such moments must be, they were brief. The lion leaped
gracefully into the air, splintering the bark from a pine fifteen feet
up, and crouched on a limb. The hounds tore madly round the tree.

"Full-grown female," said Jones calmly, as we dismounted, "and she's
ours. We'll call her Kitty."

Kitty was a beautiful creature, long, slender, glossy, with white belly
and black-tipped ears and tail. She did not resemble the heavy,
grim-faced brute that always hung in the air of my dreams. A low,
brooding menacing murmur, that was not a snarl nor a growl, came from
her. She watched the dogs with bright, steady eyes, and never so much
as looked at us.

The dogs were worth attention, even from us, who certainly did not need
to regard them from her personally hostile point of view. Don stood
straight up, with his forepaws beating the air; he walked on his hind
legs like the trained dog in the circus; he yelped continuously, as if
it agonized him to see the lion safe out of his reach. Sounder had lost
his identity. Joy had unhinged his mind and had made him a dog of
double personality. He had always been unsocial with me, never
responding to my attempts to caress him, but now he leaped into my arms
and licked my face. He had always hated Jones till that moment, when he
raised his paws to his master's breast. And perhaps more remarkable,
time and time again he sprang up at Satan's nose, whether to bite him
or kiss him, I could not tell. Then old Moze, he of Grand Canyon fame,
made the delirious antics of his canine fellows look cheap. There was a
small, dead pine that had fallen against a drooping branch of the tree
Kitty had taken refuge in, and up this narrow ladder Moze began to
climb. He was fifteen feet up, and Kitty had begun to shift uneasily,
when Jones saw him.

"Hyar! you wild coon hyar! Git out of that! Come down! Come down!"

But Jones might have been in the bottom of the canyon for all Moze
heard or cared. Jones removed his coat, carefully coiled his lasso, and
began to go hand and knee up the leaning pine.

"Hyar! dad-blast you, git down!" yelled Jones, and he kicked Moze off.
The persistent hound returned, and followed Jones to a height of twenty
feet, where again he was thrust off.

"Hold him, one of you!" called Jones.

"Not me," said Frank, "I'm lookin' out for myself."

 "Same here," I cried, with a camera in one hand and a rifle in
the other. "Let Moze climb if he likes."

Climb he did, to be kicked off again. But he went back. It was a way he
had. Jones at last recognized either his own waste of time or Moze's
greatness, for he desisted, allowing the hound to keep close after him.

The cougar, becoming uneasy, stood up, reached for another limb,
climbed out upon it, and peering down, spat hissingly at Jones. But he
kept steadily on with Moze close on his heels. I snapped my camera on
them when Kitty was not more than fifteen feet above them. As Jones
reached the snag which upheld the leaning tree, she ran out on her
branch, and leaped into an adjoining pine. It was a good long jump, and
the weight of the animal bent the limb alarmingly.

Jones backed down, and laboriously began to climb the other tree. As
there were no branches low down, he had to hug the trunk with arms and
legs as a boy climbs. His lasso hampered his progress. When the slow
ascent was accomplished up to the first branch, Kitty leaped back into
her first perch. Strange to say Jones did not grumble; none of his
characteristic impatience manifested itself. I supposed with him all
the exasperating waits, vexatious obstacles, were little things
preliminary to the real work, to which he had now come. He was calm and
deliberate, and slid down the pine, walked back to the leaning tree,
and while resting a moment, shook his lasso at Kitty. This action
fitted him, somehow; it was so compatible with his grim assurance.

To me, and to Frank, also, for that matter, it was all new and
startling, and we were as excited as the dogs. We kept continually
moving about, Frank mounted, and I afoot, to get good views of the
cougar. When she crouched as if to leap, it was almost impossible to
remain under the tree, and we kept moving.

Once more Jones crept up on hands and knees. Moze walked the slanting
pine like a rope performer. Kitty began to grow restless. This time she
showed both anger and impatience, but did not yet appear frightened.
She growled low and deep, opened her mouth and hissed, and swung her
tufted tail faster and faster.

"Look out, Jones! look out!" yelled Frank warningly.

Jones, who had reached the trunk of the tree, halted and slipped round
it, placing it between him and Kitty. She had advanced on her limb, a
few feet above Jones, and threateningly hung over.

Jones backed down a little till she crossed to another branch, then he
resumed his former position.

"Watch below," called he.

Hardly any doubt was there as to how we watched. Frank and I were all
eyes, except very high and throbbing hearts. When Jones thrashed the
lasso at Kitty we both yelled. She ran out on the branch and jumped.
This time she fell short of her point, clutched a dead snag, which
broke, letting her through a bushy branch from where she hung head
downward. For a second she swung free, then reaching toward the tree
caught it with front paws, ran down like a squirrel, and leaped off
when thirty feet from the ground. The action was as rapid as it was
astonishing.

Like a yellow rubber ball she bounded up, and fled with the yelping
hounds at her heels. The chase was short. At the end of a hundred yards
Moze caught up with her and nipped her. She whirled with savage
suddenness, and lunged at Moze, but he cunningly eluded the vicious
paws. Then she sought safety in another pine.

Frank, who was as quick as the hounds, almost rode them down in his
eagerness. While Jones descended from his perch, I led the two horses
down the forest.

This time the cougar was well out on a low spreading branch. Jones
conceived the idea of raising the loop of his lasso on a long pole, but
as no pole of sufficient length could be found, he tried from the back
of his horse. The bay walked forward well enough; when, however, he got
under the beast and heard her growl, he reared and almost threw Jones.
Frank's horse could not be persuaded to go near the tree. Satan evinced
no fear of the cougar, and without flinching carried Jones directly
beneath the limb and stood with ears back and forelegs stiff.

"Look at that! look at that!" cried Jones, as the wary cougar pawed the
loop aside. Three successive times did Jones have the lasso just ready
to drop over her neck, when she flashed a yellow paw and knocked the
noose awry. Then she leaped far out over the waiting dogs, struck the
ground with a light, sharp thud, and began to run with the speed of a
deer. Frank's cowboy training now stood us in good stead. He was off
like a shot and turned the cougar from the direction of the canyon.
Jones lost not a moment in pursuit, and I, left with Jones's badly
frightened bay, got going in time to see the race, but not to assist.
For several hundred yards Kitty made the hounds appear slow. Don, being
swiftest, gained on her steadily toward the close of the dash, and
presently was running under her upraised tail. On the next jump he
nipped her. She turned and sent him reeling. Sounder came flying up to
bite her flank, and at the same moment fierce old Moze closed in on
her. The next instant a struggling mass whirled on the ground. Jones
and Frank, yelling like demons, almost rode over it. The cougar broke
from her assailants, and dashing away leaped on the first tree. It was
a half-dead pine with short snags low down and a big branch extending
out over a ravine.

"I think we can hold her now," said Jones. The tree proved to be a most
difficult one to climb. Jones made several ineffectual attempts before
he reached the first limb, which broke, giving him a hard fall. This
calmed me enough to make me take notice of Jones's condition. He was
wet with sweat and covered with the black pitch from the pines; his
shirt was slit down the arm, and there was blood on his temple and his
hand. The next attempt began by placing a good-sized log against the
tree, and proved to be the necessary help. Jones got hold of the second
limb and pulled himself up.

As he kept on, Kitty crouched low as if to spring upon him. Again Frank
and I sent warning calls to him, but he paid no attention to us or to
the cougar, and continued to climb. This worried Kitty as much as it
did us. She began to move on the snags, stepping from one to the other,
every moment snarling at Jones, and then she crawled up. The big branch
evidently took her eye. She tried several times to climb up to it, but
small snags close together made her distrustful. She walked uneasily
out upon two limbs, and as they bent with her weight she hurried back.
Twice she did this, each time looking up, showing her desire to leap to
the big branch. Her distress became plainly evident; a child could have
seen that she feared she would fall. At length, in desperation, she
spat at Jones, then ran out and leaped. She all but missed the branch,
but succeeded in holding to it and swinging to safety. Then she turned
to her tormentor, and gave utterance to most savage sounds. As she did
not intimidate her pursuer, she retreated out on the branch, which
sloped down at a deep angle, and crouched on a network of small limbs.

When Jones had worked up a little farther, he commanded a splendid
position for his operations. Kitty was somewhat below him in a
desirable place, yet the branch she was on joined the tree considerably
above his head. Jones cast his lasso. It caught on a snag. Throw after
throw he made with like result. He recoiled and recast nineteen times,
to my count, when Frank made a suggestion.

"Rope those dead snags an' break them off."

This practical idea Jones soon carried out, which left him a clear
path. The next fling of the lariat caused the cougar angrily to shake
her head. Again Jones sent the noose flying. She pulled it off her back
and bit it savagely.

Though very much excited, I tried hard to keep sharp, keen faculties
alert so as not to miss a single detail of the thrilling scene. But I
must have failed, for all of a sudden I saw how Jones was standing in
the tree, something I had not before appreciated. He had one hand hold,
which he could not use while recoiling the lasso, and his feet rested
upon a precariously frail-appearing, dead snag. He made eleven casts of
the lasso, all of which bothered Kitty, but did not catch her. The
twelfth caught her front paw. Jones jerked so quickly and hard that he
almost lost his balance, and he pulled the noose off. Patiently he
recoiled the lasso.

"That's what I want. If I can get her front paw she's ours. My idea is
to pull her off the limb, let her hang there, and then lasso her hind
legs."

Another cast, the unlucky thirteenth, settled the loop perfectly round
her neck. She chewed on the rope with her front teeth and appeared to
have difficulty in holding it.

"Easy! Easy! Ooze thet rope! Easy!" yelled the cowboy.

Cautiously Jones took up the slack and slowly tightened the nose, then
with a quick jerk, fastened it close round her neck.

We heralded this achievement with yells of triumph that made the forest
ring.

Our triumph was short-lived. Jones had hardly moved when the cougar
shot straight out into the air. The lasso caught on a branch, hauling
her up short, and there she hung in mid-air, writhing, struggling and
giving utterance to sounds terribly human. For several seconds she
swung, slowly descending, in which frenzied time I, with ruling passion
uppermost, endeavored to snap a picture of her.

The unintelligible commands Jones was yelling to Frank and me ceased
suddenly with a sharp crack of breaking wood. Then crash! Jones fell
out of the tree. The lasso streaked up, ran over the limb, while the
cougar dropped pell-mell into the bunch of waiting, howling dogs.

The next few moments it was impossible for me to distinguish what
actually transpired. A great flutter of leaves whirled round a swiftly
changing ball of brown and black and yellow, from which came a fiendish
clamor.

Then I saw Jones plunge down the ravine and bounce here and there in
mad efforts to catch the whipping lasso. He was roaring in a way that
made all his former yells merely whispers. Starting to run, I tripped
on a root, fell prone on my face into the ravine, and rolled over and
over until I brought up with a bump against a rock.

What a tableau rivited my gaze! It staggered me so I did not think of
my camera. I stood transfixed not fifteen feet from the cougar. She sat
on her haunches with body well drawn back by the taut lasso to which
Jones held tightly. Don was standing up with her, upheld by the hooked
claws in his head. The cougar had her paws outstretched; her mouth open
wide, showing long, cruel, white fangs; she was trying to pull the head
of the dog to her. Don held back with all his power, and so did Jones.
Moze and Sounder were tussling round her body. Suddenly both ears of
the dog pulled out, slit into ribbons. Don had never uttered a sound,
and once free, he made at her again with open jaws. One blow sent him
reeling and stunned. Then began again that wrestling whirl.

"Beat off the dogs! Beat off the dogs!" roared Jones. "She'll kill
them! She'll kill them!"

Frank and I seized clubs and ran in upon the confused furry mass,
forgetful of peril to ourselves. In the wild contagion of such a savage
moment the minds of men revert wholly to primitive instincts. We swung
our clubs and yelled; we fought all over the bottom of the ravine,
crashing through the bushes, over logs and stones. I actually felt the
soft fur of the cougar at one fleeting instant. The dogs had the
strength born of insane fighting spirit. At last we pulled them to
where Don lay, half-stunned, and with an arm tight round each, I held
them while Frank turned to help Jones.

The disheveled Jones, bloody, grim as death, his heavy jaw locked,
stood holding to the lasso. The cougar, her sides shaking with short,
quick pants, crouched low on the ground with eyes of purple fire.

"For God's sake, get a half-hitch on the saplin'!" called the cowboy.

His quick grasp of the situation averted a tragedy. Jones was nearly
exhausted, even as he was beyond thinking for himself or giving up. The
cougar sprang, a yellow, frightful flash. Even as she was in the air,
Jones took a quick step to one side and dodged as he threw his lasso
round the sapling. She missed him, but one alarmingly outstretched paw
grazed his shoulder. A twist of Jones's big hand fastened the
lasso--and Kitty was a prisoner. While she fought, rolled, twisted,
bounded, whirled, writhed with hissing, snarling fury, Jones sat
mopping the sweat and blood from his face.

Kitty's efforts were futile; she began to weaken from the choking.
Jones took another rope, and tightening a noose around her back paws,
which he lassoed as she rolled over, he stretched her out. She began to
contract her supple body, gave a savage, convulsive spring, which
pulled Jones flat on the ground, then the terrible wrestling started
again. The lasso slipped over her back paws. She leaped the whole
length of the other lasso. Jones caught it and fastened it more
securely; but this precaution proved unnecessary, for she suddenly sank
down either exhausted or choked, and gasped with her tongue hanging
out. Frank slipped the second noose over her back paws, and Jones did
likewise with a third lasso over her right front paw. These lassoes
Jones tied to different saplings.

"Now you are a good Kitty," said Jones, kneeling by her. He took a pair
of clippers from his hip pocket, and grasping a paw in his powerful
fist he calmly clipped the points of the dangerous claws. This done, he
called to me to get the collar and chain that were tied to his saddle.
I procured them and hurried back. Then the old buffalo hunter loosened
the lasso which was round her neck, and as soon as she could move her
head, he teased her to bite a club. She broke two good sticks with her
sharp teeth, but the third, being solid, did not break. While she was
chewing it Jones forced her head back and placed his heavy knee on the
club. In a twinkling he had strapped the collar round her neck. The
chain he made fast to the sapling. After removing the club from her
mouth he placed his knee on her neck, and while her head was in this
helpless position he dexterously slipped a loop of thick copper wire
over her nose, pushed it back and twisted it tight Following this, all
done with speed and precision, he took from his pocket a piece of steel
rod, perhaps one-quarter of an inch thick, and five inches long. He
pushed this between Kitty's jaws, just back of her great white fangs,
and in front of the copper wire. She had been shorn of her sharp
weapons; she was muzzled, bound, helpless, an object to pity.

Lastly Jones removed the three lassoes. Kitty slowly gathered her
lissom body in a ball and lay panting, with the same brave wildfire in
her eyes. Jones stroked her black-tipped ears and ran his hand down her
glossy fur. All the time he had kept up a low monotone, talking to her
in the strange language he used toward animals. Then he rose to his
feet.

"We'll go back to camp now, and get a pack, saddle and horse," he said.
"She'll be safe here. We'll rope her again, tie her up, throw her over
a pack-saddle, and take her to camp."

To my utter bewilderment the hounds suddenly commenced fighting among
themselves. Of all the vicious bloody dog-fights I ever saw that was
the worst. I began to belabor them with a club, and Frank sprang to my
assistance. Beating had no apparent effect. We broke a dozen sticks,
and then Frank grappled with Moze and I with Sounder. Don kept on
fighting either one till Jones secured him. Then we all took a rest,
panting and weary.

"What's it mean?" I ejaculated, appealing to Jones.

"Jealous, that's all. Jealous over the lion."

We all remained seated, men and hounds, a sweaty, dirty, bloody, ragged
group. I discovered I was sorry for Kitty. I forgot all the carcasses
of deer and horses, the brutality of this species of cat; and even
forgot the grim, snarling yellow devil that had leaped at me. Kitty was
beautiful and helpless. How brave she was, too! No sign of fear shone
in her wonderful eyes, only hate, defiance, watchfulness.

On the ride back to camp Jones expressed himself thus: "How happy I am
that I can keep this lion and the others we are going to capture, for
my own. When I was in the Yellowstone Park I did not get to keep one of
the many I captured. The military officials took them from me."

When we reached camp Lawson was absent, but fortunately Old Baldy
browsed near at hand, and was easily caught. Frank said he would rather
take Old Baldy for the cougar than any other horse we had. Leaving me
in camp, he and Jones rode off to fetch Kitty.

About five o'clock they came trotting up through the forest with Jim,
who had fallen in with them on the way. Old Baldy had remained true to
his fame--nothing, not even a cougar bothered him. Kitty, evidently no
worse for her experience, was chained to a pine tree about fifty feet
from the campfire.

Wallace came riding wearily in, and when he saw the captive, he greeted
us with an exultant yell. He got there just in time to see the first
special features of Kitty's captivity. The hounds surrounded her, and
could not be called off. We had to beat them. Whereupon the six jealous
canines fell to fighting among themselves, and fought so savagely as to
be deaf to our cries and insensible to blows. They had to be torn apart
and chained.

About six o'clock Lawson loped in with the horses. Of course he did not
know we had a cougar, and no one seemed interested enough to inform
him. Perhaps only Frank and I thought of it; but I saw a merry snap in
Frank's eyes, and kept silent. Kitty had hidden behind the pine tree.
Lawson, astride Jones' pack horse, a crochety animal, reined in just
abreast of the tree, and leisurely threw his leg over the saddle. Kitty
leaped out to the extent of her chain, and fairly exploded in a
frightful cat-spit.

Lawson had stated some time before that he was afraid of cougars, which
was a weakness he need not have divulged in view of what happened. The
horse plunged, throwing him ten feet, and snorting in terror, stampeded
with the rest of the bunch and disappeared among the pines.

"Why the hell didn't you tell a feller?" reproachfully growled the
Arizonian. Frank and Jim held each other upright, and the rest of us
gave way to as hearty if not as violent mirth.

We had a gay supper, during which Kitty sat her pine and watched our
every movement.

"We'll rest up for a day or two," said Jones "Things have commenced to
come our way. If I'm not mistaken we'll bring an old Tom alive into
camp. But it would never do for us to get a big Tom in the fix we had
Kitty to-day. You see, I wanted to lasso her front paw, pull her off
the limb, tie my end of the lasso to the tree, and while she hung I'd
go down and rope her hind paws. It all went wrong to-day, and was as
tough a job as I ever handled."

Not until late next morning did Lawson corral all the horses. That day
we lounged in camp mending broken bridles, saddles, stirrups, lassoes,
boots, trousers, leggins, shirts and even broken skins.

During this time I found Kitty a most interesting study. She reminded
me of an enormous yellow kitten. She did not appear wild or untamed
until approached. Then she slowly sank down, laid back her ears, opened
her mouth and hissed and spat, at the same time throwing both paws out
viciously. Kitty may have rested, but did not sleep. At times she
fought her chain, tugging and straining at it, and trying to bite it
through. Everything in reach she clawed, particularly the bark of the
tree. Once she tried to hang herself by leaping over a low limb. When
any one walked by her she crouched low, evidently imagining herself
unseen. If one of us walked toward her, or looked at her, she did not
crouch. At other times, noticeably when no one was near, she would roll
on her back and extend all four paws in the air. Her actions were
beautiful, soft, noiseless, quick and subtle.

The day passed, as all days pass in camp, swiftly and pleasantly, and
twilight stole down upon us round the ruddy fire. The wind roared in
the pines and lulled to repose; the lonesome, friendly coyote barked;
the bells on the hobbled horses jingled sweetly; the great watch stars
blinked out of the blue.

The red glow of the burning logs lighted up Jones's calm, cold face.
Tranquil, unalterable and peaceful it seemed; yet beneath the peace I
thought I saw a suggestion of wild restraint, of mystery, of unslaked
life.

Strangely enough, his next words confirmed my last thought.

"For forty years I've had an ambition. It's to get possession of an
island in the Pacific, somewhere between Vancouver and Alaska, and then
go to Siberia and capture a lot of Russian sables. I'd put them on the
island and cross them with our silver foxes. I'm going to try it next
year if I can find the time."

The ruling passion and character determine our lives. Jones was
sixty-three years old, yet the thing that had ruled and absorbed his
mind was still as strong as the longing for freedom in Kitty's wild
heart.

Hours after I had crawled into my sleeping-bag, in the silence of night
I heard her working to get free. In darkness she was most active,
restless, intense. I heard the clink of her chain, the crack of her
teeth, the scrape of her claws. How tireless she was. I recalled the
wistful light in her eyes that saw, no doubt, far beyond the campfire
to the yellow crags, to the great downward slopes, to freedom. I
slipped my elbow out of the bag and raised myself. Dark shadows were
hovering under the pines. I saw Kitty's eyes gleam like sparks, and I
seemed to see in them the hate, the fear, the terror she had of the
clanking thing that bound her!

I shivered, perhaps from the cold night wind which moaned through the
pines; I saw the stars glittering pale and far off, and under their wan
light the still, set face of Jones, and blanketed forms of my other
companions.

The last thing I remembered before dropping into dreamless slumber was
hearing a bell tinkle in the forest, which I recognized as the one I
had placed on Satan.



CHAPTER 17.

CONCLUSION

Kitty was not the only cougar brought into camp alive. The ensuing days
were fruitful of cougars and adventure. There were more wild rides to
the music of the baying hounds, and more heart-breaking canyon slopes
to conquer, and more swinging, tufted tails and snarling savage faces
in the pinyons. Once again, I am sorry to relate, I had to glance down
the sights of the little Remington, and I saw blood on the stones.
Those eventful days sped by all too soon.

When the time for parting came it took no little discussion to decide
on the quickest way of getting me to a railroad. I never fully
appreciated the inaccessibility of the Siwash until the question arose
of finding a way out. To return on our back trail would require two
weeks, and to go out by the trail north to Utah meant half as much time
over the same kind of desert. Lawson came to our help, however, with
the information that an occasional prospector or horse hunter crossed
the canyon from the Saddle, where a trail led down to the river.

"I've heard the trail is a bad one," said Lawson, "an' though I never
seen it, I reckon it could be found. After we get to the Saddle we'll
build two fires on one of the high points an' keep them burnin' well
after dark. If Mr. Bass, who lives on the other side, sees the fires
he'll come down his trail next mornin' an' meet us at the river. He
keeps a boat there. This is takin' a chance, but I reckon it's worth
while."

So it was decided that Lawson and Frank would try to get me out by way
of the canyon; Wallace intended to go by the Utah route, and Jones was
to return at once to his range and his buffalo.

That night round the campfire we talked over the many incidents of the
hunt. Jones stated he had never in his life come so near getting his
"everlasting" as when the big bay horse tripped on a canyon slope and
rolled over him. Notwithstanding the respect with which we regarded his
statement we held different opinions. Then, with the unfailing optimism
of hunters, we planned another hunt for the next year.

"I'll tell you what," said Jones. "Up in Utah there's a wild region
called Pink Cliffs. A few poor sheep-herders try to raise sheep in the
valleys. They wouldn't be so poor if it was not for the grizzly and
black bears that live on the sheep. We'll go up there, find a place
where grass and water can be had, and camp. We'll notify the
sheep-herders we are there for business. They'll be only too glad to
hustle in with news of a bear, and we can get the hounds on the trail
by sun-up. I'll have a dozen hounds then, maybe twenty, and all
trained. We'll put every black bear we chase up a tree, and we'll rope
and tie him. As to grizzlies--well, I'm not saying so much. They can't
climb trees, and they are not afraid of a pack of hounds. If we rounded
up a grizzly, got him cornered, and threw a rope on him--there'd be
some fun, eh, Jim?"

"Shore there would," Jim replied.

On the strength of this I stored up food for future thought and thus
reconciled myself to bidding farewell to the purple canyons and shaggy
slopes of Buckskin Mountain.

At five o'clock next morning we were all stirring. Jones yelled at the
hounds and untangled Kitty's chain. Jim was already busy with the
biscuit dough. Frank shook the frost off the saddles. Wallace was
packing. The merry jangle of bells came from the forest, and presently
Lawson appeared driving in the horses. I caught my black and saddled
him, then realizing we were soon to part I could not resist giving him
a hug.

An hour later we all stood at the head of the trail leading down into
the chasm. The east gleamed rosy red. Powell's Plateau loomed up in the
distance, and under it showed the dark-fringed dip in the rim called
the Saddle. Blue mist floated round the mesas and domes.

Lawson led the way down the trail. Frank started Old Baldy with the
pack.

"Come," he called, "be oozin' along."

I spoke the last good-by and turned Satan into the narrow trail. When I
looked back Jones stood on the rim with the fresh glow of dawn shining
on his face. The trail was steep, and claimed my attention and care,
but time and time again I gazed back. Jones waved his hand till a huge
jutting cliff walled him from view. Then I cast my eyes on the rough
descent and the wonderful void beneath me. In my mind lingered a
pleasing consciousness of my last sight of the old plainsman. He fitted
the scene; he belonged there among the silent pines and the yellow
crags.





