
THE RAINBOW TRAIL, a Romance

by ZANE GREY.




CONTENTS.


    FOREWORD


    CHAPTER.

    I.     RED LAKE.

    II.    THE SAGI.

    III.   KAYENTA.

    IV.    NEW FRIENDS.

    V.     ON THE TRAIL.

    VI.    IN THE HIDDEN VALLEY.

    VII.   SAGO-LILIES.

    VIII.  THE HOGAN OF NAS TA BEGA.

    IX.    IN THE DESERT CRUCIBLE.

    X.     STONEBRIDGE.

    XI.    AFTER THE TRIAL.

    XII.   THE REVELATION.

    XIII.  THE STORY OF SURPRISE VALLEY.

    XIV.   THE NAVAJO.

    XV.    WILD JUSTICE.

    XVI.   SURPRISE VALLEY.

    XVII.  THE TRAIL TO NONNEZOSHE.

    XVIII. AT THE FOOT OF THE RAINBOW.

    XIX.   THE GRAND CANYON OF THE COLORADO.

    XX.    WILLOW SPRINGS.


    EPILOGUE




FOREWORD


The spell of the desert comes back to me, as it always will come. I see
the veils, like purple smoke, in the cañon, and I feel the silence. And
it seems that again I must try to pierce both and to get at the strange
wild life of the last American wilderness--wild still, almost, as it
ever was.


While this romance is an independent story, yet readers of "Riders of
the Purple Sage" will find in it an answer to a question often asked.

I wish to say also this story has appeared serially in a different
form in one of the monthly magazines under the title of "The Desert
Crucible."             ZANE GREY.

             June, 1915.





THE RAINBOW TRAIL




I. RED LAKE


Shefford halted his tired horse and gazed with slowly realizing eyes.

A league-long slope of sage rolled and billowed down to Red Lake, a dry
red basin, denuded and glistening, a hollow in the desert, a lonely and
desolate door to the vast, wild, and broken upland beyond.

All day Shefford had plodded onward with the clear horizon-line a thing
unattainable; and for days before that he had ridden the wild bare flats
and climbed the rocky desert benches. The great colored reaches and
steps had led endlessly onward and upward through dim and deceiving
distance.

A hundred miles of desert travel, with its mistakes and lessons and
intimations, had not prepared him for what he now saw. He beheld what
seemed a world that knew only magnitude. Wonder and awe fixed his gaze,
and thought remained aloof. Then that dark and unknown northland flung
a menace at him. An irresistible call had drawn him to this seamed and
peaked border of Arizona, this broken battlemented wilderness of Utah
upland; and at first sight they frowned upon him, as if to warn him not
to search for what lay hidden beyond the ranges. But Shefford thrilled
with both fear and exultation. That was the country which had been
described to him. Far across the red valley, far beyond the ragged line
of black mesa and yellow range, lay the wild cañon with its haunting
secret.

Red Lake must be his Rubicon. Either he must enter the unknown to seek,
to strive, to find, or turn back and fail and never know and be always
haunted. A friend's strange story had prompted his singular journey; a
beautiful rainbow with its mystery and promise had decided him. Once in
his life he had answered a wild call to the kingdom of adventure
within him, and once in his life he had been happy. But here in the
horizon-wide face of that up-flung and cloven desert he grew cold; he
faltered even while he felt more fatally drawn.

As if impelled Shefford started his horse down the sandy trail, but he
checked his former far-reaching gaze. It was the month of April, and the
waning sun lost heat and brightness. Long shadows crept down the slope
ahead of him and the scant sage deepened its gray. He watched the
lizards shoot like brown streaks across the sand, leaving their slender
tracks; he heard the rustle of pack-rats as they darted into their
brushy homes; the whir of a low-sailing hawk startled his horse.

Like ocean waves the slope rose and fell, its hollows choked with sand,
its ridge-tops showing scantier growth of sage and grass and weed. The
last ridge was a sand-dune, beautifully ribbed and scalloped and lined
by the wind, and from its knife-sharp crest a thin wavering sheet of
sand blew, almost like smoke. Shefford wondered why the sand looked red
at a distance, for here it seemed almost white. It rippled everywhere,
clean and glistening, always leading down.

Suddenly Shefford became aware of a house looming out of the bareness
of the slope. It dominated that long white incline. Grim, lonely,
forbidding, how strangely it harmonized with the surroundings! The
structure was octagon-shaped, built of uncut stone, and resembled a
fort. There was no door on the sides exposed to Shefford's gaze, but
small apertures two-thirds the way up probably served as windows and
port-holes. The roof appeared to be made of poles covered with red
earth.

Like a huge cold rock on a wide plain this house stood there on the
windy slope. It was an outpost of the trader Presbrey, of whom Shefford
had heard at Flagstaff and Tuba. No living thing appeared in the
limit of Shefford's vision. He gazed shudderingly at the unwelcoming
habitation, at the dark eyelike windows, at the sweep of barren slope
merging into the vast red valley, at the bold, bleak bluffs. Could any
one live here? The nature of that sinister valley forbade a home there,
and the spirit of the place hovered in the silence and space. Shefford
thought irresistibly of how his enemies would have consigned him to
just such a hell. He thought bitterly and mockingly of the narrow
congregation that had proved him a failure in the ministry, that had
repudiated his ideas of religion and immortality and God, that had
driven him, at the age of twenty-four, from the calling forced upon him
by his people. As a boy he had yearned to make himself an artist; his
family had made him a clergyman; fate had made him a failure. A failure
only so far in his life, something urged him to add--for in the lonely
days and silent nights of the desert he had experienced a strange birth
of hope. Adventure had called him, but it was a vague and spiritual
hope, a dream of promise, a nameless attainment that fortified his
wilder impulse.

As he rode around a corner of the stone house his horse snorted and
stopped. A lean, shaggy pony jumped at sight of him, almost displacing
a red long-haired blanket that covered an Indian saddle. Quick thuds
of hoofs in sand drew Shefford's attention to a corral made of peeled
poles, and here he saw another pony.

Shefford heard subdued voices. He dismounted and walked to an open door.
In the dark interior he dimly descried a high counter, a stairway, a
pile of bags of flour, blankets, and silver-ornamented objects, but the
persons he had heard were not in that part of the house. Around another
corner of the octagon-shaped wall he found another open door, and
through it saw goat-skins and a mound of dirty sheep-wool, black and
brown and white. It was light in this part of the building. When he
crossed the threshold he was astounded to see a man struggling with
a girl--an Indian girl. She was straining back from him, panting, and
uttering low guttural sounds. The man's face was corded and dark with
passion. This scene affected Shefford strangely. Primitive emotions were
new to him.

Before Shefford could speak the girl broke loose and turned to flee. She
was an Indian and this place was the uncivilized desert, but Shefford
knew terror when he saw it. Like a dog the man rushed after her. It was
instinct that made Shefford strike, and his blow laid the man flat. He
lay stunned a moment, then raised himself to a sitting posture, his
hand to his face, and the gaze he fixed upon Shefford seemed to combine
astonishment and rage.

"I hope you're not Presbrey," said Shefford, slowly. He felt awkward,
not sure of himself.

The man appeared about to burst into speech, but repressed it. There
was blood on his mouth and his hand. Hastily he scrambled to his feet.
Shefford saw this man's amaze and rage change to shame. He was tall and
rather stout; he had a smooth tanned face, soft of outline, with a weak
chin; his eyes were dark. The look of him and his corduroys and his soft
shoes gave Shefford an impression that he was not a man who worked hard.
By contrast with the few other worn and rugged desert men Shefford had
met this stranger stood out strikingly. He stooped to pick up a soft
felt hat and, jamming it on his head, he hurried out. Shefford followed
him and watched him from the door. He went directly to the corral,
mounted the pony, and rode out, to turn down the slope toward the south.
When he reached the level of the basin, where evidently the sand was
hard, he put the pony to a lope and gradually drew away.

"Well!" ejaculated Shefford. He did not know what to make of this
adventure. Presently he became aware that the Indian girl was sitting on
a roll of blankets near the wall. With curious interest Shefford studied
her appearance. She had long, raven-black hair, tangled and disheveled,
and she wore a soiled white band of cord above her brow. The color of
her face struck him; it was dark, but not red nor bronzed; it almost
had a tinge of gold. Her profile was clear-cut, bold, almost stern. Long
black eyelashes hid her eyes. She wore a tight-fitting waist garment of
material resembling velveteen. It was ripped along her side, exposing
a skin still more richly gold than that of her face. A string of silver
ornaments and turquoise-and-white beads encircled her neck, and it moved
gently up and down with the heaving of her full bosom. Her skirt was
some gaudy print goods, torn and stained and dusty. She had little feet,
incased in brown moccasins, fitting like gloves and buttoning over the
ankles with silver coins.

"Who was that man? Did he hurt you?" inquired Shefford, turning to gaze
down the valley where a moving black object showed on the bare sand.

"No savvy," replied the Indian girl.

"Where's the trader Presbrey?" asked Shefford.

She pointed straight down into the red valley.

"Toh," she said.

In the center of the basin lay a small pool of water shining brightly in
the sunset glow. Small objects moved around it, so small that Shefford
thought he saw several dogs led by a child. But it was the distance
that deceived him. There was a man down there watering his horses. That
reminded Shefford of the duty owing to his own tired and thirsty beast.
Whereupon he untied his pack, took off the saddle, and was about ready
to start down when the Indian girl grasped the bridle from his hand.

"Me go," she said.

He saw her eyes then, and they made her look different. They were as
black as her hair. He was puzzled to decide whether or not he thought
her handsome.

"Thanks, but I'll go," he replied, and, taking the bridle again, he
started down the slope. At every step he sank into the deep, soft sand.
Down a little way he came upon a pile of tin cans; they were everywhere,
buried, half buried, and lying loose; and these gave evidence of how
the trader lived. Presently Shefford discovered that the Indian girl
was following him with her own pony. Looking upward at her against the
light, he thought her slender, lithe, picturesque. At a distance he
liked her.

He plodded on, at length glad to get out of the drifts of sand to the
hard level floor of the valley. This, too, was sand, but dried and baked
hard, and red in color. At some season of the year this immense flat
must be covered with water. How wide it was, and empty! Shefford
experienced again a feeling that had been novel to him--and it was that
he was loose, free, unanchored, ready to veer with the wind. From the
foot of the slope the water hole had appeared to be a few hundred rods
out in the valley. But the small size of the figures made Shefford
doubt; and he had to travel many times a few hundred rods before those
figures began to grow. Then Shefford made out that they were approaching
him.

Thereafter they rapidly increased to normal proportions of man and
beast. When Shefford met them he saw a powerful, heavily built young man
leading two ponies.

"You're Mr. Presbrey, the trader?" inquired Shefford.

"Yes, I'm Presbrey, without the Mister," he replied.

"My name's Shefford. I'm knocking about on the desert. Rode from beyond
Tuba to-day."

"Glad to see you," said Presbrey. He offered his hand. He was a stalwart
man, clad in gray shirt, overalls, and boots. A shock of tumbled light
hair covered his massive head; he was tanned, but not darkly, and there
was red in his cheeks; under his shaggy eyebrows were deep, keen eyes;
his lips were hard and set, as if occasion for smiles or words was rare;
and his big, strong jaw seemed locked.

"Wish more travelers came knocking around Red Lake," he added. "Reckon
here's the jumping-off place."

"It's pretty--lonesome," said Shefford, hesitating as if at a loss for
words.

Then the Indian girl came up. Presbrey addressed her in her own
language, which Shefford did not understand. She seemed shy and would
not answer; she stood with downcast face and eyes. Presbrey spoke again,
at which she pointed down the valley, and then moved on with her pony
toward the water-hole.

Presbrey's keen eyes fixed on the receding black dot far down that oval
expanse.

"That fellow left--rather abruptly," said Shefford, constrainedly. "Who
was he?"

"His name's Willetts. He's a missionary. He rode in to-day with this
Navajo girl. He was taking her to Blue Cañon, where he lives and
teaches the Indians. I've met him only a few times. You see, not many
white men ride in here. He's the first white man I've seen in six
months, and you're the second. Both the same day!... Red Lake's getting
popular! It's queer, though, his leaving. He expected to stay all night.
There's no other place to stay. Blue Cañon is fifty miles away."

"I'm sorry to say--no, I'm not sorry, either--but I must tell you I was
the cause of Mr. Willetts leaving," replied Shefford.

"How so?" inquired the other.

Then Shefford related the incident following his arrival.

"Perhaps my action was hasty," he concluded, apologetically. "I didn't
think. Indeed, I'm surprised at myself."

Presbrey made no comment and his face was as hard to read as one of the
distant bluffs.

"But what did the man mean?" asked Shefford, conscious of a little
heat. "I'm a stranger out here. I'm ignorant of Indians--how they're
controlled. Still I'm no fool.... If Willetts didn't mean evil, at least
he was brutal."

"He was teaching her religion," replied Presbrey. His tone held faint
scorn and implied a joke, but his face did not change in the slightest.

Without understanding just why, Shefford felt his conviction justified
and his action approved. Then he was sensible of a slight shock of
wonder and disgust.

"I am--I was a minister of the Gospel," he said to Presbrey. "What you
hint seems impossible. I can't believe it."

"I didn't hint," replied Presbrey, bluntly, and it was evident that
he was a sincere, but close-mouthed, man. "Shefford, so you're a
preacher?... Did you come out here to try to convert the Indians?"

"No. I said I WAS a minister. I am no longer. I'm just a--a wanderer."

"I see. Well, the desert's no place for missionaries, but it's good for
wanderers.... Go water your horse and take him up to the corral. You'll
find some hay for him. I'll get grub ready."

Shefford went on with his horse to the pool. The water appeared thick,
green, murky, and there was a line of salty crust extending around the
margin of the pool. The thirsty horse splashed in and eagerly bent his
head. But he did not like the taste. Many times he refused to drink, yet
always lowered his nose again. Finally he drank, though not his fill.
Shefford saw the Indian girl drink from her hand. He scooped up a
handful and found it too sour to swallow. When he turned to retrace his
steps she mounted her pony and followed him.

A golden flare lit up the western sky, and silhouetted dark and lonely
against it stood the trading-post. Upon his return Shefford found the
wind rising, and it chilled him. When he reached the slope thin gray
sheets of sand were blowing low, rising, whipping, falling, sweeping
along with soft silken rustle. Sometimes the gray veils hid his boots.
It was a long, toilsome climb up that yielding, dragging ascent, and he
had already been lame and tired. By the time he had put his horse away
twilight was everywhere except in the west. The Indian girl left her
pony in the corral and came like a shadow toward the house.

Shefford had difficulty in finding the foot of the stairway. He climbed
to enter a large loft, lighted by two lamps. Presbrey was there,
kneading biscuit dough in a pan.

"Make yourself comfortable," he said.

The huge loft was the shape of a half-octagon. A door opened upon the
valley side, and here, too, there were windows. How attractive the place
was in comparison with the impressions gained from the outside! The
furnishings consisted of Indian blankets on the floor, two beds, a
desk and table, several chairs and a couch, a gun-rack full of rifles,
innumerable silver-ornamented belts, bridles, and other Indian articles
upon the walls, and in one corner a wood-burning stove with teakettle
steaming, and a great cupboard with shelves packed full of canned foods.

Shefford leaned in the doorway and looked out. Beneath him on a roll of
blankets sat the Indian girl, silent and motionless. He wondered what
was in her mind, what she would do, how the trader would treat her. The
slope now was a long slant of sheeted moving shadows of sand. Dusk had
gathered in the valley. The bluffs loomed beyond. A pale star twinkled
above. Shefford suddenly became aware of the intense nature of the
stillness about him. Yet, as he listened to this silence, he heard
an intermittent and immeasurably low moan, a fitful, mournful murmur.
Assuredly it was only the wind. Nevertheless, it made his blood run
cold. It was a different wind from that which had made music under
the eaves of his Illinois home. This was a lonely, haunting wind, with
desert hunger in it, and more which he could not name. Shefford listened
to this spirit-brooding sound while he watched night envelop the valley.
How black, how thick the mantle! Yet it brought no comforting sense
of close-folded protection, of walls of soft sleep, of a home. Instead
there was the feeling of space, of emptiness, of an infinite hall down
which a mournful wind swept streams of murmuring sand.

"Well, grub's about ready," said Presbrey.

"Got any water?" asked Shefford.

"Sure. There in the bucket. It's rain-water. I have a tank here."

Shefford's sore and blistered face felt better after he had washed off
the sand and alkali dust.

"Better not wash your face often while you're in the desert. Bad plan,"
went on Presbrey, noting how gingerly his visitor had gone about his
ablutions. "Well, come and eat."

Shefford marked that if the trader did live a lonely life he fared well.
There was more on the table than twice two men could have eaten. It was
the first time in four days that Shefford had sat at a table, and he
made up for lost opportunity.

His host's actions indicated pleasure, yet the strange, hard face never
relaxed, never changed. When the meal was finished Presbrey declined
assistance, had a generous thought of the Indian girl, who, he said,
could have a place to eat and sleep down-stairs, and then with the skill
and despatch of an accomplished housewife cleared the table, after which
work he filled a pipe and evidently prepared to listen.

It took only one question for Shefford to find that the trader was
starved for news of the outside world; and for an hour Shefford fed that
appetite, even as he had been done by. But when he had talked himself
out there seemed indication of Presbrey being more than a good listener.

"How'd you come in?" he asked, presently.

"By Flagstaff--across the Little Colorado--and through Moencopie."

"Did you stop at Moen Ave?"

"No. What place is that?"

"A missionary lives there. Did you stop at Tuba?"

"Only long enough to drink and water my horse. That was a wonderful
spring for the desert."

"You said you were a wanderer.... Do you want a job? I'll give you one."

"No, thank you, Presbrey."

"I saw your pack. That's no pack to travel with in this country. Your
horse won't last, either. Have you any money?"

"Yes, plenty of money."

"Well, that's good. Not that a white man out here would ever take a
dollar from you. But you can buy from the Indians as you go. Where are
you making for, anyhow?"

Shefford hesitated, debating in mind whether to tell his purpose or not.
His host did not press the question.

"I see. Just foot-loose and wandering around," went on Presbrey. "I can
understand how the desert appeals to you. Preachers lead easy, safe,
crowded, bound lives. They're shut up in a church with a Bible and good
people. When once in a lifetime they get loose--they break out."

"Yes, I've broken out--beyond all bounds," replied Shefford, sadly.
He seemed retrospective for a moment, unaware of the trader's keen and
sympathetic glance, and then he caught himself. "I want to see some wild
life. Do you know the country north of here?"

"Only what the Navajos tell me. And they're not much to talk. There's
a trail goes north, but I've never traveled it. It's a new trail every
time an Indian goes that way, for here the sand blows and covers old
tracks. But few Navajos ride in from the north. My trade is mostly with
Indians up and down the valley."

"How about water and grass?"

"We've had rain and snow. There's sure to be, water. Can't say about
grass, though the sheep and ponies from the north are always fat....
But, say, Shefford, if you'll excuse me for advising you--don't go
north."

"Why?" asked Shefford, and it was certain that he thrilled.

"It's unknown country, terribly broken, as you can see from here, and
there are bad Indians biding in the cañon. I've never met a man who had
been over the pass between here and Kayenta. The trip's been made, so
there must be a trail. But it's a dangerous trip for any man, let alone
a tenderfoot. You're not even packing a gun."

"What's this place Kayenta?" asked Shefford.

"It's a spring. Kayenta means Bottomless Spring. There's a little
trading-post, the last and the wildest in northern Arizona. Withers, the
trader who keeps it, hauls his supplies in from Colorado and New Mexico.
He's never come down this way. I never saw him. Know nothing of him
except hearsay. Reckon he's a nervy and strong man to hold that post. If
you want to go there, better go by way of Keams Cañon, and then around
the foot of Black Mesa. It'll be a long ride--maybe two hundred miles."

"How far straight north over the pass?"

"Can't say. Upward of seventy-five miles over rough trails, if there are
trails at all.... I've heard rumors of a fine tribe of Navajos living in
there, rich in sheep and horses. It may be true and it may not. But I do
know there are bad Indians, half-breeds and outcasts, hiding in there.
Some of them have visited me here. Bad customers! More than that,
you'll be going close to the Utah line, and the Mormons over there are
unfriendly these days."

"Why?" queried Shefford, again with that curious thrill.

"They are being persecuted by the government."

Shefford asked no more questions and his host vouchsafed no more
information on that score. The conversation lagged. Then Shefford
inquired about the Indian girl and learned that she lived up the valley
somewhere. Presbrey had never seen her before Willetts came with her
to Red Lake. And this query brought out the fact that Presbrey was
comparatively new to Red Lake and vicinity. Shefford wondered why a
lonely six months there had not made the trader old in experience.
Probably the desert did not readily give up its secrets. Moreover, this
Red Lake house was only an occasionally used branch of Presbrey's main
trading-post, which was situated at Willow Springs, fifty miles westward
over the mesa.

"I'm closing up here soon for a spell," said Presbrey, and now his
face lost its set hardness and seemed singularly changed. It was a
difference, of light and softness. "Won't be so lonesome over at Willow
Springs.... I'm being married soon."

"That's fine," replied Shefford, warmly. He was glad for the sake of
this lonely desert man. What good a wife would bring into a trader's
life!

Presbrey's naive admission, however, appeared to detach him from his
present surroundings, and with his massive head enveloped by a cloud of
smoke he lived in dreams.

Shefford respected his host's serene abstraction. Indeed, he was
grateful for silence. Not for many nights had the past impinged so
closely upon the present. The wound in his soul had not healed, and to
speak of himself made it bleed anew. Memory was too poignant; the past
was too close; he wanted to forget until he had toiled into the heart of
this forbidding wilderness--until time had gone by and he dared to face
his unquiet soul. Then he listened to the steadily rising roar of the
wind. How strange and hollow! That wind was freighted with heavy sand,
and he heard it sweep, sweep, sweep by in gusts, and then blow with
dull, steady blast against the walls. The sound was provocative of
thought. This moan and rush of wind was no dream--this presence of his
in a night-enshrouded and sand-besieged house of the lonely desert was
reality--this adventure was not one of fancy. True indeed, then, must
be the wild, strange story that had led him hither. He was going on to
seek, to strive, to find. Somewhere northward in the broken fastnesses
lay hidden a valley walled in from the world. Would they be there, those
lost fugitives whose story had thrilled him? After twelve years would
she be alive, a child grown to womanhood in the solitude of a beautiful
cañon? Incredible! Yet he believed his friend's story and he indeed
knew how strange and tragic life was. He fancied he heard her voice
on the sweeping wind. She called to him, haunted him. He admitted the
improbability of her existence, but lost nothing of the persistent
intangible hope that drove him. He believed himself a man stricken in
soul, unworthy, through doubt of God, to minister to the people who had
banished him. Perhaps a labor of Hercules, a mighty and perilous work of
rescue, the saving of this lost and imprisoned girl, would help him in
his trouble. She might be his salvation. Who could tell? Always as a boy
and as a man he had fared forth to find the treasure at the foot of the
rainbow.




II. THE SAGI


Next morning the Indian girl was gone and the tracks of her pony led
north. Shefford's first thought was to wonder if he would overtake her
on the trail; and this surprised him with the proof of how unconsciously
his resolve to go on had formed.

Presbrey made no further attempt to turn Shefford back. But he insisted
on replenishing the pack, and that Shefford take weapons. Finally
Shefford was persuaded to accept a revolver. The trader bade him good-by
and stood in the door while Shefford led his horse down the slope
toward the water-hole. Perhaps the trader believed he was watching the
departure of a man who would never return. He was still standing at the
door of the post when Shefford halted at the pool.

Upon the level floor of the valley lay thin patches of snow which
had fallen during the night. The air was biting cold, yet stimulated
Shefford while it stung him. His horse drank rather slowly and
disgustedly. Then Shefford mounted and reluctantly turned his back upon
the trading-post.

As he rode away from the pool he saw a large flock of sheep approaching.
They were very closely, even densely, packed, in a solid slow-moving
mass and coming with a precision almost like a march. This fact
surprised Shefford, for there was not an Indian in sight. Presently he
saw that a dog was leading the flock, and a little later he discovered
another dog in the rear of the sheep. They were splendid, long-haired
dogs, of a wild-looking shepherd breed. He halted his horse to watch the
procession pass by. The flock covered fully an acre of ground and the
sheep were black, white, and brown. They passed him, making a little
pattering roar on the hard-caked sand. The dogs were taking the sheep in
to water.

Shefford went on and was drawing close to the other side of the basin,
where the flat red level was broken by rising dunes and ridges, when he
espied a bunch of ponies. A shrill whistle told him that they had seen
him. They were wild, shaggy, with long manes and tails. They stopped,
threw up their heads, and watched him. Shefford certainly returned the
attention. There was no Indian with them. Presently, with a snort, the
leader, which appeared to be a stallion, trotted behind the others,
seemed to be driving them, and went clear round the band to get in the
lead again. He was taking them in to water, the same as the dogs had
taken the sheep.

These incidents were new and pleasing to Shefford. How ignorant he had
been of life in the wilderness! Once more he received subtle intimations
of what he might learn out in the open; and it was with a less weighted
heart that he faced the gateway between the huge yellow bluffs on his
left and the slow rise of ground to the black mesa on his right. He
looked back in time to see the trading-post, bleak and lonely on the
bare slope, pass out of sight behind the bluffs. Shefford felt no
fear--he really had little experience of physical fear--but it was
certain that he gritted his teeth and welcomed whatever was to come to
him. He had lived a narrow, insulated life with his mind on spiritual
things; his family and his congregation and his friends--except that
one new friend whose story had enthralled him--were people of quiet
religious habit; the man deep down in him had never had a chance. He
breathed hard as he tried to imagine the world opening to him, and
almost dared to be glad for the doubt that had sent him adrift.

The tracks of the Indian girl's pony were plain in the sand. Also there
were other tracks, not so plain, and these Shefford decided had been
made by Willetts and the girl the day before. He climbed a ridge, half
soft sand and half hard, and saw right before him, rising in striking
form, two great yellow buttes, like elephant legs. He rode between them,
amazed at their height. Then before him stretched a slowly ascending
valley, walled on one side by the black mesa and on the other by low
bluffs. For miles a dark-green growth of greasewood covered the valley,
and Shefford could see where the green thinned and failed, to give place
to sand. He trotted his horse and made good time on this stretch.

The day contrasted greatly with any he had yet experienced. Gray clouds
obscured the walls of rock a few miles to the west, and Shefford saw
squalls of snow like huge veils dropping down and spreading out. The
wind cut with the keenness of a knife. Soon he was chilled to the bone.
A squall swooped and roared down upon him, and the wind that bore the
driving white pellets of snow, almost like hail, was so freezing bitter
cold that the former wind seemed warm in comparison. The squall passed
as swiftly as it had come, and it left Shefford so benumbed he could not
hold the bridle. He tumbled off his horse and walked. By and by the sun
came out and soon warmed him and melted the thin layer of snow on the
sand. He was still on the trail of the Indian girl, but hers were now
the only tracks he could see.

All morning he gradually climbed, with limited view, until at last he
mounted to a point where the country lay open to his sight on all sides
except where the endless black mesa ranged on into the north. A rugged
yellow peak dominated the landscape to the fore, but it was far away.
Red and jagged country extended westward to a huge flat-topped wall of
gray rock. Lowering swift clouds swept across the sky, like drooping
mantles, and darkened the sun. Shefford built a little fire out of dead
greasewood sticks, and with his blanket round his shoulders he hung over
the blaze, scorching his clothes and hands. He had been cold before in
his life but he had never before appreciated fire. This desert blast
pierced him. The squall enveloped him, thicker and colder and windier
than the other, but, being better fortified, he did not suffer so much.
It howled away, hiding the mesa and leaving a white desert behind.
Shefford walked on, leading his horse, until the exercise and the sun
had once more warmed him.

This last squall had rendered the Indian girl's trail difficult to
follow. The snow did not quickly melt, and, besides, sheep tracks and
the tracks of horses gave him trouble, until at last he was compelled to
admit that he could not follow her any longer. A faint path or trail
led north, however, and, following that, he soon forgot the girl. Every
surmounted ridge held a surprise for him. The desert seemed never to
change in the vast whole that encompassed him, yet near him it was
always changing. From Red Lake he had seen a peaked, walled, and
canyoned country, as rough as a stormy sea; but when he rode into that
country the sharp and broken features held to the distance.

He was glad to get out of the sand. Long narrow flats, gray with grass
and dotted with patches of greasewood, and lined by low bare ridges of
yellow rock, stretched away from him, leading toward the yellow peak
that seemed never to be gained upon.

Shefford had pictures in his mind, pictures of stone walls and wild
valleys and domed buttes, all of which had been painted in colorful and
vivid words by his friend Venters. He believed he would recognize the
distinctive and remarkable landmarks Venters had portrayed, and he was
certain that he had not yet come upon one of them. This was his second
lonely day of travel and he had grown more and more susceptible to the
influence of horizon and the different prominent points. He attributed
a gradual change in his feelings to the loneliness and the increasing
wildness. Between Tuba and Flagstaff he had met Indians and an
occasional prospector and teamster. Here he was alone, and though he
felt some strange gladness, he could not help but see the difference.

He rode on during the gray, lowering, chilly day, and toward evening
the clouds broke in the west, and a setting sun shone through the
rift, burnishing the desert to red and gold. Shefford's instinctive
but deadened love of the beautiful in nature stirred into life, and the
moment of its rebirth was a melancholy and sweet one. Too late for the
artist's work, but not too late for his soul!

For a place to make camp he halted near a low area of rock that lay like
an island in a sea of grass. There was an abundance of dead greasewood
for a camp-fire, and, after searching over the rock, he found little
pools of melted snow in the depressions. He took off the saddle and
pack, watered his horse, and, hobbling him as well as his inexperience
permitted, he turned him loose on the grass.

Then while he built a fire and prepared a meal the night came down upon
him. In the lee of the rock he was well sheltered from the wind, but
the air, was bitter cold. He gathered all the dead greasewood in the
vicinity, replenished the fire, and rolled in his blanket, back to the
blaze. The loneliness and the coyotes did not bother him this night.
He was too tired and cold. He went to sleep at once and did not awaken
until the fire died out. Then he rebuilt it and went to sleep again.
Every half-hour all night long he repeated this, and was glad indeed
when the dawn broke.

The day began with misfortune. His horse was gone; it had been stolen,
or had worked out of sight, or had broken the hobbles and made off. From
a high stone ridge Shefford searched the grassy flats and slopes, all
to no purpose. Then he tried to track the horse, but this was equally
futile. He had expected disasters, and the first one did not daunt him.
He tied most of his pack in the blanket, threw the canteen across his
shoulder, and set forth, sure at least of one thing--that he was a very
much better traveler on foot than on horseback.

Walking did not afford him the leisure to study the surrounding country;
however, from time to time, when he surmounted a bench he scanned the
different landmarks that had grown familiar. It took hours of steady
walking to reach and pass the yellow peak that had been a kind of
goal. He saw many sheep trails and horse tracks in the vicinity of this
mountain, and once he was sure he espied an Indian watching him from a
bold ridge-top.

The day was bright and warm, with air so clear it magnified objects
he knew to be far away. The ascent was gradual; there were many narrow
flats connected by steps; and the grass grew thicker and longer. At noon
Shefford halted under the first cedar-tree, a lonely, dwarfed shrub that
seemed to have had a hard life. From this point the rise of ground was
more perceptible, and straggling cedars led the eye on to a purple slope
that merged into green of pinyon and pine. Could that purple be the
sage Venters had so feelingly described, or was it merely the purple of
deceiving distance? Whatever it might be, it gave Shefford a thrill and
made him think of the strange, shy, and lovely woman Venters had won out
here in this purple-sage country.

He calculated that he had ridden thirty miles the day before and had
already traveled ten miles today, and therefore could hope to be in the
pass before night. Shefford resumed his journey with too much energy and
enthusiasm to think of being tired. And he discovered presently that
the straggling cedars and the slope beyond were much closer than he
had judged them to be. He reached the sage to find it gray instead of
purple. Yet it was always purple a little way ahead, and if he half shut
his eyes it was purple near at hand. He was surprised to find that he
could not breathe freely, or it seemed so, and soon made the discovery
that the sweet, pungent, penetrating fragrance of sage and cedar had
this strange effect upon him. This was an exceedingly dry and odorous
forest, where every open space between the clumps of cedars was choked
with luxuriant sage. The pinyons were higher up on the mesa, and the
pines still higher. Shefford appeared to lose himself. There were no
trails; the black mesa on the right and the wall of stone on the left
could not be seen; but he pushed on with what was either singular
confidence or rash impulse. And he did not know whether that slope was
long or short. Once at the summit he saw with surprise that it broke
abruptly and the descent was very steep and short on that side. Through
the trees he once more saw the black mesa, rising to the dignity of a
mountain; and he had glimpses of another flat, narrow valley, this time
with a red wall running parallel with the mesa. He could not help but
hurry down to get an unobstructed view. His eagerness was rewarded by a
splendid scene, yet to his regret he could not force himself to believe
it had any relation to the pictured scenes in his mind. The valley was
half a mile wide, perhaps several miles long, and it extended in a curve
between the cedar-sloped mesa and a looming wall of red stone. There was
not a bird or a beast in sight. He found a well-defined trail, but it
had not been recently used. He passed a low structure made of peeled
logs and mud, with a dark opening like a door. It did not take him many
minutes to learn that the valley was longer than he had calculated.
He walked swiftly and steadily, in spite of the fact that the pack had
become burdensome. What lay beyond the jutting corner of the mesa had
increasing fascination for him and acted as a spur. At last he turned
the corner, only to be disappointed at sight of another cedar slope.
He had a glimpse of a single black shaft of rock rising far in the
distance, and it disappeared as his striding forward made the crest of
the slope rise toward the sky.

Again his view became restricted, and he lost the sense of a slow and
gradual uplift of rock and an increase in the scale of proportion.
Half-way up this ascent he was compelled to rest; and again the sun was
slanting low when he entered the cedar forest. Soon he was descending,
and he suddenly came into the open to face a scene that made his heart
beat thick and fast.

He saw lofty crags and cathedral spires, and a wonderful cañon winding
between huge beetling red walls. He heard the murmur of flowing water.
The trail led down to the cañon floor, which appeared to be level and
green and cut by deep washes in red earth. Could this cañon be the
mouth of Deception Pass? It bore no resemblance to any place Shefford
had heard described, yet somehow he felt rather than saw that it was the
portal to the wild vastness he had traveled so far to enter.

Not till he had descended the trail and had dropped his pack did he
realize how weary and footsore he was. Then he rested. But his eyes
roved to and fro, and his mind was active. What a wild and lonesome
spot! The low murmur of shallow water came up to him from a deep, narrow
cleft. Shadows were already making the cañon seem full of blue haze. He
saw a bare slope of stone out of which cedar-trees were growing. And as
he looked about him he became aware of a singular and very perceptible
change in the lights and shades. The sun was setting; the crags were
gold-tipped; the shadows crept upward; the sky seemed to darken swiftly;
then the gold changed to red, slowly dulled, and the grays and purples
stood out. Shefford was entranced with the beautiful changing effects,
and watched till the walls turned black and the sky grew steely and a
faint star peeped out. Then he set about the necessary camp tasks.

Dead cedars right at hand assured him a comfortable night with steady
fire; and when he had satisfied his hunger he arranged an easy seat
before the blazing logs, and gave his mind over to thought of his weird,
lonely environment.

The murmur of running water mingled in harmonious accompaniment with the
moan of the wind in the cedars--wild, sweet sounds that were balm to his
wounded spirit! They seemed a part of the silence, rather than a break
in it or a hindrance to the feeling of it. But suddenly that silence
did break to the rattle of a rock. Shefford listened, thinking some wild
animal was prowling around. He felt no alarm. Presently he heard the
sound again, and again. Then he recognized the crack of unshod hoofs
upon rock. A horse was coming down the trail. Shefford rather resented
the interruption, though he still had no alarm. He believed he was
perfectly safe. As a matter of fact, he had never in his life been
anything but safe and padded around with wool, hence, never having
experienced peril, he did not know what fear was.

Presently he saw a horse and rider come into dark prominence on the
ridge just above his camp. They were silhouetted against the starry
sky. The horseman stopped and he and his steed made a magnificent black
statue, somehow wild and strange, in Shefford's sight. Then he came on,
vanished in the darkness under the ridge, presently to emerge into the
circle of camp-fire light.

He rode to within twenty feet of Shefford and the fire. The horse was
dark, wild-looking, and seemed ready to run. The rider appeared to be an
Indian, and yet had something about him suggesting the cowboy. At once
Shefford remembered what Presbrey had said about half-breeds. A little
shock, inexplicable to Shefford, rippled over him.

He greeted his visitor, but received no answer. Shefford saw a dark,
squat figure bending forward in the saddle. The man was tense. All about
him was dark except the glint of a rifle across the saddle. The face
under the sombrero was only a shadow. Shefford kicked the fire-logs and
a brighter blaze lightened the scene. Then he saw this stranger a little
more clearly, and made out an unusually large head, broad dark face, a
sinister tight-shut mouth, and gleaming black eyes.

Those eyes were unmistakably hostile. They roved searchingly over
Shefford's pack and then over his person. Shefford felt for the gun that
Presbrey had given him. But it was gone. He had left it back where he
had lost his horse, and had not thought of it since. Then a strange,
slow-coming cold agitation possessed Shefford. Something gripped his
throat.

Suddenly Shefford was stricken at a menacing movement on the part of
the horseman. He had drawn a gun. Shefford saw it shine darkly in the
firelight. The Indian meant to murder him. Shefford saw the grim, dark
face in a kind of horrible amaze. He felt the meaning of that drawn
weapon as he had never felt anything before in his life. And he
collapsed back into his seat with an icy, sickening terror. In a second
he was dripping wet with cold sweat. Lightning-swift thoughts flashed
through his mind. It had been one of his platitudes that he was not
afraid of death. Yet here he was a shaking, helpless coward. What had
he learned about either life or death? Would this dark savage plunge
him into the unknown? It was then that Shefford realized his hollow
philosophy and the bitter-sweetness of life. He had a brain and a soul,
and between them he might have worked out his salvation. But what were
they to this ruthless night-wanderer, this raw and horrible wildness of
the desert?

Incapable of voluntary movement, with tongue cleaving to the roof of his
mouth, Shefford watched the horseman and the half-poised gun. It was not
yet leveled. Then it dawned upon Shefford that the stranger's head was
turned a little, his ear to the wind. He was listening. His horse was
listening. Suddenly he straightened up, wheeled his horse, and trotted
away into the darkness. But he did not climb the ridge down which he had
come.

Shefford heard the click of hoofs upon the stony trail. Other horses and
riders were descending into the cañon. They had been the cause of his
deliverance, and in the relaxation of feeling he almost fainted. Then he
sat there, slowly recovering, slowly ceasing to tremble, divining that
this situation was somehow to change his attitude toward life.

Three horses, two with riders, moved in dark shapes across the skyline
above the ridge, disappeared as had Shefford's first visitor, and then
rode into the light. Shefford saw two Indians--a man and a woman; then
with surprise recognized the latter to be the Indian girl he had met at
Red Lake. He was still more surprised to recognize in the third horse
the one he had lost at the last camp. Shefford rose, a little shaky on
his legs, to thank these Indians for a double service. The man slipped
from his saddle and his moccasined feet thudded lightly. He was tall,
lithe, erect, a singularly graceful figure, and as he advanced Shefford
saw a dark face and sharp, dark eyes. The Indian was bareheaded, with
his hair bound in a band. He resembled the girl, but appeared to have a
finer face.

"How do?" he said, in a voice low and distinct. He extended his hand,
and Shefford felt a grip of steel. He returned the greeting. Then
the Indian gave Shefford the bridle of the horse, and made signs that
appeared to indicate the horse had broken his hobbles and strayed.
Shefford thanked him. Thereupon the Indian unsaddled and led the horses
away, evidently to water them. The girl remained behind. Shefford
addressed her, but she was shy and did not respond. He then set about
cooking a meal for his visitors, and was busily engaged at this when the
Indian returned without the horses. Presently Shefford resumed his seat
by the fire and watched the two eat what he had prepared. They certainly
were hungry and soon had the pans and cups empty. Then the girl drew
back a little into the shadow, while the man sat with his legs crossed
and his feet tucked under him.

His dark face was smooth, yet it seemed to have lines under the surface.
Shefford was impressed. He had never seen an Indian who interested him
as this one. Looked at superficially, he appeared young, wild, silent,
locked in his primeval apathy, just a healthy savage; but looked at more
attentively, he appeared matured, even old, a strange, sad, brooding
figure, with a burden on his shoulders. Shefford found himself growing
curious.

"What place?" asked Shefford, waving his hand toward the dark opening
between the black cliffs.

"Sagi," replied the Indian.

That did not mean anything to Shefford, and he asked if the Sagi was the
pass, but the Indian shook his head.

"Wife?" asked Shefford, pointing to the girl.

The Indian shook his head again. "_Bi-la_," he said.

"What you mean?" asked Shefford. "What _bi-la_?"

"Sister," replied the Indian. He spoke the word reluctantly, as if the
white man's language did not please him, but the clearness and correct
pronunciation surprised Shefford.

"What name--what call her?" he went on.

"Glen Naspa."

"What your name?" inquired Shefford, indicating the Indian.

"Nas Ta Bega," answered the Indian.

"Navajo?"

The Indian bowed with what seemed pride and stately dignity.

"My name John Shefford. Come far way back toward rising sun. Come stay
here long."

Nas Ta Bega's dark eyes were fixed steadily upon Shefford. He reflected
that he could not remember having felt so penetrating a gaze. But
neither the Indian's eyes nor face gave any clue to his thoughts.

"Navajo no savvy Jesus Christ," said the Indian, and his voice rolled
out low and deep.

Shefford felt both amaze and pain. The Indian had taken him for a
missionary.

"No!... Me no missionary," cried Shefford, and he flung up a
passionately repudiating hand.

A singular flash shot from the Indian's dark eyes. It struck Shefford
even at this stinging moment when the past came back.

"Trade--buy wool--blanket?" queried Nas Ta Bega.

"No," replied Shefford. "Me want ride--walk far." He waved his hand to
indicate a wide sweep of territory. "Me sick."

Nas Ta Bega laid a significant finger upon his lungs.

"No," replied Shefford. "Me strong. Sick here." And with motions of his
hands he tried to show that his was a trouble of the heart.

Shefford received instant impression of this Indian's intelligent
comprehension, but he could not tell just what had given him the
feeling. Nas Ta Bega rose then and walked away into the shadow. Shefford
heard him working around the dead cedar-tree, where he had probably gone
to get fire-wood. Then Shefford heard a splintering crash, which was
followed by a crunching, bumping sound. Presently he was astounded to
see the Indian enter the lighted circle dragging the whole cedar-tree,
trunk first. Shefford would have doubted the ability of two men to drag
that tree, and here came Nas Ta Bega, managing it easily. He laid the
trunk on the fire, and then proceeded to break off small branches, to
place them advantageously where the red coals kindled them into a blaze.

The Indian's next move was to place his saddle, which he evidently meant
to use for a pillow. Then he spread a goat-skin on the ground, lay
down upon it, with his back to the fire, and, pulling a long-haired
saddle-blanket over his shoulders, he relaxed and became motionless. His
sister, Glen Naspa, did likewise, except that she stayed farther away
from the fire, and she had a larger blanket, which covered her well. It
appeared to Shefford that they went to sleep at once.

Shefford felt as tired as he had ever been, but he did not think he
could soon drop into slumber, and in fact he did not want to.

There was something in the companionship of these Indians that he had
not experienced before. He still had a strange and weak feeling--the
aftermath of that fear which had sickened him with its horrible icy
grip. Nas Ta Bega's arrival had frightened away that dark and silent
prowler of the night; and Shefford was convinced the Indian had saved
his life. The measure of his gratitude was a source of wonder to him.
Had he cared so much for life? Yes--he had, when face to face with
death. That was something to know. It helped him. And he gathered from
his strange feeling that the romantic quest which had brought him
into the wilderness might turn out to be an antidote for the morbid
bitterness of heart.

With new sensations had come new thoughts. Right then it was very
pleasant to sit in the warmth and light of the roaring cedar fire. There
was a deep-seated ache of fatigue in his bones. What joy it was to rest!
He had felt the dry scorch of desert thirst and the pang of hunger.
How wonderful to learn the real meaning of water and food! He had just
finished the longest, hardest day's work of his life! Had that anything
to do with a something almost like peace which seemed to hover near in
the shadows, trying to come to him? He had befriended an Indian girl,
and now her brother had paid back the service. Both the giving and
receiving were somehow sweet to Shefford. They opened up hitherto vague
channels of thought. For years he had imagined he was serving people,
when he had never lifted a hand. A blow given in the defense of an
Indian girl had somehow operated to make a change in John Shefford's
existence. It had liberated a spirit in him. Moreover, it had worked its
influence outside his mind. The Indian girl and her brother had followed
his trail to return his horse, perhaps to guide him safely, but,
unknowingly perhaps, they had done infinitely more than that for him. As
Shefford's eye wandered over the dark, still figures of the sleepers he
had a strange, dreamy premonition, or perhaps only a fancy, that there
was to be more come of this fortunate meeting.

For the rest, it was good to be there in the speaking silence, to feel
the heat on his outstretched palms and the cold wind on his cheek, to
see the black wall lifting its bold outline and the crags reaching for
the white stars.




III. KAYENTA


The stamping of horses awoke Shefford. He saw a towering crag, rosy
in the morning light, like a huge red spear splitting the clear blue
of sky. He got up, feeling cramped and sore, yet with unfamiliar
exhilaration. The whipping air made him stretch his hands to the fire.
An odor of coffee and broiled meat mingled with the fragrance of wood
smoke. Glen Naspa was on her knees broiling a rabbit on a stick over the
red coals. Nas Ta Bega was saddling the ponies. The cañon appeared
to be full of purple shadows under one side of dark cliffs and golden
streaks of mist on the other where the sun struck high up on the walls.

"Good morning," said Shefford.

Glen Naspa shyly replied in Navajo.

"How," was Nas Ta Bega's greeting.

In daylight the Indian lost some of the dark somberness of face that had
impressed Shefford. He had a noble head, in poise like that of an eagle,
a bold, clean-cut profile, and stern, close-shut lips. His eyes were the
most striking and attractive feature about him; they were coal-black
and piercing; the intent look out of them seemed to come from a keen and
inquisitive mind.

Shefford ate breakfast with the Indians, and then helped with the few
preparations for departure. Before they mounted, Nas Ta Bega pointed
to horse tracks in the dust. They were those that had been made by
Shefford's threatening visitor of the night before. Shefford explained
by word and sign, and succeeded at least in showing that he had been
in danger. Nas Ta Bega followed the tracks a little way and presently
returned.

"Shadd," he said, with an ominous shake of his head. Shefford did not
understand whether he meant the name of his visitor or something else,
but the menace connected with the word was clear enough.

Glen Naspa mounted her pony, and it was a graceful action that pleased
Shefford. He climbed a little stiffly into his own saddle. Then Nas Ta
Bega got up and pointed northward.

"Kayenta?" he inquired.

Shefford nodded and then they were off, with Glen Naspa in the lead.
They did not climb the trail which they had descended, but took one
leading to the right along the base of the slope. Shefford saw down into
the red wash that bisected the cañon floor. It was a sheer wall of
red clay or loam, a hundred feet high, and at the bottom ran a swift,
shallow stream of reddish water. Then for a time a high growth of
greasewood hid the surroundings from Shefford's sight. Presently the
trail led out into the open, and Shefford saw that he was at the neck of
a wonderful valley that gradually widened with great jagged red peaks on
the left and the black mesa, now a mountain, running away to the right.
He turned to find that the opening of the Sagi could no longer be seen,
and he was conscious of a strong desire to return and explore that
cañon.

Soon Glen Naspa put her pony to a long, easy, swinging canter and her
followers did likewise. As they got outward into the valley Shefford
lost the sense of being overshadowed and crowded by the nearness of
the huge walls and crags. The trail appeared level underfoot, but at a
distance it was seen to climb. Shefford found where it disappeared over
the foot of a slope that formed a graceful rising line up to the
cedared flank of the mesa. The valley floor, widening away to the north,
remained level and green. Beyond rose the jagged range of red peaks,
all strangely cut and slanting. These distant deceiving features of
the country held Shefford's gaze until the Indian drew his attention
to things near at hand. Then Shefford saw flocks of sheep dotting
the gray-green valley, and bands of beautiful long-maned, long-tailed
ponies.

For several miles the scene did not change except that Shefford imagined
he came to see where the upland plain ended or at least broke its level.
He was right, for presently the Indian pointed, and Shefford went on to
halt upon the edge of a steep slope leading down into a valley vast in
its barren gray reaches.

"Kayenta," said Nas Ta Bega.

Shefford at first saw nothing except the monotonous gray valley reaching
far to the strange, grotesque monuments of yellow cliff. Then close
under the foot of the slope he espied two squat stone houses with red
roofs, and a corral with a pool of water shining in the sun.

The trail leading down was steep and sandy, but it was not long.
Shefford's sweeping eyes appeared to take in everything at once--the
crude stone structures with their earthen roofs, the piles of dirty
wool, the Indians lolling around, the tents, and wagons, and horses,
little lazy burros and dogs, and scattered everywhere saddles, blankets,
guns, and packs.

Then a white man came out of the door. He waved a hand and shouted.
Dust and wool and flour were thick upon him. He was muscular and
weather-beaten, and appeared young in activity rather than face. A gun
swung at his hip and a row of brass-tipped cartridges showed in his
belt. Shefford looked into a face that he thought he had seen before,
until he realized the similarity was only the bronze and hard line and
rugged cast common to desert men. The gray searching eyes went right
through him.

"Glad to see you. Get down and come in. Just heard from an Indian that
you were coming. I'm the trader Withers," he said to Shefford. His voice
was welcoming and the grip of his hand made Shefford's ache.

Shefford told his name and said he was as glad as he was lucky to arrive
at Kayenta.

"Hello! Nas Ta Bega!" exclaimed Withers. His tone expressed a surprise
his face did not show. "Did this Indian bring you in?"

Withers shook hands with the Navajo while Shefford briefly related what
he owed to him. Then Withers looked at Nas Ta Bega and spoke to him in
the Indian tongue.

"Shadd," said Nas Ta Bega. Withers let out a dry little laugh and his
strong hand tugged at his mustache.

"Who's Shadd?" asked Shefford.

"He's a half-breed Ute--bad Indian, outlaw, murderer. He's in with
a gang of outlaws who hide in the San Juan country.... Reckon you're
lucky. How'd you come to be there in the Sagi alone?"

"I traveled from Red Lake. Presbrey, the trader there, advised against
it, but I came anyway."

"Well." Withers's gray glance was kind, if it did express the
foolhardiness of Shefford's act. "Come into the house.... Never mind the
horse. My wife will sure be glad to see you."

Withers led Shefford by the first stone house, which evidently was the
trading-store, into the second. The room Shefford entered was large,
with logs smoldering in a huge open fireplace, blankets covering every
foot of floor space, and Indian baskets and silver ornaments everywhere,
and strange Indian designs painted upon the whitewashed walls. Withers
called his wife and made her acquainted with Shefford. She was a slight,
comely little woman, with keen, earnest, dark eyes. She seemed to be
serious and quiet, but she made Shefford feel at home immediately. He
refused, however, to accept the room offered him, saying that he me
meant to sleep out under the open sky. Withers laughed at this and said
he understood. Shefford, remembering Presbrey's hunger for news of the
outside world, told this trader and his wife all he could think of; and
he was listened to with that close attention a traveler always gained in
the remote places.

"Sure am glad you rode in," said Withers, for the fourth time. "Now you
make yourself at home. Stay here--come over to the store--do what you
like. I've got to work. To-night we'll talk."

Shefford went out with his host. The store was as interesting as
Presbrey's, though much smaller and more primitive. It was full of
everything, and smelled strongly of sheep and goats. There was a narrow
aisle between sacks of flour and blankets on one side and a high counter
on the other. Behind this counter Withers stood to wait upon the buying
Indians. They sold blankets and skins and bags of wool, and in exchange
took silver money. Then they lingered and with slow, staid reluctance
bought one thing and then another--flour, sugar, canned goods, coffee,
tobacco, ammunition. The counter was never without two or three Indians
leaning on their dark, silver-braceleted arms. But as they were slow to
sell and buy and go, so were others slow to come in. Their voices were
soft and low and it seemed to Shefford they were whispering. He liked
to hear them and to look at the banded heads, the long, twisted rolls
of black hair tied with white cords, the still dark faces and watchful
eyes, the silver ear-rings, the slender, shapely brown hands, the lean
and sinewy shapes, the corduroys with a belt and gun, and the small,
close-fitting buckskin moccasins buttoned with coins. These Indians
all appeared young, and under the quiet, slow demeanor there was fierce
blood and fire.

By and by two women came in, evidently squaw and daughter. The former
was a huge, stout Indian with a face that was certainly pleasant if not
jolly.

She had the corners of a blanket tied under her chin, and in the folds
behind on her broad back was a naked Indian baby, round and black of
head, brown-skinned, with eyes as bright as beads. When the youngster
caught sight of Shefford he made a startled dive into the sack of the
blanket. Manifestly, however, curiosity got the better of fear, for
presently Shefford caught a pair of wondering dark eyes peeping at him.

"They're good spenders, but slow," said Withers. "The Navajos are
careful and cautious. That's why they're rich. This squaw, Yan As Pa,
has flocks of sheep and more mustangs than she knows about."

"Mustangs. So that's what you call the ponies?" replied Shefford.

"Yep. They're mustangs, and mostly wild as jack-rabbits."

Shefford strolled outside and made the acquaintance of Withers's helper,
a Mormon named Whisner. He was a stockily built man past maturity, and
his sun-blistered face and watery eyes told of the open desert. He was
engaged in weighing sacks of wool brought in by the Indians. Near by
stood a framework of poles from which an immense bag was suspended. From
the top of this bag protruded the head and shoulders of an Indian who
appeared to be stamping and packing wool with his feet. He grinned at
the curious Shefford. But Shefford was more interested in the Mormon. So
far as he knew, Whisner was the first man of that creed he had ever met,
and he could scarcely hide his eagerness. Venters's stories had been
of a long-past generation of Mormons, fanatical, ruthless, and
unchangeable. Shefford did not expect to meet Mormons of this kind.
But any man of that religion would have interested him. Besides this,
Whisner seemed to bring him closer to that wild secret cañon he had
come West to find. Shefford was somewhat amazed and discomfited to have
his polite and friendly overtures repulsed. Whisner might have been an
Indian. He was cold, incommunicative, aloof; and there was something
about him that made the sensitive Shefford feel his presence was
resented.

Presently Shefford strolled on to the corral, which was full of shaggy
mustangs. They snorted and kicked at him. He had a half-formed wish that
he would never be called upon to ride one of those wild brutes, and then
he found himself thinking that he would ride one of them, and after a
while any of them. Shefford did not understand himself, but he fought
his natural instinctive reluctance to meet obstacles, peril, suffering.

He traced the white-bordered little stream that made the pool in the
corral, and when he came to where it oozed out of the sand under the
bluff he decided that was not the spring which had made Kayenta famous.
Presently down below the trading-post he saw a trough from which burros
were drinking. Here he found the spring, a deep well of eddying water
walled in by stones, and the overflow made a shallow stream meandering
away between its borders of alkali, like a crust of salt. Shefford
tasted the water. It bit, but it was good.

Shefford had no trouble in making friends with the lazy sleepy-eyed
burros. They let him pull their long ears and rub their noses, but the
mustangs standing around were unapproachable. They had wild eyes; they
raised long ears and looked vicious. He let them alone.

Evidently this trading-post was a great deal busier than Red Lake.
Shefford counted a dozen Indians lounging outside, and there were others
riding away. Big wagons told how the bags of wool were transported out
of the wilds and how supplies were brought in. A wide, hard-packed road
led off to the east, and another, not so clearly defined, wound away to
the north. And Indian trails streaked off in all directions.

Shefford discovered, however, when he had walked off a mile or so across
the valley to lose sight of the post, that the feeling of wildness
and loneliness returned to him. It was a wonderful country. It held
something for him besides the possible rescue of an imprisoned girl from
a wild cañon.

. . . . . . . . . . .

That night after supper, when Withers and Shefford sat alone before
the blazing logs in the huge fireplace, the trader laid his hand on
Shefford's and said, with directness and force:

"I've lived my life in the desert. I've met many men and have been a
friend to most.... You're no prospector or trader or missionary?"

"No," replied Shefford.

"You've had trouble?"

"Yes."

"Have you come in here to hide? Don't be afraid to tell me. I won't give
you away."

"I didn't come to hide."

"Then no one is after you? You've done no wrong?"

"Perhaps I wronged myself, but no one else," replied Shefford, steadily.

"I reckoned so. Well, tell me, or keep your secret--it's all one to me."

Shefford felt a desire to unburden himself. This man was strong,
persuasive, kindly. He drew Shefford.

"You're welcome in Kayenta," went on Withers. "Stay as long as you like.
I take no pay from a white man. If you want work I have it aplenty."

"Thank you. That is good. I need to work. We'll talk of it later. ...
But just yet I can't tell you why I came to Kayenta, what I want to
do, how long I shall stay. My thoughts put in words would seem so
like dreams. Maybe they are dreams. Perhaps I'm only chasing a
phantom--perhaps I'm only hunting the treasure at the foot of the
rainbow."

"Well, this is the country for rainbows," laughed Withers. "In summer
from June to August when it storms we have rainbows that'll make you
think you're in another world. The Navajos have rainbow mountains,
rainbow canyons, rainbow bridges of stone, rainbow trails. It sure is
rainbow country."

That deep and mystic chord in Shefford thrilled. Here it was
again--something tangible at the bottom of his dream.

Withers did not wait for Shefford to say any more, and almost as if
he read his visitor's mind he began to talk about the wild country he
called home.

He had lived at Kayenta for several years--hard and profitless years by
reason of marauding outlaws. He could not have lived there at all but
for the protection of the Indians. His father-in-law had been friendly
with the Navajos and Piutes for many years, and his wife had been
brought up among them. She was held in peculiar reverence and affection
by both tribes in that part of the country. Probably she knew more of
the Indians' habits, religion, and life than any white person in the
West. Both tribes were friendly and peaceable, but there were bad
Indians, half-breeds, and outlaws that made the trading-post a venture
Withers had long considered precarious, and he wanted to move and
intended to some day. His nearest neighbors in New Mexico and Colorado
were a hundred miles distant and at some seasons the roads were
impassable. To the north, however, twenty miles or so, was situated a
Mormon village named Stonebridge. It lay across the Utah line. Withers
did some business with this village, but scarcely enough to warrant
the risks he had to run. During the last year he had lost several
pack-trains, one of which he had never heard of after it left
Stonebridge.

"Stonebridge!" exclaimed Shefford, and he trembled. He had heard that
name. In his memory it had a place beside the name of another village
Shefford longed to speak of to this trader.

"Yes--Stonebridge," replied Withers. "Ever heard the name?"

"I think so. Are there other villages in--in that part of the country?"

"A few, but not close. Glaze is now only a water-hole. Bluff and
Monticello are far north across the San Juan.... There used to be
another village--but that wouldn't interest you."

"Maybe it would," replied Shefford, quietly.

But his hint was not taken by the trader. Withers suddenly showed a
semblance of the aloofness Shefford had observed in Whisner.

"Withers, pardon an impertinence--I am deeply serious.... Are you a
Mormon?"

"Indeed I'm not," replied the trader, instantly.

"Are you for the Mormons or against them?"

"Neither. I get along with them. I know them. I believe they are a
misunderstood people."

"That's for them."

"No. I'm only fair-minded."

Shefford paused, trying to curb his thrilling impulse, but it was too
strong.

"You said there used to be another village.... Was the name of
it--Cottonwoods?"

Withers gave a start and faced round to stare at Shefford in blank
astonishment.

"Say, did you give me a straight story about yourself?" he queried,
sharply.

"So far as I went," replied Shefford.

"You're no spy on the lookout for sealed wives?"

"Absolutely not. I don't even know what you mean by sealed wives."

"Well, it's damn strange that you'd know the name Cottonwoods.... Yes,
that's the name of the village I meant--the one that used to be. It's
gone now, all except a few stone walls."

"What became of it?"

"Torn down by Mormons years ago. They destroyed it and moved away. I've
heard Indians talk about a grand spring that was there once. It's gone,
too. Its name was--let me see--"

"Amber Spring," interrupted Shefford.

"By George, you're right!" rejoined the trader, again amazed. "Shefford,
this beats me. I haven't heard that name for ten years. I can't help
seeing what a tenderfoot--stranger--you are to the desert. Yet, here you
are--speaking of what you should know nothing of.... And there's more
behind this."

Shefford rose, unable to conceal his agitation.

"Did you ever hear of a rider named Venters?"

"Rider? You mean a cowboy? Venters. No, I never heard that name."

"Did you ever hear of a gunman named Lassiter?" queried Shefford, with
increasing emotion.

"No."

"Did you ever hear of a Mormon woman named--Jane Withersteen?"

"No."

Shefford drew his breath sharply. He had followed a gleam--he had caught
a fleeting glimpse of it.

"Did you ever hear of a child--a girl--a woman--called Fay Larkin?"

Withers rose slowly with a paling face.

"If you're a spy it'll go hard with you--though I'm no Mormon," he said,
grimly.

Shefford lifted a shaking hand.

"I WAS a clergyman. Now I'm nothing--a wanderer--least of all a spy."

Withers leaned closer to see into the other man's eyes; he looked long
and then appeared satisfied.

"I've heard the name Fay Larkin," he said, slowly. "I reckon that's all
I'll say till you tell your story."

. . . . . . . . . . .

Shefford stood with his back to the fire and he turned the palms of
his hands to catch the warmth. He felt cold. Withers had affected him
strangely. What was the meaning of the trader's somber gravity? Why was
the very mention of Mormons attended by something austere and secret?

"My name is John Shefford. I am twenty-four," began Shefford. "My
family--"

Here a knock on the door interrupted Shefford.

"Come in," called Withers.

The door opened and like a shadow Nas Ta Bega slipped in. He said
something in Navajo to the trader.

"How," he said to Shefford, and extended his hand. He was stately, but
there was no mistaking his friendliness. Then he sat down before the
fire, doubled his legs under him after the Indian fashion, and with dark
eyes on the blazing logs seemed to lose himself in meditation.


"He likes the fire," explained Withers. "Whenever he comes to Kayenta he
always visits me like this.... Don't mind him. Go on with your story."

"My family were plain people, well-to-do, and very religious," went on
Shefford. "When I was a boy we moved from the country to a town called
Beaumont, Illinois. There was a college in Beaumont and eventually I was
sent to it to study for the ministry. I wanted to be---- But never mind
that.... By the time I was twenty-two I was ready for my career as a
clergyman. I preached for a year around at different places and then got
a church in my home town of Beaumont. I became exceedingly good friends
with a man named Venters, who had recently come to Beaumont. He was a
singular man. His wife was a strange, beautiful woman, very reserved,
and she had wonderful dark eyes. They had money and were devoted to each
other, and perfectly happy. They owned the finest horses ever seen in
Illinois, and their particular enjoyment seemed to be riding. They were
always taking long rides. It was something worth going far for to see
Mrs. Venters on a horse.

"It was through my own love of horses that I became friendly with
Venters. He and his wife attended my church, and as I got to see more
of them, gradually we grew intimate. And it was not until I did get
intimate with them that I realized that both seemed to be haunted by the
past. They were sometimes sad even in their happiness. They drifted
off into dreams. They lived back in another world. They seemed to be
listening. Indeed, they were a singularly interesting couple, and I grew
genuinely fond of them. By and by they had a little girl whom they named
Jane. The coming of the baby made a change in my friends. They were
happier, and I observed that the haunting shadow did not so often
return.

"Venters had spoken of a journey west that he and his wife meant to
take some time. But after the baby came he never mentioned his wife in
connection with the trip. I gathered that he felt compelled to go to
clear up a mystery or to find something--I did not make out just what.
But eventually, and it was about a year ago, he told me his story--the
strangest, wildest, and most tragic I ever heard. I can't tell it all
now. It is enough to say that fifteen years before he had been a
rider for a rich Mormon woman named Jane Withersteen, of this village
Cottonwoods. She had adopted a beautiful Gentile child named Fay Larkin.
Her interest in Gentiles earned the displeasure of her churchmen, and as
she was proud there came a breach. Venters and a gunman named Lassiter
became involved in her quarrel. Finally Venters took to the cañon. Here
in the wilds he found the strange girl he eventually married. For a long
time they lived in a wonderful hidden valley, the entrance to which was
guarded by a huge balancing rock. Venters got away with the girl. But
Lassiter and Jane Withersteen and the child Fay Larkin were driven into
the cañon. They escaped to the valley where Venters had lived. Lassiter
rolled the balancing rock, and, crashing down the narrow trail, it
loosened the weathered walls and closed the narrow outlet for ever."




IV. NEW FRIENDS


Shefford ended his narrative out of breath, pale, and dripping with
sweat. Withers sat leaning forward with an expression of intense
interest. Nas Ta Bega's easy, graceful pose had succeeded to one
of strained rigidity. He seemed a statue of bronze. Could a few
intelligible words, Shefford wondered, have created that strange,
listening posture?

"Venters got out of Utah, of course, as you know," went on Shefford. "He
got out, knowing--as I feel I would have known--that Jane, Lassiter, and
little Fay Larkin were shut up, walled up in Surprise Valley. For years
Venters considered it would not have been safe for him to venture
to rescue them. He had no fears for their lives. They could live in
Surprise Valley. But Venters always intended to come back with Bess and
find the valley and his friends. No wonder he and Bess were haunted.
However, when his wife had the baby that made a difference. It meant he
had to go alone. And he was thinking seriously of starting when--when
there were developments that made it desirable for me to leave Beaumont.
Venters's story haunted me as he had been haunted. I dreamed of that
wild valley--of little Fay Larkin grown to womanhood--such a woman
as Bess Venters was. And the longing to come was great.... And,
Withers--here I am."

The trader reached out and gave Shefford the grip of a man in whom
emotion was powerful, but deep and difficult to express.

"Listen to this.... I wish I could help you. Life is a queer deal. ...
Shefford, I've got to trust you. Over here in the wild cañon country
there's a village of Mormons' sealed wives. It's in Arizona, perhaps
twenty miles from here, and near the Utah line. When the United States
government began to persecute, or prosecute, the Mormons for polygamy,
the Mormons over here in Stonebridge took their sealed wives and moved
them out of Utah, just across the line. They built houses, established
a village there. I'm the only Gentile who knows about it. And I pack
supplies every few weeks in to these women. There are perhaps fifty
women, mostly young--second or third or fourth wives of Mormons--sealed
wives. And I want you to understand that sealed means SEALED in all that
religion or loyalty can get out of the word. There are also some old
women and old men in the village, but they hardly count. And there's a
flock of the finest children you ever saw in your life.

"The idea of the Mormons must have been to escape prosecution. The
law of the government is one wife for each man--no more. All over Utah
polygamists have been arrested. The Mormons are deeply concerned. I
believe they are a good, law-abiding people. But this law is a direct
blow at their religion. In my opinion they can't obey both. And
therefore they have not altogether given up plural wives. Perhaps they
will some day. I have no proof, but I believe the Mormons of Stonebridge
pay secret night visits to their sealed wives across the line in the
lonely, hidden village.

"Now once over in Stonebridge I overheard some Mormons talking about a
girl who was named Fay Larkin. I never forgot the name. Later I heard
the name in this sealed-wife village. But, as I told you, I never heard
of Lassiter or Jane Withersteen. Still, if Mormons had found them I
would never have heard of it. And Deception Pass--that might be the
Sagi.... I'm not surprised at your rainbow-chasing adventure. It's
a great story.... This Fay Larkin I've heard of MIGHT be your Fay
Larkin--I almost believe so. Shefford, I'll help you find out."

"Yes, yes--I must know," replied Shefford. "Oh, I hope, I pray we can
find her! But--I'd rather she was dead--if she's not still hidden in the
valley."

"Naturally. You've dreamed yourself into rescuing this lost Fay
Larkin.... But, Shefford, you're old enough to know life doesn't work
out as you want it to. One way or another I fear you're in for a bitter
disappointment."

"Withers, take me to the village."

"Shefford, you're liable to get in bad out here," said the trader,
gravely.

"I couldn't be any more ruined than I am now," replied Shefford,
passionately.

"But there's risk in this--risk such as you never had," persisted
Withers.

"I'll risk anything."

"Reckon this is a funny deal for a sheep-trader to have on his hands,"
continued Withers. "Shefford, I like you. I've a mind to see you through
this. It's a damn strange story.... I'll tell you what--I will help you.
I'll give you a job packing supplies in to the village. I meant to turn
that over to a Mormon cowboy--Joe Lake. The job shall be yours, and I'll
go with you first trip. Here's my hand on it.... Now, Shefford, I'm more
curious about you than I was before you told your story. What ruined
you? As we're to be partners, you can tell me now. I'll keep your
secret. Maybe I can do you good."

Shefford wanted to confess, yet it was hard. Perhaps, had he not been so
agitated, he would not have answered to impulse. But this trader was a
man--a man of the desert--he would understand.

"I told you I was a clergyman," said Shefford in low voice. "I didn't
want to be one, but they made me one. I did my best. I failed.... I had
doubts of religion--of the Bible--of God, as my Church believed in them.
As I grew older thought and study convinced me of the narrowness of
religion as my congregation lived it. I preached what I believed. I
alienated them. They put me out, took my calling from me, disgraced me,
ruined me."

"So that's all!" exclaimed Withers, slowly. "You didn't believe in the
God of the Bible.... Well, I've been in the desert long enough to know
there IS a God, but probably not the one your Church worships. ...
Shefford, go to the Navajo for a faith!"

Shefford had forgotten the presence of Nas Ta Bega, and perhaps Withers
had likewise. At this juncture the Indian rose to his full height, and
he folded his arms to stand with the somber pride of a chieftain while
his dark, inscrutable eyes were riveted upon Shefford. At that moment
he seemed magnificent. How infinitely more he seemed than just a common
Indian who had chanced to befriend a white man! The difference was
obscure to Shefford. But he felt that it was there in the Navajo's
mind. Nas Ta Bega's strange look was not to be interpreted. Presently he
turned and passed from the room.

"By George!" cried Withers, suddenly, and he pounded his knee with his
fist. "I'd forgotten."

"What?" ejaculated Shefford.

"Why, that Indian understood every word we said. He knows English. He's
educated. Well, if this doesn't beat me.... Let me tell you about Nas Ta
Bega."

Withers appeared to be recalling something half forgotten.

"Years ago, in fifty-seven, I think, Kit Carson with his soldiers chased
the Navajo tribes and rounded them up to be put on reservations. But he
failed to catch all the members of one tribe. They escaped up into wild
cañon like the Sagi. The descendants of these fugitives live there now
and are the finest Indians on earth--the finest because unspoiled by the
white man. Well, as I got the story, years after Carson's round-up one
of his soldiers guided some interested travelers in here. When they
left they took an Indian boy with them to educate. From what I know of
Navajos I'm inclined to think the boy was taken against his parents'
wish. Anyway, he was taken. That boy was Nas Ta Bega. The story goes
that he was educated somewhere. Years afterward, and perhaps not long
before I came in here, he returned to his people. There have been
missionaries and other interested fools who have given Indians a white
man's education. In all the instances I know of, these educated Indians
returned to their tribes, repudiating the white man's knowledge, habits,
life, and religion. I have heard that Nas Ta Bega came back, laid down
the white man's clothes along with the education, and never again showed
that he had known either.

"You have just seen how strangely he acted. It's almost certain he heard
our conversation. Well, it doesn't matter. He won't tell. He can hardly
be made to use an English word. Besides, he's a noble red man, if there
ever was one. He has been a friend in need to me. If you stay long out
here you'll learn something from the Indians. Nas Ta Bega has befriended
you, too, it seems. I thought he showed unusual interest in you."

"Perhaps that was because I saved his sister--well, to be charitable,
from the rather rude advances of a white man," said Shefford, and he
proceeded to tell of the incident that occurred at Red Lake.

"Willetts!" exclaimed Withers, with much the same expression that
Presbrey had used. "I never met him. But I know about him. He's--well,
the Indians don't like him much. Most of the missionaries are good
men--good for the Indians, in a way, but sometimes one drifts out here
who is bad. A bad missionary teaching religion to savages! Queer, isn't
it? The queerest part is the white people's blindness--the blindness of
those who send the missionaries. Well, I dare say Willetts isn't very
good. When Presbrey said that was Willetts's way of teaching religion he
meant just what he said. If Willetts drifts over here he'll be risking
much.... This you told me explains Nas Ta Bega's friendliness toward
you, and also his bringing his sister Glen Naspa to live with relatives
up in the pass. She had been living near Red Lake."

"Do you mean Nas Ta Bega wants to keep his sister far removed from
Willetts?" inquired Shefford.

"I mean that," replied Withers, "and I hope he's not too late."

Later Shefford went outdoors to walk and think. There was no moon, but
the stars made light enough to cast his shadow on the ground. The dark,
illimitable expanse of blue sky seemed to be glittering with numberless
points of fire. The air was cold and still. A dreaming silence lay over
the land. Shefford saw and felt all these things, and their effect was
continuous and remained with him and helped calm him. He was conscious
of a burden removed from his mind. Confession of his secret had been
like tearing a thorn from his flesh, but, once done, it afforded him
relief and a singular realization that out here it did not matter much.
In a crowd of men all looking at him and judging him by their standards
he had been made to suffer. Here, if he were judged at all, it would be
by what he could do, how he sustained himself and helped others.

He walked far across the valley toward the low bluffs, but they did
not seem to get any closer. And, finally, he stopped beside a stone and
looked around at the strange horizon and up at the heavens. He did not
feel utterly aloof from them, nor alone in a waste, nor a useless atom
amid incomprehensible forces. Something like a loosened mantle fell from
about him, dropping down at his feet; and all at once he was conscious
of freedom. He did not understand in the least why abasement left
him, but it was so. He had come a long way, in bitterness, in despair,
believing himself to be what men had called him. The desert and the
stars and the wind, the silence of the night, the loneliness of this
vast country where there was room for a thousand cities--these somehow
vaguely, yet surely, bade him lift his head. They withheld their secret,
but they made a promise. The thing which he had been feeling every day
and every night was a strange enveloping comfort. And it was at this
moment that Shefford, divining whence his help was to come, embraced
all that wild and speaking nature around and above him and surrendered
himself utterly.

"I am young. I am free. I have my life to live," he said. "I'll be a
man. I'll take what comes. Let me learn here!"

When he had spoken out, settled once and for ever his attitude toward
his future, he seemed to be born again, wonderfully alive to the
influences around him, ready to trust what yet remained a mystery.

Then his thoughts reverted to Fay Larkin. Could this girl be known to
the Mormons? It was possible. Fay Larkin was an unusual name. Deep into
Shefford's heart had sunk the story Venters had told. Shefford found
that he had unconsciously created a like romance--he had been loving a
wild and strange and lonely girl, like beautiful Bess Venters. It was
a shock to learn the truth, but, as it had been only a dream, it could
hardly be vital.

Shefford retraced his steps toward the post. Halfway back he espied a
tall, dark figure moving toward him, and presently the shape and the
step seemed familiar. Then he recognized Nas Ta Bega. Soon they were
face to face. Shefford felt that the Indian had been trailing him over
the sand, and that this was to be a significant meeting. Remembering
Withers's revelation about the Navajo, Shefford scarcely knew how to
approach him now. There was no difference to be made out in Nas Ta
Bega's dark face and inscrutable eyes, yet there was a difference to be
felt in his presence. But the Indian did not speak, and turned to walk
by Shefford's side. Shefford could not long be silent.

"Nas Ta Bega, were you looking for me?" he asked.

"You had no gun," replied the Indian.

But for his very low voice, his slow speaking of the words, Shefford
would have thought him a white man. For Shefford there was indeed an
instinct in this meeting, and he turned to face the Navajo.

"Withers told me you had been educated, that you came back to the
desert, that you never showed your training.... Nas Ta Bega, did you
understand all I told Withers?"

"Yes," replied the Indian.

"You won't betray me?"

"I am a Navajo."

"Nas Ta Bega, you trail me--you say I had no gun." Shefford wanted
to ask this Indian if he cared to be the white man's friend, but the
question was not easy to put, and, besides, seemed unnecessary. "I am
alone and strange in this wild country. I must learn."

"Nas Ta Bega will show you the trails and the water-holes and how to
hide from Shadd."

"For money--for silver you will do this?" inquired Shefford.

Shefford felt that the Indian's silence was a rebuke. He remembered
Withers's singular praise of this red man. He realized he must change
his idea of Indians.

"Nas Ta Bega, I know nothing. I feel like a child in the wilderness.
When I speak it is out of the mouths of those who have taught me. I must
find a new voice and a new life.... You heard my story to Withers. I am
an outcast from my own people. If you will be my friend--be so."

The Indian clasped Shefford's hand and held it in a response that
was more beautiful for its silence. So they stood for a moment in the
starlight.

"Nas Ta Bega, what did Withers mean when he said go to the Navajo for a
faith?" asked Shefford.

"He meant the desert is my mother.... Will you go with Nas Ta Bega into
the cañon and the mountains?"

"Indeed I will."

They unclasped hands and turned toward the trading-post.

"Nas Ta Bega, have you spoken my tongue to any other white man since you
returned to your home?" asked Shefford.

"No."

"Why do you--why are you different for me?"

The Indian maintained silence.

"Is it because of--of Glen Naspa?" inquired Shefford.

Nas Ta Bega stalked on, still silent, but Shefford divined that,
although his service to Glen Naspa would never be forgotten, still it
was not wholly responsible for the Indian's subtle sympathy.

"Bi Nai! The Navajo will call his white friend Bi Nai--brother," said
Nas Ta Bega, and he spoke haltingly, not as if words were hard to find,
but strange to speak. "I was stolen from my mother's hogan and taken to
California. They kept me ten years in a mission at San Bernardino and
four years in a school. They said my color and my hair were all that
was left of the Indian in me. But they could not see my heart. They took
fourteen years of my life. They wanted to make me a missionary among my
own people. But the white man's ways and his life and his God are not
the Indian's. They never can be."

How strangely productive of thought for Shefford to hear the Indian
talk! What fatality in this meeting and friendship! Upon Nas Ta Bega had
been forced education, training, religion, that had made him something
more and something less than an Indian. It was something assimilated
from the white man which made the Indian unhappy and alien in his own
home--something meant to be good for him and his kind that had ruined
him. For Shefford felt the passion and the tragedy of this Navajo.

"Bi Nai, the Indian is dying!" Nas Ta Bega's low voice was deep and
wonderful with its intensity of feeling. "The white man robbed the
Indian of lands and homes, drove him into the deserts, made him a gaunt
and sleepless spiller of blood.... The blood is all spilled now, for
the Indian is broken. But the white man sells him rum and seduces his
daughters.... He will not leave the Indian in peace with his own God!...
Bi Nai, the Indian is dying!"

. . . . . . . . . . .

That night Shefford lay in his blankets out under the open sky and the
stars. The earth had never meant much to him, and now it was a bed. He
had preached of the heavens, but until now had never studied them. An
Indian slept beside him. And not until the gray of morning had blotted
out the starlight did Shefford close his eyes.

. . . . . . . . . . .

With break of the next day came full, varied, and stirring incidents
to Shefford. He was strong, though unskilled at most kinds of outdoor
tasks. Withers had work for ten men, if they could have been found.
Shefford dug and packed and lifted till he was so sore and tired that
rest was a blessing.

He never succeeded in getting on a friendly footing with the Mormon
Whisner, though he kept up his agreeable and kindly advances. He
listened to the trader's wife as she told him about the Indians, and
what he learned he did not forget. And his wonder and respect increased
in proportion to his knowledge.

One day there rode into Kayenta the Mormon for whom Withers had been
waiting. His name was Joe Lake. He appeared young, and slipped off his
superb bay with a grace and activity that were astounding in one of his
huge bulk. He had a still, smooth face, with the color of red bronze and
the expression of a cherub; big, soft, dark eyes; and a winning smile.
He was surprisingly different from Whisner or any Mormon character that
Shefford had naturally conceived. His costume was that of the cowboy on
active service; and he packed a gun at his hip. The hand-shake he gave
Shefford was an ordeal for that young man and left him with his whole
right side momentarily benumbed.

"I sure am glad to meet you," he said in a lazy, mild voice. And he
was taking friendly stock of Shefford when the bay mustang reached
with vicious muzzle to bite at him. Lake gave a jerk on the bridle that
almost brought the mustang to his knees. He reared then, snorted, and
came down to plant his forefeet wide apart, and watched his master with
defiant eyes. This mustang was the finest horse Shefford had ever seen.
He appeared quite large for his species, was almost red in color, had a
racy and powerful build, and a fine thoroughbred head with dark, fiery
eyes. He did not look mean, but he had spirit.

"Navvy, you've sure got bad manners," said Lake, shaking the mustang's
bridle. He spoke as if he were chiding a refractory little boy. "Didn't
I break you better'n that? What's this gentleman goin' to think of you?
Tryin' to bite my ear off!"

Lake had arrived about the middle of the forenoon, and Withers announced
his intention of packing at once for the trip. Indians were sent out on
the ranges to drive in burros and mustangs. Shefford had his thrilling
expectancy somewhat chilled by what he considered must have been Lake's
reception of the trader's plan. Lake seemed to oppose him, and evidently
it took vehemence and argument on Withers's part to make the Mormon
tractable. But Withers won him over, and then he called Shefford to his
side.

"You fellows got to be good friends," he said. "You'll have charge of my
pack-trains. Nas Ta Bega wants to go with you. I'll feel safer about my
supplies and stock than I've ever been.... Joe, I'll back this stranger
for all I'm worth. He's square.... And, Shefford, Joe Lake is a Mormon
of the younger generation. I want to start you right. You can trust
him as you trust me. He's white clean through. And he's the best
horse-wrangler in Utah."

It was Lake who first offered his hand, and Shefford made haste to meet
it with his own. Neither of them spoke. Shefford intuitively felt
an alteration in Lake's regard, or at least a singular increase of
interest. Lake had been told that Shefford had been a clergyman, was now
a wanderer, without any religion. Again it seemed to Shefford that he
owed a forming of friendship to this singular fact. And it hurt him. But
strangely it came to him that he had taken a liking to a Mormon.

About one o'clock the pack-train left Kayenta. Nas Ta Bega led the way
up the slope. Following him climbed half a dozen patient, plodding,
heavily laden burros. Withers came next, and he turned in his saddle
to wave good-by to his wife. Joe Lake appeared to be busy keeping a
red mule and a wild gray mustang and a couple of restive blacks in the
trail. Shefford brought up in the rear.

His mount was a beautiful black mustang with three white feet, a white
spot on his nose, and a mane that swept to his knees. "His name's
Nack-yal," Withers had said. "It means two bits, or twenty-five cents.
He ain't worth more." To look at Nack-yal had pleased Shefford very
much indeed, but, once upon his back, he grew dubious. The mustang
acted queer. He actually looked back at Shefford, and it was a look of
speculation and disdain. Shefford took exception to Nack-yal's manner
and to his reluctance to go, and especially to a habit the mustang had
of turning off the trail to the left. Shefford had managed some rather
spirited horses back in Illinois; and though he was willing and eager to
learn all over again, he did not enjoy the prospect of Lake and Withers
seeing this black mustang make a novice of him. And he guessed that was
just what Nack-yal intended to do. However, once up over the hill, with
Kayenta out of sight, Nack-yal trotted along fairly well, needing only
now and then to be pulled back from his strange swinging to the left off
the trail.

The pack-train traveled steadily and soon crossed the upland plain to
descend into the valley again. Shefford saw the jagged red peaks with
an emotion he could not name. The cañon between them were purple in the
shadows, the great walls and slopes brightened to red, and the tips were
gold in the sun. Shefford forgot all about his mustang and the trail.

Suddenly with a pound of hoofs Nack-yal seemed to rise. He leaped
sidewise out of the trail, came down stiff-legged. Then Shefford shot
out of the saddle. He landed so hard that he was stunned for an instant.
Sitting up, he saw the mustang bent down, eyes and ears showing fight,
and his forefeet spread. He appeared to be looking at something in the
trail. Shefford got up and soon saw what had been the trouble. A long,
crooked stick, rather thick and black and yellow, lay in the trail, and
any mustang looking for an excuse to jump might have mistaken it for
a rattlesnake. Nack-yal appeared disposed to be satisfied, and gave
Shefford no trouble in mounting. The incident increased Shefford's
dubiousness. These Arizona mustangs were unknown quantities.

Thereafter Shefford had an eye for the trail rather than the scenery,
and this continued till the pack-train entered the mouth of the Sagi.
Then those wonderful lofty cliffs, with their peaks and towers and
spires, loomed so close and so beautiful that he did not care if
Nack-yal did throw him. Along here, however, the mustang behaved well,
and presently Shefford decided that if it had been otherwise he would
have walked. The trail suddenly stood on end and led down into the deep
wash, where some days before he had seen the stream of reddish water.
This day there appeared to be less water and it was not so red. Nack-yal
sank deep as he took short and careful steps down. The burros and other
mustangs were drinking, and Nack-yal followed suit. The Indian, with a
hand clutching his mustang's mane, rode up a steep, sandy slope on the
other side that Shefford would not have believed any horse could climb.
The burros plodded up and over the rim, with Withers calling to them.
Joe Lake swung his rope and cracked the flanks of the gray mare and the
red mule; and the way the two kicked was a revelation and a warning to
Shefford. When his turn came to climb the trail he got off and walked,
an action that Nack-yal appeared fully to appreciate.

From the head of this wash the trail wound away up the widening cañon,
through greasewood flats and over grassy levels and across sandy
stretches. The looming walls made the valley look narrow, yet it must
have been half a mile wide. The slopes under the cliffs were dotted with
huge stones and cedar-trees. There were deep indentations in the walls,
running back to form box cañon, choked with green of cedar and spruce
and pinyon. These notches haunted Shefford, and he was ever on the
lookout for more of them.

Withers came back to ride just in advance and began to talk.

"Reckon this Sagi cañon is your Deception Pass," he said. "It's sure
a queer hole. I've been lost more than once, hunting mustangs in here.
I've an idea Nas Ta Bega knows all this country. He just pointed out
a cliff-dwelling to me. See it?... There 'way up in that cave of the
wall."

Shefford saw a steep, rough slope leading up to a bulge of the cliff,
and finally he made out strange little houses with dark, eyelike
windows. He wanted to climb up there. Withers called his attention to
more caves with what he believed were the ruins of cliff-dwellings. And
as they rode along the trader showed him remarkable formations of
rock where the elements were slowly hollowing out a bridge. They came
presently to a region of intersecting cañon, and here the breaking of
the trail up and down the deep washes took Withers back to his task with
the burros and gave Shefford more concern than he liked with Nack-yal.
The mustang grew unruly and was continually turning to the left.
Sometimes he tried to climb the steep slope. He had to be pulled hard
away from the opening cañon on the left. It seemed strange to Shefford
that the mustang never swerved to the right. This habit of Nack-yal's
and the increasing caution needed on the trail took all of Shefford's
attention. When he dismounted, however, he had a chance to look around,
and more and more he was amazed at the increasing proportions and
wildness of the Sagi.

He came at length to a place where a fallen tree blocked the trail. All
of the rest of the pack-train had jumped the log. But Nack-yal balked.
Shefford dismounted, pulled the bridle over the mustang's head, and
tried to lead him. Nack-yal, however, refused to budge. Whereupon
Shefford got a stick and, remounting, he gave the balky mustang a cut
across the flank. Then something violent happened. Shefford received a
sudden propelling jolt, and then he was rising into the air, and then
falling. Before he alighted he had a clear image of Nack-yal in the air
above him, bent double, and seemingly possessed of devils. Then Shefford
hit the ground with no light thud. He was thoroughly angry when he got
dizzily upon his feet, but he was not quick enough to catch the mustang.
Nack-yal leaped easily over the log and went on ahead, dragging his
bridle. Shefford hurried after him, and the faster he went just by so
much the cunning Nack-yal accelerated his gait. As the pack-train was
out of sight somewhere ahead, Shefford could not call to his companions
to halt his mount, so he gave up trying, and walked on now with free and
growing appreciation of his surroundings.

The afternoon had waned. The sun blazed low in the west in a notch of
the cañon ramparts, and one wall was darkening into purple shadow while
the other shone through a golden haze. It was a weird, wild world
to Shefford, and every few strides he caught his breath and tried to
realize actuality was not a dream.

Nack-yal kept about a hundred paces to the fore and ever and anon he
looked back to see how his new master was progressing. He varied these
occasions by reaching down and nipping a tuft of grass. Evidently he was
too intelligent to go on fast enough to be caught by Withers. Also he
kept continually looking up the slope to the left as if seeking a way to
climb out of the valley in that direction. Shefford thought it was
well the trail lay at the foot of a steep slope that ran up to unbroken
bluffs.

The sun set and the cañon lost its red and its gold and deepened its
purple. Shefford calculated he had walked five miles, and though he did
not mind the effort, he would rather have ridden Nack-yal into camp.
He mounted a cedar ridge, crossed some sandy washes, turned a corner of
bold wall to enter a wide, green level. The mustangs were rolling and
snorting. He heard the bray of a burro. A bright blaze of camp-fire
greeted him, and the dark figure of the Indian approached to intercept
and catch Nack-yal. When he stalked into camp Withers wore a beaming
smile, and Joe Lake, who was on his knees making biscuit dough in a pan,
stopped proceedings and drawled:

"Reckon Nack-yal bucked you off."

"Bucked! Was that it? Well, he separated himself from me in a new and
somewhat painful manner--to me."

"Sure, I saw that in his eye," replied Lake; and Withers laughed with
him.

"Nack-yal never was well broke," he said. "But he's a good mustang,
nothing like Joe's Navvy or that gray mare Dynamite. All this Indian
stock will buck on a man once in a while."

"I'll take the bucking along with the rest," said Shefford. Both men
liked his reply, and the Indian smiled for the first time.

Soon they all sat round a spread tarpaulin and ate like wolves. After
supper came the rest and talk before the camp-fire. Joe Lake was droll;
he said the most serious things in a way to make Shefford wonder if
he was not joking. Withers talked about the cañon, the Indians, the
mustangs, the scorpions running out of the heated sand; and to Shefford
it was all like a fascinating book. Nas Ta Bega smoked in silence, his
brooding eyes upon the fire.




V. ON THE TRAIL


Shefford was awakened next morning by a sound he had never heard
before--the plunging of hobbled horses on soft turf. It was clear
daylight, with a ruddy color in the sky and a tinge of red along the
cañon rim. He saw Withers, Lake, and the Indian driving the mustangs
toward camp.

The burros appeared lazy, yet willing. But the mustangs and the mule
Withers called Red and the gray mare Dynamite were determined not to be
driven into camp. It was astonishing how much action they had, how much
ground they could cover with their forefeet hobbled together. They
were exceedingly skilful; they lifted both forefeet at once, and then
plunged. And they all went in different directions. Nas Ta Bega darted
in here and there to head off escape.

Shefford pulled on his boots and went out to help. He got too close to
the gray mare and, warned by a yell from Withers, he jumped back just in
time to avoid her vicious heels. Then Shefford turned his attention to
Nack-yal and chased him all over the flat in a futile effort to catch
him. Nas Ta Bega came to Shefford's assistance and put a rope over
Nack-yal's head.

"Don't ever get behind one of these mustangs," said Withers, warningly,
as Shefford came up. "You might be killed.... Eat your bite now. We'll
soon be out of here."

Shefford had been late in awakening. The others had breakfasted. He
found eating somewhat difficult in the excitement that ensued. Nas Ta
Bega held ropes which were round the necks of Red and Dynamite. The mule
showed his cunning and always appeared to present his heels to Withers,
who tried to approach him with a pack-saddle. The patience of the trader
was a revelation to Shefford. And at length Red was cornered by the
three men, the pack-saddle was strapped on, and then the packs. Red
promptly bucked the packs off, and the work had to be done over again.
Then Red dropped his long ears and seemed ready to be tractable.

When Shefford turned his attention to Dynamite he decided that this
was his first sight of a wild horse. The gray mare had fiery eyes that
rolled and showed the white. She jumped straight up, screamed, pawed,
bit, and then plunged down to shoot her hind hoofs into the air as high
as her head had been. She was amazingly agile and she seemed mad to kill
something. She dragged the Indian about, and when Joe Lake got a rope
on her hind foot she dragged them both. They lashed her with the ends
of the lassoes, which action only made her kick harder. She plunged
into camp, drove Shefford flying for his life, knocked down two of the
burros, and played havoc with the unstrapped packs. Withers ran to
the assistance of Lake, and the two of them hauled back with all their
strength and weight. They were both powerful and heavy men. Dynamite
circled round and finally, after kicking the camp-fire to bits, fell
down on her haunches in the hot embers. "Let--her--set--there!" panted
Withers. And Joe Lake shouted, "Burn up, you durn coyote!" Both men
appeared delighted that she had brought upon herself just punishment.
Dynamite sat in the remains of the fire long enough to get burnt, and
then she got up and meekly allowed Withers to throw a tarpaulin and a
roll of blankets over her and tie them fast.

Lake and Withers were sweating freely when this job was finished.

"Say, is that a usual morning's task with the pack-animals?" asked
Shefford.

"They're all pretty decent to-day, except Dynamite," replied Withers.
"She's got to be worked out."

Shefford felt both amusement and consternation. The sun was just rising
over the ramparts of the cañon, and he had already seen more difficult
and dangerous work accomplished than half a dozen men of his type could
do in a whole day. He liked the outlook of his new duty as Withers's
assistant, but he felt helplessly inefficient. Still, all he needed
was experience. He passed over what he anticipated would be pain and
peril--the cost was of no moment.

Soon the pack-train was on the move, with the Indian leading. This
morning Nack-yal began his strange swinging off to the left, precisely
as he had done the day before. It got to be annoying to Shefford, and
he lost patience with the mustang and jerked him sharply round. This,
however, had no great effect upon Nack-yal.

As the train headed straight up the cañon Joe Lake dropped back to ride
beside Shefford. The Mormon had been amiable and friendly.

"Flock of deer up that draw," he said, pointing up a narrow side cañon.

Shefford gazed to see a half-dozen small, brown, long-eared objects,
very like burros, watching the pack-train pass.

"Are they deer?" he asked, delightedly.

"Sure are," replied Joe, sincerely. "Get down and shoot one. There's a
rifle in your saddle-sheath."

Shefford had already discovered that he had been armed this morning, a
matter which had caused him reflection. These animals certainly looked
like deer; he had seen a few deer, though not in their native wild
haunts; and he experienced the thrill of the hunter. Dismounting, he
drew the rifle out of the sheath and started toward the little cañon.

"Hyar! Where you going with that gun?" yelled Withers. "That's a bunch
of burros.... Joe's up to his old tricks. Shefford, look out for Joe!"

Rather sheepishly Shefford returned to his mustang and sheathed the
rifle, and then took a long look at the animals up the draw. They,
resembled deer, but upon second glance they surely were burros.

"Durn me! Now if I didn't think they sure were deer!" exclaimed Joe. He
appeared absolutely sincere and innocent. Shefford hardly knew how to
take this likable Mormon, but vowed he would be on his guard in the
future.

Nas Ta Bega soon led the pack-train toward the left wall of the cañon,
and evidently intended to scale it. Shefford could not see any trail,
and the wall appeared steep and insurmountable. But upon nearing the
cliff he saw a narrow broken trail leading zigzag up over smooth rock,
weathered slope, and through cracks.

"Spread out, and careful now!" yelled Withers.

The need of both advices soon became manifest to Shefford. The burros
started stones rolling, making danger for those below. Shefford
dismounted and led Nack-yal and turned aside many a rolling rock. The
Indian and the burros, with the red mule leading, climbed steadily. But
the mustangs had trouble. Joe's spirited bay had to be coaxed to face
the ascent; Nack-yal balked at every difficult step; and Dynamite
slipped on a flat slant of rock and slid down forty feet. Withers and
Lake with ropes hauled the mare out of the dangerous position. Shefford,
who brought up the rear, saw all the action, and it was exciting, but
his pleasure in the climb was spoiled by sight of blood and hair on
the stones. The ascent was crooked, steep, and long, and when Shefford
reached the top of the wall he was glad to rest. It made him gasp to
look down and see what he had surmounted. The cañon floor, green and
level, lay a thousand feet below; and the wild burros which had followed
on the trail looked like rabbits.

Shefford mounted presently, and rode out upon a wide, smooth trail
leading into a cedar forest. There were bunches of gray sage in the open
places. The air was cool and crisp, laden with a sweet fragrance. He saw
Lake and Withers bobbing along, now on one side of the trail, now on the
other, and they kept to a steady trot. Occasionally the Indian and his
bright-red saddle-blanket showed in an opening of the cedars.

It was level country, and there was nothing for Shefford to see except
cedar and sage, an outcropping of red rock in places, and the winding
trail. Mocking-birds made melody everywhere. Shefford seemed full of
a strange pleasure, and the hours flew by. Nack-yal still wanted to be
everlastingly turning off the trail, and, moreover, now he wanted to go
faster. He was eager, restless, dissatisfied.

At noon the pack-train descended into a deep draw, well covered with
cedar and sage. There was plenty of grass and shade, but no water.
Shefford was surprised to see that every pack was removed; however, the
roll of blankets was left on Dynamite.

The men made a fire and began to cook a noonday meal. Shefford, tired
and warm, sat in a shady spot and watched. He had become all eyes. He
had almost forgotten Fay Larkin; he had forgotten his trouble; and
the present seemed sweet and full. Presently his ears were filled by a
pattering roar and, looking up the draw, he saw two streams of sheep
and goats coming down. Soon an Indian shepherd appeared, riding a fine
mustang. A cream-colored colt bounded along behind, and presently a
shaggy dog came in sight. The Indian dismounted at the camp, and his
flock spread by in two white and black streams. The dog went with them.
Withers and Joe shook hands with the Indian, whom Joe called "Navvy,"
and Shefford lost no time in doing likewise. Then Nas Ta Bega came in,
and he and the Navajo talked. When the meal was ready all of them sat
down round the canvas. The shepherd did not tie his horse.

Presently Shefford noticed that Nack-yal had returned to camp and was
acting strangely. Evidently he was attracted by the Indian's mustang or
the cream-colored colt. At any rate, Nack-yal hung around, tossed his
head, whinnied in a low, nervous manner, and looked strangely eager and
wild. Shefford was at first amused, then curious. Nack-yal approached
too close to the mother of the colt, and she gave him a sounding kick in
the ribs. Nack-yal uttered a plaintive snort and backed away, to stand,
crestfallen, with all his eagerness and fire vanished.

Nas Ta Bega pointed to the mustang and said something in his own tongue.
Then Withers addressed the visiting Indian, and they exchanged some
words, whereupon the trader turned to Shefford:

"I bought Nack-yal from this Indian three years ago. This mare is
Nack-yal's mother. He was born over here to the south. That's why he
always swung left off the trail. He wanted to go home. Just now he
recognized his mother and she whaled away and gave him a whack for his
pains. She's got a colt now and probably didn't recognize Nack-yal. But
he's broken-hearted."

The trader laughed, and Joe said, "You can't tell what these durn
mustangs will do." Shefford felt sorry for Nack-yal, and when it came
time to saddle him again found him easier to handle than ever before.
Nack-yal stood with head down, broken-spirited.

Shefford was the first to ride up out of the draw, and once upon the
top of the ridge he halted to gaze, wide-eyed and entranced. A rolling,
endless plain sloped down beneath him, and led him on to a distant
round-topped mountain. To the right a red cañon opened its jagged jaws,
and away to the north rose a whorled and strange sea of curved ridges,
crags, and domes.

Nas Ta Bega rode up then, leading the pack-train.

"Bi Nai, that is Na-tsis-an," he said, pointing to the mountain. "Navajo
Mountain. And there in the north are the cañon."

Shefford followed the Indian down the trail and soon lost sight of that
wide green-and-red wilderness. Nas Ta Bega turned at an intersecting
trail, rode down into the cañon, and climbed out on the other side.
Shefford got a glimpse now and then of the black dome of the mountain,
but for the most part the distant points of the country were hidden.
They crossed many trails, and went up and down the sides of many shallow
cañon. Troops of wild mustangs whistled at them, stood on ridge-tops to
watch, and then dashed away with manes and tails flying.

Withers rode forward presently and halted the pack-train. He had some
conversation with Nas Ta Bega, whereupon the Indian turned his horse and
trotted back, to disappear in the cedars.

"I'm some worried," explained Withers. "Joe thinks he saw a bunch of
horsemen trailing us. My eyes are bad and I can't see far. The Indian
will find out. I took a roundabout way to reach the village because I'm
always dodging Shadd."

This communication lent an added zest to the journey. Shefford could
hardly believe the truth that his eyes and his ears brought to his
consciousness. He turned in behind Withers and rode down the rough
trail, helping the mustang all in his power. It occurred to him that
Nack-yal had been entirely different since that meeting with his mother
in the draw. He turned no more off the trail; he answered readily to the
rein; he did not look afar from every ridge. Shefford conceived a liking
for the mustang.

Withers turned sidewise in his saddle and let his mustang pick the way.

"Another time we'll go up round the base of the mountain, where you can
look down on the grandest scene in the world," said he. "Two hundred
miles of wind-worn rock, all smooth and bare, without a single straight
line--cañon, caves, bridges--the most wonderful country in the world!
Even the Indians haven't explored it. It's haunted, for them, and they
have strange gods. The Navajos will hunt on this side of the mountain,
but not on the other. That north side is consecrated ground. My wife
has long been trying to get the Navajos to tell her the secret of
Nonnezoshe. Nonnezoshe means Rainbow Bridge. The Indians worship it, but
as far as she can find out only a few have ever seen it. I imagine it'd
be worth some trouble."

"Maybe that's the bridge Venters talked about--the one overarching the
entrance to Surprise Valley," Said Shefford.

"It might be," replied the trader. "You've got a good chance of finding
out. Nas Ta Bega is the man. You stick to that Indian. ... Well, we
start down here into this cañon, and we go down some, I reckon. In
half an hour you'll see sago-lilies and Indian paint-brush and vermilion
cactus."

. . . . . . . . . . .

About the middle of the afternoon the pack-train and its drivers arrived
at the hidden Mormon village. Nas Ta Bega had not returned from his
scout back along the trail.

Shefford's sensibilities had all been overstrained, but he had left in
him enthusiasm and appreciation that made the situation of this village
a fairyland. It was a valley, a cañon floor, so long that he could
not see the end, and perhaps a quarter of a mile wide. The air was hot,
still, and sweetly odorous of unfamiliar flowers. Piñon and cedar trees
surrounded the little log and stone houses, and along the walls of the
cañon stood sharp-pointed, dark-green spruce-trees. These walls were
singular of shape and color. They were not imposing in height, but they
waved like the long, undulating swell of a sea. Every foot of surface
was perfectly smooth, and the long curved lines of darker tinge that
streaked the red followed the rounded line of the slope at the top. Far
above, yet overhanging, were great yellow crags and peaks, and between
these, still higher, showed the pine-fringed slope of Navajo Mountain
with snow in the sheltered places, and glistening streams, like silver
threads, running down.

All this Shefford noticed as he entered the valley from round a corner
of wall. Upon nearer view he saw and heard a host of children, who,
looking up to see the intruders, scattered like frightened quail. Long
gray grass covered the ground, and here and there wide, smooth paths
had been worn. A swift and murmuring brook ran through the middle of the
valley, and its banks were bordered with flowers.

Withers led the way to one side near the wall, where a clump of
cedar-trees and a dark, swift spring boiling out of the rocks and banks
of amber moss with purple blossoms made a beautiful camp site. Here
the mustangs were unsaddled and turned loose without hobbles. It was
certainly unlikely that they would leave such a spot. Some of the burros
were unpacked, and the others Withers drove off into the village.

"Sure's pretty nice," said Joe, wiping his sweaty face. "I'll never
want to leave. It suits me to lie on this moss.... Take a drink of that
spring."

Shefford complied with alacrity and found the water cool and sweet,
and he seemed to feel it all through him. Then he returned to the mossy
bank. He did not reply to Joe. In fact, all his faculties were absorbed
in watching and feeling, and he lay there long after Joe went off to
the village. The murmur of water, the hum of bees, the songs of
strange birds, the sweet, warm air, the dreamy summer somnolence of the
valley--all these added drowsiness to Shefford's weary lassitude, and he
fell asleep. When he awoke Nas Ta Bega was sitting near him and Joe was
busy near a camp-fire.

"Hello, Nas Ta Bega!" said Shefford. "Was there any one trailing us?"

The Navajo nodded.

Joe raised his head and with forceful brevity said, "Shadd."

"Shadd!" echoed Shefford, remembering the dark, sinister face of his
visitor that night in the Sagi. "Joe, is it serious--his trailing us?"

"Well, I don't know how durn serious it is, but I'm scared to death,"
replied Lake. "He and his gang will hold us up somewhere on the way
home."

Shefford regarded Joe with both concern and doubt. Joe's words were at
variance with his looks.

"Say, pard, can you shoot a rifle?" queried Joe.

"Yes. I'm a fair shot at targets."

The Mormon nodded his head as if pleased. "That's good. These
outlaws are all poor shots with a rifle. So 'm I. But I can handle a
six-shooter. I reckon we'll make Shadd sweat if he pushes us."

Withers returned, driving the burros, all of which had been unpacked
down to the saddles. Two gray-bearded men accompanied him. One of them
appeared to be very old and venerable, and walked with a stick. The
other had a sad-lined face and kind, mild blue eyes. Shefford observed
that Lake seemed unusually respectful. Withers introduced these Mormons
merely as Smith and Henninger. They were very cordial and pleasant in
their greetings to Shefford. Presently another, somewhat younger, man
joined the group, a stalwart, jovial fellow with ruddy face. There was
certainly no mistaking his kindly welcome as he shook Shefford's hand.
His name was Beal. The three stood round the camp-fire for a while,
evidently glad of the presence of fellow-men and to hear news from the
outside. Finally they went away, taking Joe with them. Withers took up
the task of getting supper where Joe had been made to leave it.

"Shefford, listen," he said, presently, as he knelt before the fire. "I
told them right out that you'd been a Gentile clergyman--that you'd gone
back on your religion. It impressed them and you've been well received.
I'll tell the same thing over at Stonebridge. You'll get in right. Of
course I don't expect they'll make a Mormon of you. But they'll try to.
Meanwhile you can be square and friendly all the time you're trying to
find your Fay Larkin. To-morrow you'll meet some of the women. They're
good souls, but, like any women, crazy for news. Think what it is to be
shut up in here between these walls!"

"Withers, I'm intensely interested," replied Shefford, "and excited,
too. Shall we stay here long?"

"I'll stay a couple of days, then go to Stonebridge with Joe. He'll
come back here, and when you both feel like leaving, and if Nas Ta Bega
thinks it safe, you'll take a trail over to some Indian hogans and pack
me out a load of skins and blankets.... My boy, you've all the time
there is, and I wish you luck. This isn't a bad place to loaf. I always
get sentimental over here. Maybe it's the women. Some of them are
pretty, and one of them--Shefford, they call her the Sago Lily. Her
first name is Mary, I'm told. Don't know her last name. She's lovely.
And I'll bet you forget Fay Larkin in a flash. Only--be careful. You
drop in here with rather peculiar credentials, so to speak--as my helper
and as a man with no religion! You'll not only be fully trusted, but
you'll be welcome to these lonely women. So be careful. Remember it's
my secret belief they are sealed wives and are visited occasionally at
night by their husbands. I don't know this, but I believe it. And you're
not supposed to dream of that."

"How many men in the village?" asked Shefford.

"Three. You met them."

"Have they wives?" asked Shefford, curiously.

"Wives! Well, I guess. But only one each that I know of. Joe Lake is the
only unmarried Mormon I've met."

"And no men--strangers, cowboys, outlaws--ever come to this village?"

"Except to Indians, it seems to be a secret so far," replied the trader,
earnestly. "But it can't be kept secret. I've said that time after time
over in Stonebridge. With Mormons it's 'sufficient unto the day is the
evil thereof.'"

"What'll happen when outsiders do learn and ride in here?"

"There'll be trouble--maybe bloodshed. Mormon women are absolutely good,
but they're human, and want and need a little life. And, strange to say,
Mormon men are pig-headedly jealous.... Why, if some of the cowboys I
knew in Durango would ride over here there'd simply be hell. But that's
a long way, and probably this village will be deserted before news of it
ever reaches Colorado. There's more danger of Shadd and his gang coming
in. Shadd's half Piute. He must know of this place. And he's got some
white outlaws in his gang.... Come on. Grub's ready, and I'm too hungry
to talk."

Later, when shadows began to gather in the valley and the lofty peaks
above were gold in the sunset glow, Withers left camp to look after the
straying mustangs, and Shefford strolled to and fro under the cedars.
The lights and shades in the Sagi that first night had moved him to
enthusiastic watchfulness, but here they were so weird and beautiful
that he was enraptured. He actually saw great shafts of gold and shadows
of purple streaming from the peaks down into the valley. It was day on
the heights and twilight in the valley. The swiftly changing colors were
like rainbows.

While he strolled up and down several women came to the spring and
filled their buckets. They wore shawls or hoods and their garments were
somber, but, nevertheless, they appeared to have youth and comeliness.
They saw him, looked at him curiously, and then, without speaking,
went back on the well-trodden path. Presently down the path appeared a
woman--a girl in lighter garb. It was almost white. She was shapely and
walked with free, graceful step, reminding him of the Indian girl,
Glen Naspa. This one wore a hood shaped like a huge sunbonnet and it
concealed her face. She carried a bucket. When she reached the spring
and went down the few stone steps Shefford saw that she did not have on
shoes. As she braced herself to lift the bucket her bare foot clung to
the mossy stone. It was a strong, sinewy, beautiful foot, instinct with
youth. He was curious enough, he thought, but the awakening artist in
him made him more so. She dragged at the full bucket and had difficulty
in lifting it out of the hole. Shefford strode forward and took the
bucket-handle from her.

"Won't you let me help you?" he said, lifting the bucket. "Indeed--it's
very heavy."

"Oh--thank you," she said, without raising her head. Her voice seemed
singularly young and sweet. He had not heard a voice like it. She moved
down the path and he walked beside her. He felt embarrassed, yet more
curious than ever; he wanted to say something, to turn and look at her,
but he kept on for a dozen paces without making up his mind.

Finally he said: "Do you really carry this heavy bucket? Why, it makes
my arm ache."

"Twice every day--morning and evening," she replied. "I'm very strong."

Then he stole a look out of the corner of his eye, and, seeing that her
face was hidden from him by the hood, he turned to observe her at better
advantage. A long braid of hair hung down her back. In the twilight it
gleamed dull gold. She came up to his shoulder. The sleeve nearest him
was rolled up to her elbow, revealing a fine round arm. Her hand, like
her foot, was brown, strong, and well shaped. It was a hand that had
been developed by labor. She was full-bosomed, yet slender, and she
walked with a free stride that made Shefford admire and wonder.

They passed several of the little stone and log houses, and women
greeted them as they went by and children peered shyly from the doors.
He kept trying to think of something to say, and, failing in that,
determined to have one good look under the hood before he left her.

"You walk lame," she said, solicitously. "Let me carry the bucket
now--please. My house is near."

"Am I lame?... Guess so, a little," he replied. "It was a hard ride for
me. But I'll carry the bucket just the same."

They went on under some pinyon-trees, down a path to a little house
identical with the others, except that it had a stone porch. Shefford
smelled fragrant wood-smoke and saw a column curling from the low, flat,
stone chimney. Then he set the bucket down on the porch. "Thank you,
Mr. Shefford," she said. "You know my name?" he asked. "Yes. Mr. Withers
spoke to my nearest neighbor and she told me."

"Oh, I see. And you--"

He did not go on and she did not reply. When she stepped upon the porch
and turned he was able to see under the hood. The face there was in
shadow, and for that very reason he answered to ungovernable impulse and
took a step closer to her. Dark, grave, sad eyes looked down at him, and
he felt as if he could never draw his own glance away. He seemed not
to see the rest of her face, and yet felt that it was lovely. Then a
downward movement of the hood hid from him the strange eyes and the
shadowy loveliness.

"I--I beg your pardon," he said, quickly, drawing back. "I'm rude. ...
Withers told me about a girl he called--he said looked like a sago-lily.
That's no excuse to stare under your hood. But I--I was curious. I
wondered if--"

He hesitated, realizing how foolish his talk was. She stood a moment,
probably watching him, but he could not be sure, for her face was
hidden.

"They call me that," she said. "But my name is Mary."

"Mary--what?" he asked.

"Just Mary," she said, simply. "Good night."

He did not say good night and could not have told why. She took up the
bucket and went into the dark house. Shefford hurried away into the
gathering darkness.




VI. IN THE HIDDEN VALLEY


Shefford had hardly seen her face, yet he was more interested in a woman
than he had ever been before. Still, he reflected, as he returned to
camp, he had been under a long strain, he was unduly excited by this new
and adventurous life, and these, with the mystery of this village, were
perhaps accountable for a state of mind that could not last.

He rolled in his blankets on the soft bed of moss and he saw the stars
through the needle-like fringe of the pinyons. It seemed impossible
to fall asleep. The two domed peaks split the sky, and back of them,
looming dark and shadowy, rose the mountain. There was something cold,
austere, and majestic in their lofty presence, and they made him feel
alone, yet not alone. He raised himself to see the quiet forms of
Withers and Nas Ta Bega prone in the starlight, and their slow, deep
breathing was that of tired men. A bell on a mustang rang somewhere off
in the valley and gave out a low, strange, reverberating echo from
wall to wall. When it ceased a silence set in that was deader than
any silence he had ever felt, but gradually he became aware of the low
murmur of the brook. For the rest there was no sound of wind, no bark of
dog or yelp of coyote, no sound of voice in the village.

He tried to sleep, but instead thought of this girl who was called the
Sago Lily. He recalled everything incident to their meeting and the
walk to her home. Her swift, free step, her graceful poise, her shapely
form--the long braid of hair, dull gold in the twilight, the beautiful
bare foot and the strong round arm--these he thought of and recalled
vividly. But of her face he had no idea except the shadowy, haunting
loveliness, and that grew more and more difficult to remember. The tone
of her voice and what she had said--how the one had thrilled him and the
other mystified! It was her voice that had most attracted him. There was
something in it besides music--what, he could not tell--sadness, depth,
something like that in Nas Ta Bega's beauty springing from disuse. But
this seemed absurd. Why should he imagine her voice one that had not
been used as freely as any other woman's? She was a Mormon; very likely,
almost surely, she was a sealed wife. His interest, too, was absurd, and
he tried to throw it off, or imagine it one he might have felt in any
other of these strange women of the hidden village.

But Shefford's intelligence and his good sense, which became operative
when he was fully roused and set the situation clearly before his eyes,
had no effect upon his deeper, mystic, and primitive feelings. He saw
the truth and he felt something that he could not name. He would not be
a fool, but there was no harm in dreaming. And unquestionably,
beyond all doubt, the dream and the romance that had lured him to the
wilderness were here; hanging over him like the shadows of the great
peaks. His heart swelled with emotion when he thought of how the
black and incessant despair of the past was gone. So he embraced any
attraction that made him forget and think and feel; some instinct
stronger than intelligence bade him drift.

. . . . . . . . . . .

Joe's rolling voice awoke him next morning and he rose with a singular
zest. When or where in his life had he awakened in such a beautiful
place? Almost he understood why Venters and Bess had been haunted by
memories of Surprise Valley. The morning was clear, cool, sweet; the
peaks were dim and soft in rosy cloud; shafts of golden sunlight shot
down into the purple shadows. Mocking-birds were singing. His body was
sore and tired from the unaccustomed travel, but his heart was full,
happy. His spirit wanted to run, and he knew there was something out
there waiting to meet it. The Indian and the trader and the Mormon all
meant more to him this morning. He had grown a little overnight. Nas Ta
Bega's deep "Bi Nai" rang in his ears, and the smiles of Withers and
Joe were greetings. He had friends; he had work; and there was rich,
strange, and helpful life to live. There was even a difference in
the mustang Nack-yal. He came readily; he did not look wild; he had a
friendly eye; and Shefford liked him more.

"What is there to do?" asked Shefford, feeling equal to a hundred tasks.

"No work," replied the trader, with a laugh, and he drew Shefford aside,
"I'm in no hurry. I like it here. And Joe never wants to leave. To-day
you can meet the women. Make yourself popular. I've already made you
that. These women are most all young and lonesome. Talk to them. Make
them like you. Then some day you may be safe to ask questions. Last
night I wanted to ask old Mother Smith if she ever heard the name
Fay Larkin. But I thought better of it. If there's a girl here or at
Stonebridge of that name we'll learn it. If there's mystery we'd better
go slow. Mormons are hell on secret and mystery, and to pry into their
affairs is to queer yourself. My advice is--just be as nice as you can
be, and let things happen."

Fay Larkin! All in a night Shefford had forgotten her. Why? He pondered
over the matter, and then the old thrill, the old desire, came back.

"Shefford, what do you think Nas Ta Bega said to me last night?" asked
Withers in lower voice.

"Haven't any idea," replied Shefford, curiously.

"We were sitting beside the fire. I saw you walking under the cedars.
You seemed thoughtful. That keen Indian watched you, and he said to me
in Navajo, 'Bi Nai has lost his God. He has come far to find a wife. Nas
Ta Bega is his brother.'... He meant he'll find both God and wife for
you. I don't know about that, but I say take the Indian as he thinks he
is--your brother. Long before I knew Nas Ta Bega well my wife used
to tell me about him. He's a sage and a poet--the very spirit of this
desert. He's worth cultivating for his own sake. But more--remember,
if Fay Larkin is still shut in that valley the Navajo will find her for
you."

"I shall take Nas Ta Bega as my brother--and be proud," replied
Shefford.

"There's another thing. Do you intend to confide in Joe?"

"I hadn't thought of that."

"Well, it might be a good plan. But wait until you know him better and
he knows you. He's ready to fight for you now. He's taken your trouble
to heart. You wouldn't think Joe is deeply religious. Yet he is. He may
never breathe a word about religion to you.... Now, Shefford, go ahead.
You've struck a trail. It's rough, but it'll make a man of you. It'll
lead somewhere."

"I'm singularly fortunate--I--who had lost all friends. Withers, I am
grateful. I'll prove it. I'll show--"

Withers's upheld hand checked further speech, and Shefford realized that
beneath the rough exterior of this desert trader there was fine feeling.
These men of crude toil and wild surroundings were beginning to loom up
large in Shefford's mind.

The day began leisurely. The men were yet at breakfast when the women
of the village began to come one by one to the spring. Joe Lake made
friendly and joking remarks to each. And as each one passed on down the
path he poised a biscuit in one hand and a cup of coffee in the other,
and with his head cocked sidewise like an owl he said, "Reckon I've got
to get me a woman like her."

Shefford saw and heard, yet he was all the time half unconsciously
watching with strange eagerness for a white figure to appear. At last
he saw her--the same girl with the hood, the same swift step. A
little shock or quiver passed over him, and at the moment all that was
explicable about it was something associated with regret.

Joe Lake whistled and stared.

"I haven't met her," he muttered.

"That's the Sago Lily," said Withers.

"Reckon I'm going to carry that bucket," went on Joe.

"And queer yourself with all the other women who've been to the spring?
Don't do it, Joe," advised the trader.

"But her bucket's bigger," protested Joe, weakly.

"That's true. But you ought to know Mormons. If she'd come first, all
right. As she didn't--why, don't single her out."

Joe kept his seat. The girl came to the spring. A low "good morning"
came from under the hood. Then she filled her bucket and started home.
Shefford observed that this time she wore moccasins and she carried the
heavy bucket with ease. When she disappeared he had again the vague,
inexplicable sensation of regret.

Joe Lake breathed heavily. "Reckon I've got to get me a woman like
her," he said. But the former jocose tone was lacking and he appeared
thoughtful.

. . . . . . . . . . .

Withers first took Shefford to the building used for a school. It was
somewhat larger than the other houses, had only one room with two doors
and several windows. It was full of children, of all sizes and ages,
sitting on rude board benches.

There were half a hundred of them, sturdy, healthy, rosy boys and girls,
clad in home-made garments. The young woman teacher was as embarrassed
as her pupils were shy, and the visitors withdrew without having heard a
word of lessons.

Withers then called upon Smith, Henninger, and Beal, and their wives.
Shefford found himself cordially received, and what little he did say
showed him how he would be listened to when he cared to talk. These folk
were plain and kindly, and he found that there was nothing about them to
dislike. The men appeared mild and quiet, and when not conversing seemed
austere. The repose of the women was only on the surface; underneath he
felt their intensity. Especially in many of the younger women, whom
he met in the succeeding hour, did he feel this power of restrained
emotion. This surprised him, as did also the fact that almost every
one of them was attractive and some of them were exceedingly pretty.
He became so interested in them all as a whole that he could not
individualize one. They were as widely different in appearance and
temperament as women of any other class, but it seemed to Shefford that
one common trait united them--and it was a strange, checked yearning for
something that he could not discover. Was it happiness? They certainly
seemed to be happy, far more so than those millions of women who were
chasing phantoms. Were they really sealed wives, as Withers believed,
and was this unnatural wife-hood responsible for the strange intensity?
At any rate he returned to camp with the conviction that he had stumbled
upon a remarkable situation.

He had been told the last names of only three women, and their husbands
were in the village. The names of the others were Ruth, Rebecca,
Joan--he could not recall them all. They were the mothers of these
beautiful children. The fathers, as far as he was concerned, were as
intangible as myths. Shefford was an educated clergyman, a man of the
world, and, as such, knew women in his way. Mormons might be strange and
different, yet the fundamental truth was that all over the world mothers
of children were wives; there was a relation between wife and mother
that did not need to be named to be felt; and he divined from this
that, whatever the situation of these lonely and hidden women, they knew
themselves to be wives. Shefford absolutely satisfied himself on that
score. If they were miserable they certainly did not show it, and the
question came to him how just was the criticism of uninformed men? His
judgment of Mormons had been established by what he had heard and read,
rather than what he knew. He wanted now to have an open mind. He had
studied the totemism and exogamy of the primitive races, and here was
his opportunity to understand polygamy. One wife for one man--that was
the law. Mormons broke it openly; Gentiles broke it secretly. Mormons
acknowledged all their wives and protected their children; Gentiles
acknowledged one wife only. Unquestionably the Mormons were wrong, but
were not the Gentiles still more wrong?

 .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

The following day Joe Lake appeared reluctant to start for Stonebridge
with Withers.

"Joe, you'd better come along," said the trader, dryly. "I reckon you've
seen a little too much of the Sago Lily."

Lake offered no reply, but it was evident from his sober face that
Withers had not hit short of the mark. Withers rode off, with a parting
word to Shefford, and finally Joe somberly mounted his bay and trotted
down the valley. As Nas Ta Bega had gone off somewhere to visit Indians,
Shefford was left alone.

He went into the village and made himself useful and agreeable. He
made friends with the children and he talked to the women until he was
hoarse. Their ignorance of the world was a spur to him, and never in
his life had he had such an attentive audience. And as he showed no
curiosity, asked no difficult questions, gradually what reserve he had
noted wore away, and the end of the day saw him on a footing with them
that Withers had predicted.

By the time several like days had passed it seemed from the interest and
friendliness of these women that he might have lived long among them.
He was possessed of wit and eloquence and information, which he freely
gave, and not with selfish motive. He liked these women; he liked to see
the somber shade pass from their faces, to see them brighten. He had met
the girl Mary at the spring and along the path, but he had not yet
seen her face. He was always looking for her, hoping to meet her, and
confessed to himself that the best of the day for him were the morning
and evening visits she made to the spring. Nevertheless, for some reason
hard to divine, he was reluctant to seek her deliberately.

Always while he had listened to her neighbors' talk, he had hoped they
might let fall something about her. But they did not. He received
an impression that she was not so intimate with the others as he had
supposed. They all made one big family. Still, she seemed a little
outside. He could bring no proofs to strengthen this idea. He merely
felt it, and many of his feelings were independent of intelligent
reason. Something had been added to curiosity, that was sure.

It was his habit to call upon Mother Smith in the afternoons. From the
first her talk to him hinted of a leaning toward thought of making him a
Mormon. Her husband and the other men took up her cue and spoke of their
religion, casually at first, but gradually opening their minds to
free and simple discussion of their faith. Shefford lent respectful
attention. He would rather have been a Mormon than an atheist, and
apparently they considered him the latter, and were earnest to save his
soul. Shefford knew that he could never be one any more than the other.
He was just at sea. But he listened, and he found them simple in faith,
blind, perhaps, but loyal and good. It was noteworthy that Mother Smith
happened to be the only woman in the village who had ever mentioned
religion to him. She was old, of a past generation; the young women
belonged to the present. Shefford pondered the significant difference.

Every day made more steadfast his impression of the great mystery that
was like a twining shadow round these women, yet in the same time many
little ideas shifted and many new characteristics became manifest. This
last was of course the result of acquaintance; he was learning more
about the villagers. He gathered from keen interpretation of subtle
words and looks that here in this lonely village, the same as in all
the rest of the world where women were together, there were cliques,
quarrels, dislikes, loves, and jealousies. The truth, once known to him,
made him feel natural and fortified his confidence to meet the demands
of an increasingly interesting position. He discovered, with a somewhat
grim amusement, that a clergyman's experience in a church full of women
had not been entirely useless.

One afternoon he let fall a careless remark that was a subtle question
in regard to the girl Mary, whom Withers called the Sago Lily. In
response he received an answer couched in the sweet poisoned honey
of woman's jealousy. He said no more. Certain ideas of his were
strengthened, and straightway he became thoughtful.

That afternoon late, as he did his camp chores, he watched for her.
But she did not come. Then he decided to go to see her. But even
the decision and the strange thrill it imparted did not change his
reluctance.

Twilight was darkening the valley when he reached her house, and the
shadows were thick under the pinyons. There was no light in the door or
window. He saw a white shape on the porch, and as he came down the path
it rose. It was the girl Mary, and she appeared startled.

"Good evening," he said. "It's Shefford. May I stay and talk a little
while?"

She was silent for so long that he began to feel awkward.

"I'd be glad to have you," she replied, finally.

There was a bench on the porch, but he preferred to sit upon a blanket
on the step.

"I've been getting acquainted with everybody--except you," he went on.

"I have been here," she replied.

That might have been a woman's speech, but it certainly had been made in
a girl's voice. She was neither shy nor embarrassed nor self-conscious.
As she stood back from him he could not see her face in the dense
twilight.

"I've been wanting to call on you."

She made some slight movement. Shefford felt a strange calm, yet he knew
the moment was big and potent.

"Won't you sit here?" he asked.

She complied with his wish, and then he saw her face, though dimly, in
the twilight. And it struck him mute. But he had no glimpse such as had
flashed upon him from under her hood that other night. He thought of a
white flower in shadow, and received his first impression of the rare
and perfect lily Withers had said graced the wild cañon. She was only a
girl. She sat very still, looking straight before her, and seemed to be
waiting, listening. Shefford saw the quick rise and fall of her bosom.

"I want to talk," he began, swiftly, hoping to put her at her ease.
"Every one here has been good to me and I've talked--oh, for hours and
hours. But the thing in my mind I haven't spoken of. I've never asked
any questions. That makes my part so strange. I want to tell why I came
out here. I need some one who will keep my secret, and perhaps help
me.... Would you?"

"Yes, if I could," she replied.

"You see I've got to trust you, or one of these other women. You're all
Mormons. I don't mean that's anything against you. I believe you're
all good and noble. But the fact makes--well, makes a liberty of speech
impossible. What can I do?"

Her silence probably meant that she did not know. Shefford sensed less
strain in her and more excitement. He believed he was on the right track
and did not regret his impulse. Even had he regretted it he would have
gone on, for opposed to caution and intelligence was his driving mystic
force.

Then he told her the truth about his boyhood, his ambition to be
an artist, his renunciation to his father's hope, his career as a
clergyman, his failure in religion, and the disgrace that had made him a
wanderer.

"Oh--I'm sorry!" she said. The faint starlight shone on her face, in her
eyes, and if he ever saw beauty and soul he saw them then. She seemed
deeply moved. She had forgotten herself. She betrayed girlhood then--all
the quick sympathy, the wonder, the sweetness of a heart innocent and
untutored. She looked at him with great, starry, questioning eyes, as if
they had just become aware of his presence, as if a man had been strange
to her.

"Thank you. It's good of you to be sorry," he said. "My instinct guided
me right. Perhaps you'll be my friend."

"I will be--if I can," she said.

"But CAN you be?"

"I don't know. I never had a friend. I... But, sir, I mustn't talk of
myself.... Oh, I'm afraid I can't help you."

How strange the pathos of her voice! Almost he believed she was in need
of help or sympathy or love. But he could not wholly trust a judgment
formed from observation of a class different from hers.

"Maybe you CAN help me. Let's see," he said. "I don't seek to make you
talk of yourself. But--you're a human being--a girl--almost a woman.
You're not dumb. But even a nun can talk."

"A nun? What is that?"

"Well--a nun is a sister of mercy--a woman consecrated to God--who has
renounced the world. In some ways you Mormon women here resemble nuns.
It is sacrifice that nails you in this lonely valley.... You see--how
I talk! One word, one thought brings another, and I speak what perhaps
should be unsaid. And it's hard, because I feel I could unburden myself
to you."

"Tell me what you want," she said.

Shefford hesitated, and became aware of the rapid pound of his heart.
More than anything he wanted to be fair to this girl. He saw that she
was warming to his influence. Her shadowy eyes were fixed upon him. The
starlight, growing brighter, shone on her golden hair and white face.

"I'll tell you presently," he said. "I've trusted you. I'll trust you
with all.... But let me have my own time. This is so strange a thing,
my wanting to confide in you. It's selfish, perhaps. I have my own ax
to grind. I hope I won't wrong you. That's why I'm going to be perfectly
frank. I might wait for days to get better acquainted. But the impulse
is on me. I've been so interested in all you Mormon women. The fact--the
meaning of this hidden village is so--so terrible to me. But that's none
of my business. I have spent my afternoons and evenings with these women
at the different cottages. You do not mingle with them. They are lonely,
but have not such loneliness as yours. I have passed here every night.
No light--no sound. I can't help thinking. Don't censure me or be afraid
or draw within yourself just because I must think. I may be all wrong.
But I'm curious. I wonder about you. Who are you? Mary--Mary what? Maybe
I really don't want to know. I came with selfish motive and now I'd like
to--to--what shall I say? Make your life a little less lonely for the
while I'm here. That's all. It needn't offend. And if you accept it, how
much easier I can tell you my secret. You are a Mormon and I--well, I am
only a wanderer in these wilds. But--we might help each other.... Have I
made a mistake?"

"No--no," she cried, almost wildly.

"We can be friends then. You will trust me, help me?"

"Yes, if I dare."

"Surely you may dare what the other women would?"

She was silent.

And the wistfulness of her silence touched him. He felt contrition. He
did not stop to analyze his own emotions, but he had an inkling that
once this strange situation was ended he would have food for reflection.
What struck him most now was the girl's blanched face, the strong,
nervous clasp of her hands, the visible tumult of her bosom. Excitement
alone could not be accountable for this. He had not divined the cause
for such agitation. He was puzzled, troubled, and drawn irresistibly. He
had not said what he had planned to say. The moment had given birth to
his speech, and it had flowed. What was guiding him?

"Mary," he said, earnestly, "tell me--have you mother, father, sister,
brother? Something prompts me to ask that."

"All dead--gone--years ago," she answered.

"How old are you?"

"Eighteen, I think. I'm not sure."

"You ARE lonely."

His words were gentle and divining.

"O God!" she cried. "Lonely!"

Then as a man in a dream he beheld her weeping. There was in her the
unconsciousness of a child and the passion of a woman. He gazed out into
the dark shadows and up at the white stars, and then at the bowed head
with its mass of glinting hair. But her agitation was no longer strange
to him. A few gentle and kind words had proved her undoing. He knew
then that whatever her life was, no kindness or sympathy entered it.
Presently she recovered, and sat as before, only whiter of face it
seemed, and with something tragic in her dark eyes. She was growing cold
and still again, aloof, more like those other Mormon women.

"I understand," he said. "I'm not sorry I spoke. I felt your trouble,
whatever it is.... Do not retreat into your cold shell, I beg of you....
Let me trust you with my secret."

He saw her shake out of the cold apathy. She wavered. He felt an
inexplicable sweetness in the power his voice seemed to have upon her.
She bowed her head in acquiescence. And Shefford began his story. Did
she grow still, like stone, or was that only his vivid imagination?
He told her of Venters and Bess--of Lassiter and Jane--of little Fay
Larkin--of the romance, and then the tragedy of Surprise Valley.

"So, when my Church disowned me," he concluded, "I conceived the idea
of wandering into the wilds of Utah to save Fay Larkin from that cañon
prison. It grew to be the best and strongest desire of my life. I think
if I could save her that it would save me. I never loved any girl.
I can't say that I love Fay Larkin. How could I when I've never seen
her--when she's only a dream girl? But I believe if she were to become a
reality--a flesh-and-blood girl--that I would love her."

That was more than Shefford had ever confessed to any one, and it
stirred him to his depths. Mary bent her head on her hands in strange,
stonelike rigidity.

"So here I am in the cañon country," he continued. "Withers tells me
it is a country of rainbows, both in the evanescent air and in the
changeless stone. Always as a boy there had been for me some haunting
promise, some treasure at the foot of the rainbow. I shall expect the
curve of a rainbow to lead me down into Surprise Valley. A dreamer, you
will call me. But I have had strange dreams come true.... Mary, do you
think THIS dream will come true?"

She was silent so long that he repeated his question.

"Only--in heaven," she whispered.

He took her reply strangely and a chill crept over him.

"You think my plan to seek to strive, to find--you think that idle,
vain?"

"I think it noble.... Thank God I've met a man like you!"

"Don't praise me!" he exclaimed, hastily. "Only help me.... Mary, will
you answer a few little questions, if I swear by my honor I'll never
reveal what you tell me?"

"I'll try."

He moistened his lips. Why did she seem so strange, so far away? The
hovering shadows made him nervous. Always he had been afraid of the
dark. His mood now admitted of unreal fancies.

"Have you ever heard of Fay Larkin?" he asked, very low.

"Yes."

"Was there only one Fay Larkin?"

"Only one."

"Did you--ever see her?"

"Yes," came the faint reply.

He was grateful. How she might be breaking faith with creed or duty!
He had not dared to hope so much. All his inner being trembled at the
portent of his next query. He had not dreamed it would be so hard to
put, or would affect him so powerfully. A warmth, a glow, a happiness
pervaded his spirit; and the chill, the gloom were as if they had never
been.

"Where is Fay Larkin now?" he asked, huskily.

He bent over her, touched her, leaned close to catch her whisper.

"She is--dead!"

Slowly Shefford rose, with a sickening shock, and then in bitter pain he
strode away into the starlight.




VII. SAGO-LILIES


The Indian returned to camp that night, and early the next day, which
was Sunday, Withers rode in, accompanied by a stout, gray-bearded
personage wearing a long black coat.

"Bishop Kane, this is my new man, John Shefford," said the trader.

Shefford acknowledged the introduction with the respectful courtesy
evidently in order, and found himself being studied intently by clear
blue eyes. The bishop appeared old, dry, and absorbed in thought; he
spoke quaintly, using in every speech some Biblical word or phrase; and
he had an air of authority. He asked Shefford to hear him preach at the
morning service, and then he went off into the village.

"Guess he liked your looks," remarked Withers.

"He certainly sized me up," replied Shefford.

"Well, what could you expect? Sure I never heard of a deal like this--a
handsome young fellow left alone with a lot of pretty Mormon women!
You'll understand when you learn to know Mormons. Bishop Kane's a square
old chap. Crazy on religion, maybe, but otherwise he's a good fellow.
I made the best stand I could for you. The Mormons over at Stonebridge
were huffy because I hadn't consulted them before fetching you over
here. If I had, of course you'd never have gotten here. It was Joe Lake
who made it all right with them. Joe's well thought of, and he certainly
stood up for you."

"I owe him something, then," replied Shefford. "Hope my obligations
don't grow beyond me. Did you leave Joe at Stonebridge?"

"Yes. He wanted to stay, and I had work there that'll keep him awhile.
Shefford, we got news of Shadd--bad news. The half-breed's cutting up
rough. His gang shot up some Piutes over here across the line. Then he
got run out of Durango a few weeks ago for murder. A posse of cowboys
trailed him. But he slipped them. He's a fox. You know he was trailing
us here. He left the trail, Nas Ta Bega said. I learned at Stonebridge
that Shadd is well disposed toward Mormons. It takes the Mormons to
handle Indians. Shadd knows of this village and that's why he shunted
off our trail. But he might hang down in the pass and wait for us. I
think I'd better go back to Kayenta alone, across country. You stay here
till Joe and the Indian think it safe to leave. You'll be going up on
the slope of Navajo to load a pack-train, and from there it may be well
to go down West Cañon to Red Lake, and home over the divide, the way
you came. Joe'll decide what's best. And you might as well buckle on a
gun and get used to it. Sooner or later you'll have to shoot your way
through."

Shefford did not respond with his usual enthusiasm, and the omission
caused the trader to scrutinize him closely.

"What's the matter?" he queried. "There's no light in your eye to-day.
You look a little shady."

"I didn't rest well last night," replied Shefford. "I'm depressed this
morning. But I'll cheer up directly."

"Did you get along with the women?"

"Very well indeed. And I've enjoyed myself. It's a strange, beautiful
place."

"Do you like the women?"

"Yes."

"Have you seen much of the Sago Lily?"

"No. I carried her bucket one night--and saw her only once again. I've
been with the other women most of the time."

"It's just as well you didn't run often into Mary. Joe's sick over her.
I never saw a girl with a face and form to equal hers. There's danger
here for any man, Shefford. Even for you who think you've turned your
back on the world! Any of these Mormon women may fall in love with you.
They CAN'T love their husbands. That's how I figure it. Religion holds
them, not love. And the peculiar thing is this: they're second, third,
or fourth wives, all sealed. That means their husbands are old, have
picked them out for youth and physical charms, have chosen the very
opposite to their first wives, and then have hidden them here in this
lonely hole.... Did you ever imagine so terrible a thing?"

"No, Withers, I did not."

"Maybe that's what depressed you. Anyway, my hunch is worth taking. Be
as nice as you can, Shefford. Lord knows it would be good for these poor
women if every last one of them fell in love with you. That won't hurt
them so long as you keep your head. Savvy? Perhaps I seem rough and
coarse to a man of your class. Well, that may be. But human nature is
human nature. And in this strange and beautiful place you might love
an Indian girl, let alone the Sago Lily. That's all. I sure feel better
with that load off my conscience. Hope I don't offend."

"No indeed. I thank you, Withers," replied Shefford, with his hand
on the trader's shoulder. "You are right to caution me. I seem to be
wild--thirsting for adventure--chasing a gleam. In these unstable days
I can't answer for my heart. But I can for my honor. These unfortunate
women are as safe with me as--as they are with you and Joe."

Withers uttered a blunt laugh.

"See here, son, look things square in the eye. Men of violent, lonely,
toilsome lives store up hunger for the love of woman. Love of a STRANGE
woman, if you want to put it that way. It's nature. It seems all the
beautiful young women in Utah are corralled in this valley. When I
come over here I feel natural, but I'm not happy. I'd like to make love
to--to that flower-faced girl. And I'm not ashamed to own it. I've told
Molly, my wife, and she understands. As for Joe, it's much harder for
him. Joe never has had a wife or sweetheart. I tell you he's sick, and
if I'd stay here a month I'd be sick."

Withers had spoken with fire in his eyes, with grim humor on his lips,
with uncompromising brutal truth. What he admitted was astounding to
Shefford, but, once spoken, not at all strange. The trader was a man who
spoke his inmost thought. And what he said suddenly focused Shefford's
mental vision clear and whole upon the appalling significance of the
tragedy of those women, especially of the girl whose life was lonelier,
sadder, darker than that of the others.

"Withers, trust me," replied Shefford.

"All right. Make the best of a bad job," said the trader, and went off
about his tasks.

Shefford and Withers attended the morning service, which was held in the
school-house. Exclusive of the children every inhabitant of the village
was there. The women, except the few eldest, were dressed in white and
looked exceedingly well. Manifestly they had bestowed care upon this
Sabbath morning's toilet. One thing surely this dress occasion brought
out, and it was evidence that the Mormon women were not poor, whatever
their misfortunes might be. Jewelry was not wanting, nor fine lace. And
they all wore beautiful wild flowers of a kind unknown to Shefford. He
received many a bright smile. He looked for Mary, hoping to see her face
for the first time in the daylight, but she sat far forward and did not
turn. He saw her graceful white neck, the fine lines of her throat, and
her colorless cheek. He recognized her, yet in the light she seemed a
stranger.

The service began with a short prayer and was followed by the singing of
a hymn. Nowhere had Shefford heard better music or sweeter voices.
How deeply they affected him! Had any man ever fallen into a stranger
adventure than this? He had only to shut his eyes to believe it all a
creation of his fancy--the square log cabin with its red mud between
the chinks and a roof like an Indian hogan--the old bishop in his black
coat, standing solemnly, his hand beating time to the tune--the few old
women, dignified and stately--the many young women, fresh and handsome,
lifting their voices.

Shefford listened intently to the bishop's sermon. In some respects
it was the best he had ever heard. In others it was impossible for an
intelligent man to regard seriously. It was very long, lasting an hour
and a half, and the parts that were helpful to Shefford came from the
experience and wisdom of a man who had grown old in the desert. The
physical things that had molded characters of iron, the obstacles that
only strong, patient men could have overcome, the making of homes in a
wilderness, showed the greatness of this alien band of Mormons. Shefford
conceded greatness to them. But the strange religion--the narrowing down
of the world to the soil of Utah, the intimations of prophets on earth
who had direct converse with God, the austere self-conscious omnipotence
of this old bishop--these were matters that Shefford felt he must
understand better, and see more favorably, if he were not to consider
them impossible.

Immediately after the service, forgetting that his intention had been to
get the long-waited-for look at Mary in the light of the sun, Shefford
hurried back to camp and to a secluded spot among the cedars. Strikingly
it had come to him that the fault he had found in Gentile religion he
now found in the Mormon religion. An old question returned to haunt
him--were all religions the same in blindness? As far as he could see,
religion existed to uphold the founders of a Church, a creed. The Church
of his own kind was a place where narrow men and women went to think of
their own salvation. They did not go there to think of others. And now
Shefford's keen mind saw something of Mormonism and found it wanting.
Bishop Kane was a sincere, good, mistaken man. He believed what he
preached, but that would not stand logic. He taught blindness and mostly
it appeared to be directed at the women. Was there no religion divorced
from power, no religion as good for one man as another, no religion in
the spirit of brotherly love? Nas Ta Bega's "Bi Nai" (brother)--that was
love, if not religion, and perhaps the one and the other were the same.
Shefford kept in mind an intention to ask Nas Ta Bega what he thought of
the Mormons.

Later, when opportunity afforded, he did speak to the Indian. Nas
Ta Bega threw away his cigarette and made an impressive gesture that
conveyed as much sorrow as scorn.

"The first Mormon said God spoke to him and told him to go to a certain
place and dig. He went there and found the Book of Mormon. It said
follow me, marry many wives, go into the desert and multiply, send your
sons out into the world and bring us young women, many young women. And
when the first Mormon became strong with many followers he said again:
Give to me part of your labor--of your cattle and sheep--of your
silver--that I may build me great cathedrals for you to worship in. And
I will commune with God and make it right and good that you have more
wives. That is Mormonism."

"Nas Ta Bega, you mean the Mormons are a great and good people blindly
following a leader?"

"Yes. And the leader builds for himself--not for them."

"That is not religion. He has no God but himself."

"They have no God. They are blind like the Mokis who have the creeping
growths on their eyes. They have no God they can see and hear and feel,
who is with them day and night."

It was late in the afternoon when Bishop Kane rode through the camp and
halted on his way to speak to Shefford. He was kind and fatherly. "Young
man, are you open to faith?" he questioned gravely.

"I think I am," replied Shefford, thankful he could answer readily.

"Then come into the fold. You are a lost sheep. 'Away on the desert
I heard its cry.'... God bless you. Visit me when you ride to
Stonebridge."

He flicked his horse with a cedar branch and trotted away beside the
trader, and presently the green-choked neck of the valley hid them from
view. Shefford could not have said that he was glad to be left behind,
and yet neither was he sorry.

That Sabbath evening as he sat quietly with Nas Ta Bega, watching the
sunset gilding the peaks, he was visited by three of the young Mormon
women--Ruth, Joan, and Hester. They deliberately sought him and merrily
led him off to the village and to the evening service of singing and
prayer. Afterward he was surrounded and made much of. He had been
popular before, but this was different. When he thoughtfully wended his
way campward under the quiet stars he realized that the coming of Bishop
Kane had made a subtle change in the women. That change was at first
hard to define, but from every point by which he approached it he came
to the same conclusion--the bishop had not objected to his presence in
the village. The women became natural, free, and unrestrained. A dozen
or twenty young and attractive women thrown much into companionship with
one man. He might become a Mormon. The idea made him laugh. But upon
reflection it was not funny; it sobered him. What a situation! He felt
instinctively that he ought to fly from this hidden valley. But he could
not have done it, even had he not been in the trader's employ. The thing
was provokingly seductive. It was like an Arabian Nights' tale. What
could these strange, fatally bound women do? Would any one of them
become involved in sweet toils such as were possible to him? He was no
fool. Already eyes had flashed and lips had smiled.

A thousand like thoughts whirled through his mind. And when he had
calmed down somewhat two things were not lost upon him--an intricate and
fascinating situation, with no end to its possibilities, threatened and
attracted him--and the certainty that, whatever change the bishop had
inaugurated, it had made these poor women happier. The latter fact
weighed more with Shefford than fears for himself. His word was given to
Withers. He would have felt just the same without having bound himself.
Still, in the light of the trader's blunt philosophy, and of his own
assurance that he was no fool, Shefford felt it incumbent upon him to
accept a belief that there were situations no man could resist without
an anchor. The ingenuity of man could not have devised a stranger, a
more enticing, a more overpoweringly fatal situation. Fatal in that it
could not be left untried! Shefford gave in and clicked his teeth as he
let himself go. And suddenly he thought of her whom these bitter women
called the Sago Lily.

The regret that had been his returned with thought of her. The saddest
disillusion of his life, the keenest disappointment, the strangest pain,
would always be associated with her. He had meant to see her face once,
clear in the sunlight, so that he could always remember it, and then
never go near her again. And now it came to him that if he did see
much of her these other women would find him like the stone wall in the
valley. Folly! Perhaps it was, but she would be safe, maybe happier.
When he decided, it was certain that he trembled.

Then he buried the memory of Fay Larkin.

Next day Shefford threw himself with all the boy left in him into the
work and play of the village. He helped the women and made games for the
children. And he talked or listened. In the early evening he called on
Ruth, chatted awhile, and went on to see Joan, and from her to another.
When the valley became shrouded in darkness he went unseen down the path
to Mary's lonely home.

She was there, a white shadow against the black.

When she replied to his greeting her voice seemed full, broken, eager to
express something that would not come. She was happier to see him than
she should have been, Shefford thought. He talked, swiftly, eloquently,
about whatever he believed would interest her. He stayed long, and
finally left, not having seen her face except in pale starlight and
shadow; and the strong clasp of her hand remained with him as he went
away under the pinyons.

Days passed swiftly. Joe Lake did not return. The Indian rode in and out
of camp, watered and guarded the pack-burros and the mustangs. Shefford
grew strong and active. He made gardens for the women; he cut cords of
fire-wood; he dammed the brook and made an irrigation ditch; he learned
to love these fatherless children, and they loved him.

In the afternoons there was leisure for him and for the women. He had no
favorites, and let the occasion decide what he should do and with whom
he should be. They had little parties at the cottages and picnics under
the cedars. He rode up and down the valley with Ruth, who could ride
a horse as no other girl he had ever seen. He climbed with Hester. He
walked with Joan. Mostly he contrived to include several at once in the
little excursions, though it was not rare for him to be out alone with
one.

It was not a game he was playing. More and more, as he learned to know
these young women, he liked them better, he pitied them, he was good for
them. It shamed him, hurt him, somehow, to see how they tried to forget
something when they were with him. Not improbably a little of it was
coquetry, as natural as a laugh to any pretty woman. But that was not
what hurt him. It was to see Ruth or Rebecca, as the case might be, full
of life and fun, thoroughly enjoying some jest or play, all of a sudden
be strangely recalled from the wholesome pleasure of a girl to become
a deep and somber woman. The crimes in the name of religion! How he
thought of the blood and the ruin laid at the door of religion! He
wondered if that were so with Nas Ta Bega's religion, and he meant
to find out some day. The women he liked best he imagined the least
religious, and they made less effort to attract him.

Every night in the dark he went to Mary's home and sat with her on the
porch. He never went inside. For all he knew, his visits were unknown to
her neighbors. Still, it did not matter to him if they found out. To her
he could talk as he had never talked to any one. She liberated all his
thought and fancy. He filled her mind.

As there had been a change in the other women, so was there in Mary;
however, it had no relation to the bishop's visit. The time came when
Shefford could not but see that she lived and dragged through the long
day for the sake of those few hours in the shadow of the stars with
him. She seldom spoke. She listened. Wonderful to him--sometimes she
laughed--and it seemed the sound was a ghost of childhood pleasure. When
he stopped to consider that she might fall in love with him he drove the
thought from him. When he realized that his folly had become sweet
and that the sweetness imperiously drew him, he likewise cast off that
thought. The present was enough. And if he had any treasures of mind and
heart he gave them to her.

She never asked him to stay, but she showed that she wanted him to. That
made it hard to go. Still, he never stayed late. The moment of parting
was like a break. Her good-by was sweet, low music; it lingered on his
ear; it bade him come to-morrow night; and it sent him away into the
valley to walk under the stars, a man fighting against himself.

One night at parting, as he tried to see her face in the wan glow of a
clouded moon, he said:

"I've been trying to find a sago-lily."

"Have you never seen one?" she asked.

"No." He meant to say something with a double meaning, in reference to
her face and the name of the flower, but her unconsciousness made him
hold his tongue. She was wholly unlike the other women.

"I'll show you where the lilies grow," she said.

"When?"

"To-morrow. Early in the afternoon I'll come to the spring. Then I'll
take you."

. . . . . . . . . . .

Next morning Joe Lake returned and imparted news that was perturbing
to Shefford. Reports of Shadd had come in to Stonebridge from different
Indian villages; Joe was not inclined to linger long at the camp, and
favored taking the trail with the pack-train.

Shefford discovered that he did not want to leave the valley, and the
knowledge made him reflective. That morning he did not go into the
village, and stayed in camp alone. A depression weighed upon him. It
was dispelled, however, early in the afternoon by the sight of a slender
figure in white swiftly coming down the path to the spring. He had an
appointment with Mary to go to see the sago lilies; everything else
slipped his mind.

Mary wore the long black hood that effectually concealed her face. It
made of her a woman, a Mormon woman, and strangely belied the lithe form
and the braid of gold hair.

"Good day," she said, putting down her bucket. "Do you still want to
go--to see the lilies?"

"Yes," replied Shefford, with a short laugh.

"Can you climb?"

"I'll go where you go."

Then she set off under the cedars and Shefford stalked at her side. He
was aware that Nas Ta Bega watched them walk away. This day, so far, at
least, Shefford did not feel talkative; and Mary had always been one who
mostly listened. They came at length to a place where the wall rose in
low, smooth swells, not steep, but certainly at an angle Shefford would
not of his own accord have attempted to scale.

Light, quick, and sure as a mountain-sheep Mary went up the first swell
to an offset above. Shefford, in amaze and admiration, watched the
little moccasins as they flashed and held on to the smooth rock.

When he essayed to follow her he slipped and came to grief. A second
attempt resulted in like failure. Then he backed away from the wall, to
run forward fast and up the slope, only to slip, halfway up, and fall
again.

He made light of the incident, but she was solicitous. When he assured
her he was unhurt she said he had agreed to go where she went.

"But I'm not a--a bird," he protested.

"Take off your boots. Then you can climb. When we get over the wall
it'll be easy," she said.

In his stocking-feet he had no great difficulty walking up the first
bulge of the walls. And from there she led him up the strange waves of
wind-worn rock. He could not attend to anything save the red, polished
rock under him, and so saw little. The ascent was longer than he would
have imagined, and steep enough to make him pant, but at last a huge
round summit was reached.

From here he saw down into the valley where the village lay. But for the
lazy columns of blue smoke curling up from the pinyons the place would
have seemed uninhabited. The wall on the other side was about level with
the one upon which he stood. Beyond rose other walls and cliffs, up
and up to the great towering peaks between which the green-and-black
mountain loomed. Facing the other way, Shefford had only a restricted
view. There were low crags and smooth stone ridges, between which were
aisles green with cedar and pinyon. Shefford's companion headed toward
one of these, and when he had followed her a few steps he could no
longer see down into the valley. The Mormon village where she lived was
as if it were lost, and when it vanished Shefford felt a difference.
Scarcely had the thought passed when Mary removed the dark hood. Her
small head glistened like gold in the sunlight.

Shefford caught up with her and walked at her side, but could not bring
himself at once deliberately to look at her. They entered a narrow,
low-walled lane where cedars and pinyons grew thickly, their fragrance
heavy in the warm air, and flowers began to show in the grassy patches.

"This is Indian paint-brush," she said, pointing to little, low, scarlet
flowers. A gray sage-bush with beautiful purple blossoms she called
purple sage; another bush with yellow flowers she named buck-brush,
and there were vermilion cacti and low, flat mounds of lavender daisies
which she said had no name. A whole mossy bank was covered with lace
like green leaves and tiny blossoms the color of violets, which she
called loco.

"Loco? Is this what makes the horses go crazy when they eat it?" he
asked.

"It is, indeed," she said, laughing.

When she laughed it was impossible not to look at her. She walked a
little in advance. Her white cheek and temple seemed framed in the gold
of her hair. How white her skin! But it was like pearl, faintly veined
and flushed. The profile, clear-cut and pure, appeared cold, almost
stern. He knew now that she was singularly beautiful, though he had yet
to see her full face.

They walked on. Quite suddenly the lane opened out between two rounded
bluffs, and Shefford looked down upon a grander and more awe-inspiring
scene than ever he had viewed in his dreams.

What appeared to be a green mountainside sloped endlessly down to
a plain, and that rolled and billowed away to a boundless region of
strangely carved rock. The greatness of the scene could not be grasped
in a glance. The slope was long; the plain not as level as it seemed
to be on first sight; here and there round, red rocks, isolated and
strange, like lonely castles, rose out of the green. Beyond the green
all the earth seemed naked, showing smooth, glistening bones. It was
a formidable wall of rock that flung itself up in the distance, carved
into a thousand cañon and walls and domes and peaks, and there was
not a straight nor a broken nor a jagged line in all that wildness. The
color low down was red, dark blue, and purple in the clefts, yellow
upon the heights, and in the distance rainbow-hued. A land of curves and
color!

Shefford uttered an exclamation.

"That's Utah," said Mary. "I come often to sit here. You see that
winding blue line. There.... That's San Juan Cañon. And the other dark
line, that's Escalante Cañon. They wind down into this great purple
chasm--'way over here to the left--and that's the Grand Cañon. They say
not even the Indians have been in there."

Shefford had nothing to say. The moment was one of subtle and vital
assimilation. Such places as this to be unknown to men! What strength,
what wonder, what help, what glory, just to sit there an hour, slowly
and appallingly to realize! Something came to Shefford from the
distance, out of the purple cañon and from those dim, wind-worn peaks.
He resolved to come here to this promontory again and again, alone and
in humble spirit, and learn to know why he had been silenced, why peace
pervaded his soul.

It was with this emotion upon him that he turned to find his companion
watching him. Then for the first time he saw her face fully, and was
thrilled that chance had reserved the privilege for this moment. It was
a girl's face he saw, flower-like, lovely and pure as a Madonna's, and
strangely, tragically sad. The eyes were large, dark gray, the color of
the sage. They were as clear as the air which made distant things close,
and yet they seemed full of shadows, like a ruffled pool under midnight
stars. They disturbed him. Her mouth had the sweet curves and redness of
youth, but it showed bitterness, pain, and repression.

"Where are the sago-lilies?" he asked, suddenly.

"Farther down. It's too cold up here for them. Come," she said.

He followed her down a winding trail--down and down till the green plain
rose to blot out the scrawled wall of rock, down into a verdant cañon
where a brook made swift music over stones, where the air was sultry
and hot, laden with the fragrant breath of flower and leaf. This was a
cañon of summer, and it bloomed.

The girl bent and plucked something from the grass.

"Here's a white lily," she said. "There are three colors. The yellow and
pink ones are deeper down in the cañon."

Shefford took the flower and regarded it with great interest. He had
never seen such an exquisite thing. It had three large petals, curving
cuplike, of a whiteness purer than new-fallen snow, and a heart of rich,
warm gold. Its fragrance was so faint as to be almost indistinguishable,
yet of a haunting, unforgettable sweetness. And even while he looked at
it the petals drooped and their whiteness shaded and the gold paled. In
a moment the flower was wilted.

"I don't like to pluck the lilies," said Mary. "They die so swiftly."

Shefford saw the white flowers everywhere in the open, sunny places
along the brook. They swayed with stately grace in the slow, warm wind.
They seemed like three-pointed stars shining out of the green. He bent
over one with a particularly lofty stem, and after a close survey of it
he rose to look at her face. His action was plainly one of comparison.
She laughed and said it was foolish for the women to call her the Sago
Lily. She had no coquetry; she spoke as she would have spoken of the
stones at her feet; she did not know that she was beautiful. Shefford
imagined there was some resemblance in her to the lily--the same
whiteness, the same rich gold, and, more striking than either, a
strange, rare quality of beauty, of life, intangible as something
fleeting, the spirit that had swiftly faded from the plucked flower.
Where had the girl been born--what had her life been? Shefford was
intensely curious about her. She seemed as different from any other
women he had known as this rare cañon lily was different from the tame
flowers at home.

On the return up the slope she outstripped him. She climbed lightly and
tirelessly. When he reached her upon the promontory there was a stain of
red in her cheeks and her expression had changed.

"Let's go back up over the rocks," she said. "I've not climbed for--for
so long."

"I'll go where you go," he replied.

Then she was off, and he followed. She took to the curves of the
bare rocks and climbed. He sensed a spirit released in her. It was so
strange, so keen, so wonderful to be with her, and when he did catch
her he feared to speak lest he break this mood. Her eyes grew dark and
daring, and often she stopped to look away across the wavy sea of stones
to something beyond the great walls. When they got high the wind blew
her hair loose and it flew out, a golden stream, with the sun bright
upon it. He saw that she changed her direction, which had been in line
with the two peaks, and now she climbed toward the heights. They came
to a more difficult ascent, where the stone still held to the smooth
curves, yet was marked by steep bulges and slants and crevices. Here she
became a wild thing. She ran, she leaped, she would have left him far
behind had he not called. Then she appeared to remember him and waited.

Her face had now lost its whiteness; it was flushed, rosy, warm.

"Where--did you--ever learn--to run over rocks--this way?" he panted.

"All my life I've climbed," she said. "Ah! it's so good to be up on the
walls again--to feel the wind--to see!"

Thereafter he kept close to her, no matter what the effort. He would
not miss a moment of her, if he could help it. She was wonderful. He
imagined she must be like an Indian girl, or a savage who loved the
lofty places and the silence. When she leaped she uttered a strange,
low, sweet cry of wildness and exultation. Shefford guessed she was a
girl freed from her prison, forgetting herself, living again youthful
hours. Still she did not forget him. She waited for him at the bad
places, lent him a strong hand, and sometimes let it stay long in his
clasp. Tireless and agile, sure-footed as a goat, fleet and wild
she leaped and climbed and ran until Shefford marveled at her. This
adventure was indeed fulfilment of a dream. Perhaps she might lead him
to the treasure at the foot of the rainbow. But that thought, sad with
memory daring forth from its grave, was irrevocably linked with a
girl who was dead. He could not remember her, in the presence of
this wonderful creature who was as strange as she was beautiful. When
Shefford reached for the brown hand stretched forth to help him in a
leap, when he felt its strong clasp, the youth and vitality and life of
it, he had the fear of a man who was running towards a precipice and who
could not draw back. This was a climb, a lark, a wild race to the
Mormon girl, bound now in the village, and by the very freedom of it she
betrayed her bonds. To Shefford it was also a wild race, but toward one
sure goal he dared not name.

They went on, and at length, hand in hand, even where no steep step or
wide fissure gave reason for the clasp. But she seemed unconscious. They
were nearing the last height, a bare eminence, when she broke from him
and ran up the smooth stone. When he surmounted it she was standing on
the very summit, her arms wide, her full breast heaving, her slender
body straight as an Indian's, her hair flying in the wind and blazing in
the sun. She seemed to embrace the west, to reach for something afar,
to offer herself to the wind and distance. Her face was scarlet from the
exertion of the climb, and her broad brow was moist. Her eyes had
the piercing light of an eagle's, though now they were dark. Shefford
instinctively grasped the essence of this strange spirit, primitive
and wild. She was not the woman who had met him at the spring. She
had dropped some side of her with that Mormon hood, and now she stood
totally strange.

She belonged up here, he divined. She was a part of that wildness. She
must have been born and brought up in loneliness, where the wind blew
and the peaks loomed and silence held dominion. The sinking sun touched
the rim of the distant wall, and as if in parting regret shone with
renewed golden fire. And the girl was crowned as with a glory.

Shefford loved her then. Realizing it, he thought he might have loved
her before, but that did not matter when he was certain of it now.
He trembled a little, fearfully, though without regret. Everything
pertaining to his desert experience had been strange--this the strangest
of all.

The sun sank swiftly, and instantly there was a change in the golden
light. Quickly it died out. The girl changed as swiftly. She seemed
to remember herself, and sat down as if suddenly weary. Shefford went
closer and seated himself beside her.

"The sun has set. We must go," she said. But she made no movement.

"Whenever you are ready," replied he.

Just as the blaze had died out of her eyes, so the flush faded out of
her face. The whiteness stole back, and with it the sadness. He had
to bite his tongue to keep from telling her what he felt, to keep from
pouring out a thousand questions. But the privilege of having seen her,
of having been with her when she had forgotten herself--that he believed
was enough. It had been wonderful; it had made him love her But it
need not add to the tragedy of her life, whatever that was. He tried to
eliminate himself. And he watched her.

Her eyes were fixed upon the gold-rimmed ramparts of the distant wall in
the west. Plain it was how she loved that wild upland. And there seemed
to be some haunting memory of the past in her gaze--some happy part of
life, agonizing to think of now.

"We must go," she said, and rose.

Shefford rose to accompany her. She looked at him, and her haunting eyes
seemed to want him to know that he had helped her to forget the present,
to remember girlhood, and that somehow she would always associate a
wonderful happy afternoon with him. He divined that her silence then was
a Mormon seal on lips.

"Mary, this has been the happiest, the best, the most revealing day of
my life," he said, simply.

Swiftly, as if startled, she turned and faced down the slope. At the top
of the wall above the village she put on the dark hood, and with it that
somber something which was Mormon.

Twilight had descended into the valley, and shadows were so thick
Shefford had difficulty in finding Mary's bucket. He filled it at the
spring, and made offer to carry it home for her, which she declined.

"You'll come to-night--later?" she asked.

"Yes," he replied, hurriedly promising. Then he watched her white form
slowly glide down the path to disappear in the shadows.

Nas Ta Bega and Joe were busy at the camp-fire. Shefford joined them.
This night he was uncommunicative. Joe peered curiously at him in
the flare of the blaze. Later, after the meal, when Shefford appeared
restless and strode to and fro, Joe spoke up gruffly:

"Better hang round camp to-night."

Shefford heard, but did not heed. Nevertheless, the purport of the
remark, which was either jealousy or admonition, haunted him with the
possibility of its meaning.

He walked away from the camp-fire, under the dark pinyons, out into the
starry open; and every step was hard to take, unless it pointed toward
the home of the girl whose beauty and sadness and mystery had bewitched
him. After what seemed hours he took the well-known path toward her
cabin, and then every step seemed lighter. He divined he was rushing to
some fate--he knew not what.

The porch was in shadow. He peered in vain for the white form against
the dark background. In the silence he seemed to hear his heart-beats
thick and muffled.

Some distance down the path he heard the sound of hoofs. Withdrawing
into the gloom of a cedar, he watched. Soon he made out moving horses
with riders. They filed past him to the number of half a score. Like
a flash of fire the truth burned him. Mormons come for one of those
mysterious night visits to sealed wives!

Shefford stalked far down the valley, into the lonely silence and the
night shadows under the walls.




VIII. THE HOGAN OF NAS TA BEGA


The home of Nas Ta Bega lay far up the cedared slope, with the craggy
yellow cliffs and the black cañon and the pine-fringed top of Navajo
Mountain behind, and to the fore the vast, rolling descent of cedar
groves and sage flats and sandy washes. No dim, dark range made bold
outline along the horizon; the stretch of gray and purple and green
extended to the blue line of sky.

Down the length of one sage level Shefford saw a long lane where the
brush and the grass had been beaten flat. This, the Navajo said, was a
track where the young braves had raced their mustangs and had striven
for supremacy before the eyes of maidens and the old people of the
tribe.

"Nas Ta Bega, did you ever race here?" asked Shefford.

"I am a chief by birth. But I was stolen from my home, and now I cannot
ride well enough to race the braves of my tribe," the Indian replied,
bitterly.

In another place Joe Lake halted his horse and called Shefford's
attention to a big yellow rock lying along the trail. And then he spoke
in Navajo to the Indian.

"I've heard of this stone--Isende Aha," said Joe, after Nas Ta Bega had
spoken. "Get down, and let's see." Shefford dismounted, but the Indian
kept his seat in the saddle.

Joe placed a big hand on the stone and tried to move it. According to
Shefford's eye measurement the stone was nearly oval, perhaps three feet
high, by a little over two in width. Joe threw off his sombrero, took a
deep breath, and, bending over, clasped the stone in his arms. He was an
exceedingly heavy and powerful man, and it was plain to Shefford that
he meant to lift the stone if that were possible. Joe's broad shoulders
strained, flattened; his arms bulged, his joints cracked, his neck
corded, and his face turned black. By gigantic effort he lifted the
stone and moved it about six inches. Then as he released his hold he
fell, and when he sat up his face was wet with sweat.

"Try it," he said to Shefford, with his lazy smile. "See if you can
heave it."

Shefford was strong, and there had been a time when he took pride in
his strength. Something in Joe's supreme effort and in the gloom of the
Indian's eyes made Shefford curious about this stone. He bent over and
grasped it as Joe had done. He braced himself and lifted with all his
power, until a red blur obscured his sight and shooting stars seemed to
explode in his head. But he could not even stir the stone.

"Shefford, maybe you'll be able to heft it some day," observed Joe. Then
he pointed to the stone and addressed Nas Ta Bega.

The Indian shook his head and spoke for a moment.

"This is the Isende Aha of the Navajos," explained Joe. "The young
braves are always trying to carry this stone. As soon as one of them can
carry it he is a man. He who carries it farthest is the biggest man. And
just so soon as any Indian can no longer lift it he is old. Nas Ta
Bega says the stone has been carried two miles in his lifetime. His own
father carried it the length of six steps."

"Well! It's plain to me that I am not a man," said Shefford, "or else I
am old."

Joe Lake drawled his lazy laugh and, mounting, rode up the trail. But
Shefford lingered beside the Indian.

"Bi Nai," said Nas Ta Bega, "I am a chief of my tribe, but I have never
been a man. I never lifted that stone. See what the pale-face education
has done for the Indian!"

The Navajo's bitterness made Shefford thoughtful. Could greater injury
be done to man than this--to rob him of his heritage of strength?

Joe drove the bobbing pack-train of burros into the cedars where the
smoke of the hogans curled upward, and soon the whistling of mustangs,
the barking of dogs, the bleating of sheep, told of his reception. And
presently Shefford was in the midst of an animated scene. Great, woolly,
fierce dogs, like wolves, ran out to meet the visitors. Sheep and goats
were everywhere, and little lambs scarcely able to walk, with others
frisky and frolicsome. There were pure-white lambs, and some that
appeared to be painted, and some so beautiful with their fleecy white
all except black faces or ears or tails or feet. They ran right under
Nack-yal's legs and bumped against Shefford, and kept bleating their
thin-piped welcome. Under the cedars surrounding the several hogans were
mustangs that took Shefford's eye. He saw an iron-gray with white mane
and tail sweeping to the ground; and a fiery black, wilder than any
other beast he had ever seen; and a pinto as wonderfully painted as the
little lambs; and, most striking of all, a pure, cream-colored mustang
with grace and fine lines and beautiful mane and tail, and, strange
to see, eyes as blue as azure. This albino mustang came right up to
Shefford, an action in singular contrast with that of the others, and
showed a tame and friendly spirit toward him and Nack-yal. Indeed,
Shefford had reason to feel ashamed of Nack-yal's temper or jealousy.

The first Indians to put in an appearance were a flock of children, half
naked, with tangled manes of raven-black hair and skin like gold bronze.
They appeared bold and shy by turns. Then a little, sinewy man, old
and beaten and gray, came out of the principal hogan. He wore a blanket
round his bent shoulders. His name was Hosteen Doetin, and it meant
gentle man. His fine, old, wrinkled face lighted with a smile of kindly
interest. His squaw followed him, and she was as venerable as he.
Shefford caught a glimpse of the shy, dark Glen Naspa, Nas Ta Bega's
sister, but she did not come out. Other Indians appeared, coming from
adjacent hogans.

Nas Ta Bega turned the mustangs loose among those Shefford had noticed,
and presently there rose a snorting, whistling, kicking, plunging melee.
A cloud of dust hid them, and then a thudding of swift hoofs told of a
run through the cedars. Joe Lake began picking over stacks of goat-skins
and bags of wool that were piled against the hogan.

"Reckon we'll have one grand job packing out this load," he growled.
"It's not so heavy, but awkward to pack."

It developed, presently, from talk with the old Navajo, that this pile
was only a half of the load to be packed to Kayenta, and the other half
was round the corner of the mountain in the camp of Piutes. Hosteen
Doetin said he would send to the camp and have the Piutes bring their
share over. The suggestion suited Joe, who wanted to save his burros as
much as possible. Accordingly, a messenger was despatched to the Piute
camp. And Shefford, with time on his hands and poignant memory to
combat, decided to recall his keen interest in the Navajo, and learn,
if possible, what the Indian's life was like. What would a day of his
natural life be?

In the gray of dawn, when the hush of the desert night still lay deep
over the land, the Navajo stirred in his blanket and began to chant to
the morning light. It began very soft and low, a strange, broken murmur,
like the music of a brook, and as it swelled that weird and mournful
tone was slowly lost in one of hope and joy. The Indian's soul was
coming out of night, blackness, the sleep that resembled death, into the
day, the light that was life.

Then he stood in the door of his hogan, his blanket around him, and
faced the east.

Night was lifting out of the clefts and ravines; the rolling cedar
ridges and the sage flats were softly gray, with thin veils like smoke
mysteriously rising and vanishing; the colorless rocks were changing. A
long, horizon-wide gleam of light, rosiest in the center, lay low down
in the east and momentarily brightened. One by one the stars in
the deep-blue sky paled and went out and the blue dome changed and
lightened. Night had vanished on invisible wings and silence broke to
the music of a mockingbird. The rose in the east deepened; a wisp of
cloud turned gold; dim distant mountains showed dark against the red;
and low down in a notch a rim of fire appeared. Over the soft ridges and
valleys crept a wondrous transfiguration. It was as if every blade of
grass, every leaf of sage, every twig of cedar, the flowers, the trees,
the rocks came to life at sight of the sun. The red disk rose, and a
golden fire burned over the glowing face of that lonely waste.

The Navajo, dark, stately, inscrutable, faced the sun--his god. This was
his Great Spirit. The desert was his mother, but the sun was his life.
To the keeper of the winds and rains, to the master of light, to the
maker of fire, to the giver of life the Navajo sent up his prayer:


 Of all the good things of the Earth let me always have plenty.
 Of all the beautiful things of the Earth let me always have plenty.
 Peacefully let my horses go and peacefully let my sheep go.
 God of the Heavens, give me many sheep and horses.
 God of the Heavens, help me to talk straight.
 Goddess of the Earth, my Mother, let me walk straight.
 Now all is well, now all is well, now all is well, now all is well.


Hope and faith were his.

A chief would be born to save the vanishing tribe of Navajos. A bride
would rise from a wind--kiss of the lilies in the moonlight.

He drank from the clear, cold spring bubbling from under mossy rocks.
He went into the cedars, and the tracks in the trails told him of the
visitors of night. His mustangs whistled to him from the ridge-tops,
standing clear with heads up and manes flying, and then trooped down
through the sage. The shepherd-dogs, guardians of the flocks, barked him
a welcome, and the sheep bleated and the lambs pattered round him.

In the hogan by the warm, red fire his women baked his bread and cooked
his meat. And he satisfied his hunger. Then he took choice meat to the
hogan of a sick relative, and joined in the song and the dance and the
prayer that drove away the evil spirit of illness. Down in the valley,
in a sandy, sunny place, was his corn-field, and here he turned in the
water from the ditch, and worked awhile, and went his contented way.

He loved his people, his women, and his children. To his son he said:
"Be bold and brave. Grow like the pine. Work and ride and play that
you may be strong. Talk straight. Love your brother. Give half to your
friend. Honor your mother that you may honor your wife. Pray and listen
to your gods."

Then with his gun and his mustang he climbed the slope of the mountain.
He loved the solitude, but he was never alone. There were voices on the
wind and steps on his trail. The lofty pine, the lichened rock, the tiny
bluebell, the seared crag--all whispered their secrets. For him their
spirits spoke. In the morning light Old Stone Face, the mountain, was a
red god calling him to the chase. He was a brother of the eagle, at home
on the heights where the winds swept and the earth lay revealed below.

In the golden afternoon, with the warm sun on his back and the blue
cañon at his feet, he knew the joy of doing nothing. He did not need
rest, for he was never tired. The sage-sweet breath of the open was
thick in his nostrils, the silence that had so many whisperings was
all about him, the loneliness of the wild was his. His falcon eye saw
mustang and sheep, the puff of dust down on the cedar level, the Indian
riding on a distant ridge, the gray walls, and the blue clefts. Here was
home, still free, still wild, still untainted. He saw with the eyes of
his ancestors. He felt them around him. They had gone into the elements
from which their voices came on the wind. They were the watchers on his
trails.

At sunset he faced the west, and this was his prayer:


                Great Spirit, God of my Fathers,
                Keep my horses in the night.
                Keep my sheep in the night.
                Keep my family in the night.
                Let me wake to the day.
                Let me be worthy of the light.
                Now all is well, now all is well,
                Now all is well, now all is well.


And he watched the sun go down and the gold sink from the peaks and the
red die out of the west and the gray shadows creep out of the cañon
to meet the twilight and the slow, silent, mysterious approach of night
with its gift of stars.

Night fell. The white stars blinked. The wind sighed in the cedars. The
sheep bleated. The shepherd-dogs bayed the mourning coyotes. And the
Indian lay down in his blankets with his dark face tranquil in the
starlight. All was well in his lonely world. Phantoms hovered, illness
lingered, injury and pain and death were there, the shadow of a
strange white hand flitted across the face of the moon--but now all was
well--the Navajo had prayed to the god of his Fathers. Now all was well!

. . . . . . . . . . .

And this, thought Shefford in revolt, was what the white man had killed
in the Indian tribes, was reaching out now to kill in this wild remnant
of the Navajos. The padre, the trapper, the trader, the prospector, and
the missionary--so the white man had come, some of him good, no doubt,
but more of him evil; and the young brave learned a thirst that could
never be quenched at the cold, sweet spring of his forefathers, and
the young maiden burned with a fever in her blood, and lost the sweet,
strange, wild fancies of her tribe.

. . . . . . . . . . .

Joe Lake came to Shefford and said, "Withers told me you had a mix-up
with a missionary at Red Lake."

"Yes, I regret to say," replied Shefford.

"About Glen Naspa?"

"Yes, Nas Ta Bega's sister."

"Withers just mentioned it. Who was the missionary?"

"Willetts, so Presbrey, the trader, said."

"What'd he look like?"

Shefford recalled the smooth, brown face, the dark eyes, the weak chin,
the mild expression, and the soft, lax figure of the missionary.

"Can't tell by what you said," went on Joe. "But I'll bet a peso to a
horse-hair that's the fellow who's been here. Old Hosteen Doetin just
told me. First visits he ever had from the priest with the long gown.
That's what he called the missionary. These old fellows will never
forget what's come down from father to son about the Spanish padres.
Well, anyway, Willetts has been here twice after Glen Naspa. The old
chap is impressed, but he doesn't want to let the girl go. I'm inclined
to think Glen Naspa would as lief go as stay. She may be a Navajo, but
she's a girl. She won't talk much."

"Where's Nas Ta Bega?" asked Shefford.

"He rode off somewhere yesterday. Perhaps to the Piute camp. These
Indians are slow. They may take a week to pack that load over here. But
if Nas Ta Bega or some one doesn't come with a message to-day I'll ride
over there myself."

"Joe, what do you think about this missionary?" queried Shefford,
bluntly.

"Reckon there's not much to think, unless you see him or find out
something. I heard of Willetts before Withers spoke of him. He's
friendly with Mormons. I understand he's worked for Mormon interests,
someway or other. That's on the quiet. Savvy? This matter of him coming
after Glen Naspa, reckon that's all right. The missionaries all go after
the young people. What'd be the use to try to convert the old Indians?
No, the missionary's work is to educate the Indian, and, of course, the
younger he is the better."

"You approve of the missionary?"

"Shefford, if you understood a Mormon you wouldn't ask that. Did you
ever read or hear of Jacob Hamblin?... Well, he was a Mormon missionary
among the Navajos. The Navajos were as fierce as Apaches till Hamblin
worked among them. He made them friendly to the white man."

"That doesn't prove he made converts of them," replied Shefford, still
bluntly.

"No. For the matter of that, Hamblin let religion alone. He made
presents, then traded with them, then taught them useful knowledge.
Mormon or not, Shefford, I'll admit this: a good man, strong with
his body, and learned in ways with his hands, with some knowledge of
medicine, can better the condition of these Indians. But just as soon
as he begins to preach his religion, then his influence wanes. That's
natural. These heathen have their ideals, their gods."

"Which the white man should leave them!" replied Shefford, feelingly.

"That's a matter of opinion. But don't let's argue.... Willetts is after
Glen Naspa. And if I know Indian girls he'll persuade her to go to his
school."

"Persuade her!" Then Shefford broke off and related the incident that
had occurred at Red Lake.

"Reckon any means justifies the end," replied Joe, imperturbably. "Let
him talk love to her or rope her or beat her, so long as he makes a
Christian of her."

Shefford felt a hot flush and had difficulty in controlling himself.
From this single point of view the Mormon was impossible to reason with.

"That, too, is a matter of opinion. We won't discuss it," continued
Shefford. "But--if old Hosteen Doetin objects to the girl leaving, and
if Nas Ta Bega does the same, won't that end the matter?"

"Reckon not. The end of the matter is Glen Naspa. If she wants to go
she'll go."

Shefford thought best to drop the discussion. For the first time he had
occasion to be repelled by something in this kind and genial Mormon,
and he wanted to forget it. Just as he had never talked about men to the
sealed wives in the hidden valley, so he could not talk of women to Joe
Lake.

Nas Ta Bega did not return that day, but, next morning a messenger came
calling Lake to the Piute camp. Shefford spent the morning high on the
slope, learning more with every hour in the silence and loneliness, that
he was stronger of soul than he had dared to hope, and that the added
pain which had come to him could be borne.

Upon his return toward camp, in the cedar grove, he caught sight of Glen
Naspa with a white man. They did not see him. When Shefford recognized
Willetts an embarrassment as well as an instinct made him halt and step
into a bushy, low-branched cedar. It was not his intention to spy on
them. He merely wanted to avoid a meeting. But the missionary's hand
on the girl's arm, and her up-lifted head, her pretty face, strange,
intent, troubled, struck Shefford with an unusual and irresistible
curiosity. Willetts was talking earnestly; Glen Naspa was listening
intently. Shefford watched long enough to see that the girl loved the
missionary, and that he reciprocated or was pretending. His manner
scarcely savored of pretense, Shefford concluded, as he slipped away
under the trees.

He did not go at once into camp. He felt troubled, and wished that he
had not encountered the two. His duty in the matter, of course, was to
tell Nas Ta Bega what he had seen. Upon reflection Shefford decided to
give the missionary the benefit of a doubt; and if he really cared for
the Indian girl, and admitted or betrayed it, to think all the better of
him for the fact. Glen Naspa was certainly pretty enough, and probably
lovable enough, to please any lonely man in this desert. The pain and
the yearning in Shefford's heart made him lenient. He had to fight
himself--not to forget, for that was impossible--but to keep rational
and sane when a white flower-like face haunted him and a voice called.

The cracking of hard hoofs on stones caused him to turn toward camp,
and as he emerged from the cedar grove he saw three Indian horsemen ride
into the cleared space before the hogans. They were superbly mounted and
well armed, and impressed him as being different from Navajos. Perhaps
they were Piutes. They dismounted and led the mustangs down to the pool
below the spring. Shefford saw another mustang, standing bridle down
and carrying a pack behind the saddle. Some squaws with children hanging
behind their skirts were standing at the door of Hosteen Doetin's hogan.
Shefford glanced in to see Glen Naspa, pale, quiet, almost sullen.
Willetts stood with his hands spread. The old Navajo's seamed face
worked convulsively as he tried to lift his bent form to some semblance
of dignity, and his voice rolled out, sonorously: "Me no savvy Jesus
Christ! Me hungry! ... Me no eat Jesus Christ!"

Shefford drew back as if he had received a blow. That had been Hosteen
Doetin's reply to the importunities of the missionary. The old Navajo
could work no longer. His sons were gone. His squaw was worn out. He
had no one save Glen Naspa to help him. She was young, strong. He was
hungry. What was the white man's religion to him?

With long, swift stride Shefford entered the hogan. Willetts, seeing
him, did not look so mild as Shefford had him pictured in memory, nor
did he appear surprised. Shefford touched Hosteen Doetin's shoulder and
said, "Tell me."

The aged Navajo lifted a shaking hand.

"Me no savvy Jesus Christ! Me hungry!... Me no eat Jesus Christ!"

Shefford then made signs that indicated the missionary's intention to
take the girl away. "Him come--big talk--Jesus--all Jesus.... Me no want
Glen Naspa go," replied the Indian.

Shefford turned to the missionary.

"Willetts, is he a relative of the girl?"

"There's some blood tie, I don't know what. But it's not close," replied
Willetts.

"Then don't you think you'd better wait till Nas Ta Bega returns? He's
her brother."

"What for?" demanded Willetts. "That Indian may be gone a week. She's
willing to accompany the missionary."

Shefford looked at the girl.

"Glen Naspa, do you want to go?"

She was shy, ashamed, and silent, but manifestly willing to accompany
the missionary. Shefford pondered a moment. How he hoped Nas Ta Bega
would come back! It was thought of the Indian that made Shefford
stubborn. What his stand ought to be was hard to define, unless he
answered to impulse; and here in the wilds he had become imbued with the
idea that his impulses and instincts were no longer false.

"Willetts, what do you want with the girl?" queried Shefford, coolly,
and at the question he seemed to find himself. He peered deliberately
and searchingly into the other's face. The missionary's gaze shifted and
a tinge of red crept up from under his collar.

"Absurd thing to ask a missionary!" he burst out, impatiently.

"Do you care for Glen Naspa?"

"I care as God's disciple--who cares to save the soul of heathen," he
replied, with the lofty tone of prayer.

"Has Glen Naspa no--no other interest in you--except to be taught
religion?"

The missionary's face flamed, and his violent tremor showed that under
his exterior there was a different man.

"What right have you to question me?" he demanded. "You're an
adventurer--an outcast. I've my duty here. I'm a missionary with Church
and state and government behind me."

"Yes, I'm an outcast," replied Shefford, bitterly. "And you may be all
you say. But we're alone now out here on the desert. And this girl's
brother is absent. You haven't answered me yet.... Is there anything
between you and Glen Naspa except religion?"

"No, you insulting beggar?"

Shefford had forced the reply that he had expected and which damned the
missionary beyond any consideration.

"Willetts, you are a liar!" said Shefford, steadily.

"And what are you?" cried Willetts, in shrill fury. "I've heard all
about you. Heretic! Atheist! Driven from your Church! Hated and scorned
for your blasphemy!"

Then he gave way to ungovernable rage, and cursed Shefford as a
religious fanatic might have cursed the most debased sinners. Shefford
heard with the blood beating, strangling the pulse in his ears. Somehow
this missionary had learned his secret--most likely from the Mormons
in Stonebridge. And the terms of disgrace were coals of fire upon
Shefford's head. Strangely, however, he did not bow to them, as had
been his humble act in the past, when his calumniators had arraigned and
flayed him. Passion burned in him now, for the first time in his life,
made a tiger of him. And these raw emotions, new to him, were difficult
to control.

"You can't take the girl," he replied, when the other had ceased. "Not
without her brother's consent."

"I will take her!"

Shefford threw him out of the hogan and strode after him. Willetts had
stumbled. When he straightened up he was white and shaken. He groped for
the bridle of his horse while keeping his eyes upon Shefford, and when
he found it he whirled quickly, mounted, and rode off. Shefford saw him
halt a moment under the cedars to speak with the three strange Indians,
and then he galloped away. It came to Shefford then that he had been
unconscious of the last strained moment of that encounter. He seemed all
cold, tight, locked, and was amazed to find his hand on his gun. Verily
the wild environment had liberated strange instincts and impulses, which
he had answered. That he had no regrets proved how he had changed.

Shefford heard the old woman scolding. Peering into the hogan, he saw
Glen Naspa flounce sullenly down, for all the world like any other
thwarted girl. Hosteen Doetin came out and pointed down the slope at the
departing missionary.

"Heap talk Jesus--all talk--all Jesus!" he exclaimed, contemptuously.
Then he gave Shefford a hard rap on the chest. "Small talk--heap man!"

The matter appeared to be adjusted for the present. But Shefford felt
that he had made a bitter enemy, and perhaps a powerful one.

He prepared and ate his supper alone that evening, for Joe Lake and Nas
Ta Bega did not put in an appearance. He observed that the three strange
Indians, whom he took for Piutes, kept to themselves, and, so far as he
knew, had no intercourse with any one at the camp. This would not have
seemed unusual, considering the taciturn habit of Indians, had he not
remembered seeing Willetts speak to the trio. What had he to do with
them? Shefford was considering the situation with vague doubts when, to
his relief, the three strangers rode off into the twilight. Then he went
to bed.

He was awakened by violence. It was the gray hour before dawn. Dark
forms knelt over him. A cloth pressed down hard over his mouth: Strong
hands bound it while other strong hands held him. He could not cry out.
He could not struggle. A heavy weight, evidently a man, held down his
feet. Then he was rolled over, securely bound, and carried, to be thrown
like a sack over the back of a horse.

All this happened so swiftly as to be bewildering. He was too astounded
to be frightened. As he hung head downward he saw the legs of a horse
and a dim trail. A stirrup swung to and fro, hitting him in the face.
He began to feel exceedingly uncomfortable, with a rush of blood to his
head, and cramps in his arms and legs. This kept on and grew worse for
what seemed a long time. Then the horse was stopped and a rude hand
tumbled him to the ground. Again he was rolled over on his face. Strong
fingers plucked at his clothes, and he believed he was being searched.
His captors were as silent as if they had been dumb. He felt when they
took his pocketbook and his knife and all that he had. Then they cut,
tore, and stripped off all his clothing. He was lifted, carried a few
steps, and dropped upon what seemed a soft, low mound, and left lying
there, still tied and naked. Shefford heard the rustle of sage and the
dull thud of hoofs as his assailants went away.

His first sensation was one of immeasurable relief. He had not been
murdered. Robbery was nothing. And though roughly handled, he had not
been hurt. He associated the assault with the three strange visitors
of the preceding day. Still, he had no proof of that. Not the slightest
clue remained to help him ascertain who had attacked him.

It might have been a short while or a long one, his mind was so filled
with growing conjectures, but a time came when he felt cold. As he lay
face down, only his back felt cold at first. He was grateful that he
had not been thrown upon the rocks. The ground under him appeared soft,
spongy, and gave somewhat as he breathed. He had really sunk down a
little in this pile of soft earth. The day was not far off, as he could
tell by the brightening of the gray. He began to suffer with the cold,
and then slowly he seemed to freeze and grow numb. In an effort to roll
over upon his back he discovered that his position, or his being bound,
or the numbness of his muscles was responsible for the fact that he
could not move. Here was a predicament. It began to look serious. What
would a few hours of the powerful sun do to his uncovered skin? Somebody
would trail and find him: still, he might not be found soon.

He saw the sky lighten, turn rosy and then gold. The sun shone upon him,
but some time elapsed before he felt its warmth. All of a sudden a pain,
like a sting, shot through his shoulder. He could not see what caused
it; probably a bee. Then he felt another upon his leg, and about
simultaneously with it a tiny, fiery stab in his side. A sickening
sensation pervaded his body, slowly moving, as if poison had entered
the blood of his veins. Then a puncture, as from a hot wire, entered the
skin of his breast. Unmistakably it was a bite. By dint of great effort
he twisted his head to see a big red ant on his breast. Then he heard
a faint sound, so exceedingly faint that he could not tell what it was
like. But presently his strained ears detected a low, swift, rustling,
creeping sound, like the slipping rattle of an infinite number of
tiny bits of moving gravel. Then it was a sound like the seeping of
wind-blown sand. Several hot bites occurred at once. And then with his
head twisted he saw a red stream of ants pour out of the mound and spill
over his quivering flesh.

In an instant he realized his position. He had been dropped
intentionally upon an ant-heap, which had sunk with his weight, wedging
him between the crusts. At the mercy of those terrible desert ants! A
frantic effort to roll out proved futile, as did another and another.
His violent muscular contractions infuriated the ants, and in an instant
he was writhing in pain so horrible and so unendurable that he nearly
fainted. But he was too strong to faint suddenly. A bath of vitriol,
a stripping of his skin and red embers of fire thrown upon raw flesh,
could not have equaled this. There was fury in the bites and poison in
the fangs of these ants. Was this an Indian's brutal trick or was it the
missionary's revenge? Shefford realized that it would kill him soon. He
sweat what seemed blood, although perhaps the blood came from the bites.
A strange, hollow, buzzing roar filled his ears, and it must have been
the pouring of the angry ants from their mound.

Then followed a time that was hell--worse than fire, for fire would
have given merciful death--agony under which his physical being began
spasmodically to jerk and retch--and his eyeballs turned and his breast
caved in.

A cry rang through the roar in his ears. "Bi Nai! Bi Nai!"

His fading sight seemed to shade round the dark face of Nas Ta Bega.

Then powerful hands dragged him from the mound, through the grass
and sage, rolled him over and over, and brushed his burning skin with
strong, swift sweep.




IX. IN THE DESERT CRUCIBLE


That hard experience was but the beginning of many cruel trials for John
Shefford.

He never knew who his assailants were, nor their motive other than
robbery; and they had gotten little, for they had not found the large
sum of money sewed in the lining of his coat. Joe Lake declared it was
Shadd's work, and the Mormon showed the stern nature that lay hidden
under his mild manner. Nas Ta Bega shook his head and would not tell
what he thought. But a somber fire burned in his eyes.

The three started with a heavily laden pack-train and went down the
mountain slope into West Cañon. The second day they were shot at from
the rim of the walls. Lake was wounded, hindering the swift flight
necessary to escape deeper into the cañon. Here they hid for days,
while the Mormon recovered and the Indian took stealthy trips to try to
locate the enemy. Lack of water and grass for the burros drove them
on. They climbed out of a side cañon, losing several burros on a rough
trail, and had proceeded to within half a day's journey of Red Lake
when they were attacked while making camp in a cedar grove. Shefford
sustained an exceedingly painful injury to his leg, but, fortunately,
the bullet went through without breaking a bone. With that burning pain
there came to Shefford the meaning of fight, and his rifle grew hot in
his hands. Night alone saved the trio from certain fatality. Under the
cover of darkness the Indian helped Shefford to escape. Joe Lake looked
out for himself. The pack-train was lost, and the mustangs, except
Nack-yal.

Shefford learned what it meant to lie out at night, listening for
pursuit, cold to his marrow, sick with dread, and enduring frightful
pain from a ragged bullet-hole. Next day the Indian led him down into
the red basin, where the sun shone hot and the sand reflected the heat.
They had no water. A wind arose and the valley became a place of flying
sand. Through a heavy, stifling pall Nas Ta Bega somehow got Shefford to
the trading-post at Red Lake. Presbrey attended to Shefford's injury
and made him comfortable. Next day Joe Lake limped in, surly and somber,
with the news that Shadd and eight or ten of his outlaw gang had gotten
away with the pack-train.

In short time Shefford was able to ride, and with his companions went
over the pass to Kayenta. Withers already knew of his loss, and all he
said was that he hoped to meet Shadd some day.

Shefford showed a reluctance to go again to the hidden village in the
silent cañon with the rounded walls. The trader appeared surprised, but
did not press the point. And Shefford meant sooner or later to tell him,
yet never quite reached the point. The early summer brought more work
for the little post, and Shefford toiled with the others. He liked the
outdoor tasks, and at night was grateful that he was too tired to think.
Then followed trips to Durango and Bluff and Monticello. He rode fifty
miles a day for many days. He knew how a man fares who packs light and
rides far and fast. When the Indian was with him he got along well,
but Nas Ta Bega would not go near the towns. Thus many mishaps were
Shefford's fortune.

Many and many a mile he trailed his mustang, for Nack-yal never forgot
the Sagi, and always headed for it when he broke his hobbles. Shefford
accompanied an Indian teamster in to Durango with a wagon and four wild
mustangs. Upon the return, with a heavy load of supplies, accident put
Shefford in charge of the outfit. In despair he had to face the hardest
task that could have been given him--to take care of a crippled Indian,
catch, water, feed, harness, and drive four wild mustangs that did not
know him and tried to kill him at every turn, and to get that precious
load of supplies home to Kayenta. That he accomplished it proved to hint
the possibilities of a man, for both endurance and patience. From that
time he never gave up in the front of any duty.

In the absence of an available Indian he rode to Durango and back in
record time. Upon one occasion he was lost in a cañon for days, with no
food and little water. Upon another he went through a sand-storm in the
open desert, facing it for forty miles and keeping to the trail; When he
rode in to Kayenta that night the trader, in grim praise, said there
was no worse to endure. At Monticello Shefford stood off a band of
desperadoes, and this time Shefford experienced a strange, sickening
shock in the wounding of a man. Later he had other fights, but in none
of them did he know whether or not he had shed blood.

The heat of midsummer came, when the blistering sun shone, and a hot
blast blew across the sand, and the furious storms made floods in the
washes. Day and night Shefford was always in the open, and any one who
had ever known him in the past would have failed to recognize him now.

In the early fall, with Nas Ta Bega as companion, he set out to the
south of Kayenta upon long-neglected business of the trader. They
visited Red Lake, Blue Cañon, Keams Cañon, Oribi, the Moki villages,
Tuba, Moencopie, and Moen Ave. This trip took many weeks and gave
Shefford all the opportunity he wanted to study the Indians, and the
conditions nearer to the border of civilization. He learned the truth
about the Indians and the missionaries.

Upon the return trip he rode over the trail he had followed alone to
Red Lake and thence on to the Sagi, and it seemed that years had passed
since he first entered this wild region which had come to be home, years
that had molded him in the stern and fiery crucible of the desert.




X. STONEBRIDGE


In October Shefford arranged for a hunt in the Cresaw Mountains with Joe
Lake and Nas Ta Bega. The Indian had gone home for a short visit, and
upon his return the party expected to start. But Nas Ta Bega did not
come back. Then the arrival of a Piute with news that excited Withers
and greatly perturbed Lake convinced Shefford that something was wrong.

The little trading-post seldom saw such disorder; certainly Shefford
had never known the trader to neglect work. Joe Lake threw a saddle on
a mustang he would have scorned to notice in an ordinary moment, and
without a word of explanation or farewell rode hard to the north on the
Stonebridge trail.

Shefford had long since acquired patience. He was curious, but he did
not care particularly what was in the wind. However, when Withers came
out and sent an Indian to drive up the horses Shefford could not refrain
from a query.

"I hate to tell you," replied the trader.

"Go on," added Shefford, quickly.

"Did I tell you about the government sending a Supreme Court judge out
to Utah to prosecute the polygamists?"

"No," replied Shefford.

"I forgot to, I reckon. You've been away a lot. Well, there's been hell
up in Utah for six months. Lately this judge and his men have worked
down into southern Utah. He visited Bluff and Monticello a few weeks
ago.... Now what do you think?"

"Withers! Is he coming to Stonebridge?"

"He's there now. Some one betrayed the whereabouts of the hidden village
over in the cañon. All the women have been arrested and taken to
Stonebridge. The trial begins to-day."

"Arrested!" echoed Shefford, blankly. "Those poor, lonely, good women?
What on earth for?"

"Sealed wives!" exclaimed Withers, tersely. "This judge is after the
polygamists. They say he's absolutely relentless."

"But--women can't be polygamists. Their husbands are the ones wanted."

"Sure. But the prosecutors have got to find the sealed wives--the second
wives--to find the law-breaking husbands. That'll be a job, or I don't
know Mormons.... Are you going to ride over to Stonebridge with me?"

Shefford shrank at the idea. Months of toil and pain and travail had not
been enough to make him forget the strange girl he had loved. But he had
remembered only at poignant intervals, and the lapse of time had made
thought of her a dream like that sad dream which had lured him into the
desert. With the query of the trader came a bitter-sweet regret.

"Better come with me," said Withers. "Have you forgotten the Sago Lily?
She'll be put on trial.... That girl--that child!... Shefford, you know
she hasn't any friends. And now no Mormon man are protect her, for fear
of prosecution."

"I'll go," replied Shefford, shortly.

The Indian brought up the horses. Nack-yal was thin from his long
travel during the hot summer, but he was as hard as iron, and the way he
pointed his keen nose toward the Sagi showed how he wanted to make for
the upland country, with its clear springs and valleys of grass. Withers
mounted his bay and with a hurried farewell to his wife spurred the
mustang into the trail. Shefford took time to get his weapons and the
light pack he always carried, and then rode out after the trader.

The pace Withers set was the long, steady lope to which these Indian
mustangs had been trained all their lives. In an hour they reached the
mouth of the Sagi, and at sight of it it seemed to Shefford that the
hard half-year of suffering since he had been there had disappeared.
Withers, to Shefford's regret, did not enter the Sagi. He turned off to
the north and took a wild trail into a split of the red wall, and wound
in and out, and climbed a crack so narrow that the light was obscured
and the cliffs could be reached from both sides of a horse.

Once up on the wild plateau, Shefford felt again in a different world
from the barren desert he had lately known. The desert had crucified
him and had left him to die or survive, according to his spirit and his
strength. If he had loved the glare, the endless level, the deceiving
distance, the shifting sand, it had certainly not been as he loved this
softer, wilder, more intimate upland. With the red peaks shining up into
the blue, and the fragrance of cedar and pinyon, and the purple sage
and flowers and grass and splash of clear water over stones--with these
there came back to him something that he had lost and which had haunted
him.

It seemed he had returned to this wild upland of color and cañon and
lofty crags and green valleys and silent places with a spirit gained
from victory over himself in the harsher and sterner desert below. And,
strange to him, he found his old self, the dreamer, the artist, the
lover of beauty, the searcher for he knew not what, come to meet him on
the fragrant wind.

He felt this, saw the old wildness with glad eyes, yet the greater part
of his mind was given over to the thought of the unfortunate women he
expected to see in Stonebridge.

Withers was harder to follow, to keep up with, than an Indian. For one
thing he was a steady and tireless rider, and for another there were
times when he had no mercy on a horse. Then an Indian always found
easier steps in a trail and shorter cuts. Withers put his mount to some
bad slopes, and Shefford had no choice but to follow. But they crossed
the great broken bench of upland without mishap, and came out upon a
promontory of a plateau from which Shefford saw a wide valley and the
dark-green alfalfa fields of Stonebridge.

Stonebridge lay in the center of a fertile valley surrounded by pink
cliffs. It must have been a very old town, certainly far older than
Bluff or Monticello, though smaller, and evidently it had been built to
last. There was one main street, very wide, that divided the town and
was crossed at right angles by a stream spanned by a small natural stone
bridge. A line of poplar-trees shaded each foot-path. The little log
cabins and stone houses and cottages were half hidden in foliage now
tinted with autumn colors. Toward the center of the town the houses and
stores and shops fronted upon the street and along one side of a
green square, or plaza. Here were situated several edifices, the
most prominent of which was a church built of wood, whitewashed, and
remarkable, according to Withers, for the fact that not a nail had been
used in its construction. Beyond the church was a large, low structure
of stone, with a split-shingle roof, and evidently this was the town
hall.

Shefford saw, before he reached the square, that this day in Stonebridge
was one of singular action and excitement for a Mormon village. The town
was full of people and, judging from the horses hitched everywhere and
the big canvas-covered wagons, many of the people were visitors. A
crowd surrounded the hall--a dusty, booted, spurred, shirt-sleeved and
sombreroed assemblage that did not wear the hall-mark Shefford had come
to associate with Mormons. They were riders, cowboys, horse-wranglers,
and some of them Shefford had seen in Durango. Navajos and Piutes were
present, also, but they loitered in the background.

Withers drew Shefford off to the side where, under a tree, they hitched
their horses.

"Never saw Stonebridge full of a riffraff gang like this to-day," said
Withers. "I'll bet the Mormons are wild. There's a tough outfit
from Durango. If they can get anything to drink--or if they've got
it--Stonebridge will see smoke to-day!... Come on. I'll get in that
hall."

But before Withers reached the hall he started violently and pulled
up short, then, with apparent unconcern, turned to lay a hand upon
Shefford. The trader's face had blanched and his eyes grew hard and
shiny, like flint. He gripped Shefford's arm.

"Look! Over to your left!" he whispered. "See that gang of Indians
there--by the big wagon. See the short Indian with the chaps. He's got a
face big as a ham, dark, fierce. That's Shadd!... You ought to know him.
Shadd and his outfit here! How's that for nerve? But he pulls a rein
with the Mormons."

Shefford's keen eye took in a lounging group of ten or twelve Indians
and several white men. They did not present any great contrast to
the other groups except that they were isolated, appeared quiet and
watchful, and were all armed. A bunch of lean, racy mustangs, restive
and spirited, stood near by in charge of an Indian. Shefford had to take
a second and closer glance to distinguish the half-breed. At once he
recognized in Shadd the broad-faced squat Indian who had paid him a
threatening visit that night long ago in the mouth of the Sagi. A fire
ran along Shefford's veins and seemed to concentrate in his breast.
Shadd's dark, piercing eyes alighted upon Shefford and rested there.
Then the half-breed spoke to one of his white outlaws and pointed at
Shefford. His action attracted the attention of others in the gang, and
for a moment Shefford and Withers were treated to a keen-eyed stare.

The trader cursed low. "Maybe I wouldn't like to mix it with that damned
breed," he said. "But what chance have we with that gang? Besides,
we're here on other and more important business. All the same, before I
forget, let me remind you that Shadd has had you spotted ever since you
came out here. A friendly Piute told me only lately. Shefford, did
any Indian between here and Flagstaff ever see that bunch of money you
persist in carrying?"

"Why, yes, I suppose so--'way back in Tuba, when I first came out,"
replied Shefford.

"Huh! Well, Shadd's after that.... Come on now, let's get inside the
hall."

The crowd opened for the trader, who appeared to be known to everybody.

A huge man with a bushy beard blocked the way to a shut door.

"Hello, Meade!" said Withers. "Let us in."

The man opened the door, permitted Withers and Shefford to enter, and
then closed it.

Shefford, coming out of the bright glare of sun into the hall, could not
see distinctly at first. His eyes blurred. He heard a subdued murmur
of many voices. Withers appeared to be affected with the same kind of
blindness, for he stood bewildered a moment. But he recovered sooner
than Shefford. Gradually the darkness shrouding many obscure forms
lifted. Withers drew him through a crowd of men and women to one side
of the hall, and squeezed along a wall to a railing where progress was
stopped.

Then Shefford raised his head to look with bated breath and strange
curiosity.

The hall was large and had many windows. Men were in consultation upon a
platform. Women to the number of twenty sat close together upon benches.
Back of them stood another crowd. But the women on the benches held
Shefford's gaze. They were the prisoners. They made a somber group. Some
were hooded, some veiled, all clad in dark garments except one on the
front bench, and she was dressed in white. She wore a long hood that
concealed her face. Shefford recognized the hood and then the slender
shape. She was Mary--she whom her jealous neighbors had named the Sago
Lily. At sight of her a sharp pain pierced Shefford's breast. His eyes
were blurred when he forced them away from her, and it took a moment for
him to see clearly.

Withers was whispering to him or to some one near at hand, but Shefford
did not catch the meaning of what was said. He paid more attention;
however, Withers ceased speaking. Shefford gazed upon the crowd back
of him. The women were hooded and it was not possible to see what they
looked like. There were many stalwart, clean-cut, young Mormons of Joe
Lake's type, and these men appeared troubled, even distressed and at a
loss. There was little about them resembling the stern, quiet, somber
austerity of the more matured men, and nothing at all of the strange,
aloof, serene impassiveness of the gray-bearded old patriarchs. These
venerable men were the Mormons of the old school, the sons of the
pioneers, the ruthless fanatics. Instinctively Shefford felt that it was
in them that polygamy was embodied; they were the husbands of the sealed
wives. He conceived an absorbing curiosity to learn if his instinct was
correct; and hard upon that followed a hot, hateful eagerness to see
which one was the husband of Mary.

"There's Bishop Kane," whispered Withers, nudging Shefford. "And there's
Waggoner with him."

Shefford saw the bishop, and then beside him a man of striking presence.

"Who's Waggoner?" asked Shefford, as he looked.

"He owns more than any Mormon in southern Utah," replied the trader.
"He's the biggest man in Stonebridge, that's sure. But I don't know his
relation to the Church. They don't call him elder or bishop. But I'll
bet he's some pumpkins. He never had any use for me or any Gentile. A
close-fisted, tight-lipped Mormon--a skinflint if I ever saw one! Just
look him over."

Shefford had been looking, and considered it unlikely that he would ever
forget this individual called Waggoner. He seemed old, sixty at least,
yet at that only in the prime of a wonderful physical life. Unlike most
of the others, he wore his grizzled beard close-cropped, so close that
it showed the lean, wolfish line of his jaw. All his features were of
striking sharpness. His eyes, of a singularly brilliant blue, were yet
cold and pale. The brow had a serious, thoughtful cast; long furrows
sloped down the cheeks. It was a strange, secretive face, full of a
power that Shefford had not seen in another man's, full of intelligence
and thought that had not been used as Shefford had known them used
among men. The face mystified him. It had so much more than the strange
aloofness so characteristic of his fellows.

"Waggoner had five wives and fifty-five children before the law went
into effect," whispered Withers. "Nobody knows and nobody will ever know
how many he's got now. That's my private opinion."

Somehow, after Withers told that, Shefford seemed to understand the
strange power in Waggoner's face. Absolutely it was not the force, the
strength given to a man from his years of control of men. Shefford, long
schooled now in his fair-mindedness, fought down the feelings of other
years, and waited with patience. Who was he to judge Waggoner or any
other Mormon? But whenever his glance strayed back to the quiet, slender
form in white, when he realized again and again the appalling nature of
this court, his heart beat heavy and labored within his breast.

Then a bustle among the men upon the platform appeared to indicate that
proceedings were about to begin. Some men left the platform; several sat
down at a table upon which were books and papers, and others remained
standing. These last were all roughly garbed, in riding-boots and spurs,
and Shefford's keen eye detected the bulge of hidden weapons. They
looked like deputy-marshals upon duty.

Somebody whispered that the judge's name was Stone. The name fitted him.
He was not young, and looked a man suited to the prosecution of these
secret Mormons. He had a ponderous brow, a deep, cavernous eye that
emitted gleams but betrayed no color or expression. His mouth was the
saving human feature of his stony face.

Shefford took the man upon the judge's right hand to be a lawyer, and
the one on his left an officer of court, perhaps a prosecuting attorney.
Presently this fellow pounded upon the table and stood up as if to
address a court-room. Certainly he silenced that hallful of people. Then
he perfunctorily and briefly stated that certain women had been arrested
upon suspicion of being sealed wives of Mormon polygamists, and were to
be herewith tried by a judge of the United States Court. Shefford felt
how the impressive words affected that silent hall of listeners, but
he gathered from the brief preliminaries that the trial could not be
otherwise than a crude, rapid investigation, and perhaps for that the
more sinister.

The first woman on the foremost bench was led forward by a deputy to a
vacant chair on the platform just in front of the judge's table. She was
told to sit down, and showed no sign that she had heard. Then the judge
courteously asked her to take the chair. She refused. And Stone nodded
his head as if he had experienced that sort of thing before. He stroked
his chin wearily, and Shefford conceived an idea that he was a kind man,
if he was a relentless judge.

"Please remove your veil," requested the prosecutor.

The woman did so, and proved to be young and handsome. Shefford had
a thrill as he recognized her. She was Ruth, who had been one of his
best-known acquaintances in the hidden village. She was pale, angry,
almost sullen, and her breast heaved. She had no shame, but she seemed
to be outraged. Her dark eyes, scornful and blazing, passed over the
judge and his assistants, and on to the crowd behind the railing.
Shefford, keen as a blade, with all his faculties absorbed, fancied he
saw Ruth stiffen and change slightly as her glance encountered some
one in that crowd. Then the prosecutor in deliberate and chosen words
enjoined her to kiss the Bible handed to her and swear to tell the
truth. How strange for Shefford to see her kiss the book which he had
studied for so many years! Stranger still to hear the low murmur from
the listening audience as she took the oath!

"What is your name?" asked Judge Stone, leaning back and fixing the
cavernous eyes upon her.

"Ruth Jones," was the cool reply.

"How old are you?"

"Twenty."

"Where were you born?" went on the judge. He allowed time for the clerk
to record her answers.

"Panguitch, Utah."

"Were your parents Mormons?"

"Yes."

"Are you a Mormon?"

"Yes."

"Are you a married woman?"

"No."

The answer was instant, cold, final. It seemed to the truth. Almost
Shefford believed she spoke truth. The judge stroked his chin and waited
a moment, and then hesitatingly he went on.

"Have you--any children?"

"No." And the blazing eyes met the cavernous ones.

That about the children was true enough, Shefford thought, and he could
have testified to it.

"You live in the hidden village near this town?"

"Yes."

"What is the name of this village?"

"It has none."

"Did you ever hear of Fre-donia, another village far west of here?"

"Yes."

"It is in Arizona, near the Utah line. There are few men there. Is it
the same kind of village as this one in which you live?"

"Yes."

"What does Fre-donia mean? The name--has it any meaning?"

"It means free women."

The judge maintained silence for a moment, turned to whisper to his
assistants, and presently, without glancing up, said to the woman:

"That will do."

Ruth was led back to the bench, and the woman next to her brought
forward. This was a heavier person, with the figure and step of a
matured woman. Upon removing her bonnet she showed the plain face of
a woman of forty, and it was striking only in that strange, stony
aloofness noted in the older men. Here, Shefford thought, was the real
Mormon, different in a way he could not define from Ruth. This woman
seated herself in the chair and calmly faced her prosecutors. She
manifested no emotion whatever. Shefford remembered her and could not
see any change in her deportment. This trial appeared to be of little
moment to her and she took the oath as if doing so had been a habit all
her life.

"What is your name?" asked Judge Stone, glancing up from a paper he
held.

"Mary Danton."

"Family or married name?"

"My husband's name was Danton."

"Was. Is he living?"

"No."

"Where did you live when you were married to him?"

"In St. George, and later here in Stonebridge."

"You were both Mormons?"

"Yes."

"Did you have any children by him?"

"Yes."

"How many?"

"Two."

"Are they living?"

"One of them is living."

Judge Stone bent over his paper and then slowly raised his eyes to her
face.

"Are you married now?"

"No."

Again the judge consulted his notes, and held a whispered colloquy with
the two men at his table.

"Mrs. Danton, when you were arrested there were five children found in
your home. To whom do they belong?"

"Me."

"Are you their mother?"

"Yes."

"Your husband Danton is the father of only one, the eldest, according to
your former statement. Is that correct?"

"Yes."

"Who, then, is the father--or who are the fathers, of your other
children?"

"I do not know."

She said it with the most stony-faced calmness, with utter disregard
of what significance her words had. A strong, mystic wall of cold flint
insulated her. Strangely it came to Shefford how impossible either to
doubt or believe her. Yet he did both! Judge Stone showed a little heat.

"You don't know the father of one or all of these children?" he queried,
with sharp rising inflection of voice.

"I do not."

"Madam, I beg to remind you that you are under oath."

The woman did not reply.

"These children are nameless, then--illegitimate?"

"They are."

"You swear you are not the sealed wife of some Mormon?"

"I swear."

"How do you live--maintain yourself?"

"I work."

"What at?"

"I weave, sew, bake, and work in my garden."

"My men made note of your large and comfortable cabin, even luxurious,
considering this country. How is that?"

"My husband left me comfortable."

Judge Stone shook a warning finger at the defendant.

"Suppose I were to sentence you to jail for perjury? For a year? Far
from your home and children! Would you speak--tell the truth?"

"I am telling the truth. I can't speak what I don't know.... Send me to
jail."

Baffled, with despairing, angry impatience, Judge Stone waved the woman
away.

"That will do for her. Fetch the next one," he said.

One after another he examined three more women, and arrived, by various
questions and answers different in tone and temper, at precisely the
same point as had been made in the case of Mrs. Danton. Thereupon the
proceedings rested a few moments while the judge consulted with his
assistants.

Shefford was grateful for this respite. He had been worked up to an
unusual degree of interest, and now, as the next Mormon woman to be
examined was she whom he had loved and loved still, he felt rise in
him emotion that threatened to make him conspicuous unless it could
be hidden. The answers of these Mormon women had been not altogether
unexpected by him, but once spoken in cold blood under oath, how tragic,
how appallingly significant of the shadow, the mystery, the yoke that
bound them! He was amazed, saddened. He felt bewildered. He needed to
think out the meaning of the falsehoods of women he knew to be good and
noble. Surely religion, instead of fear and loyalty, was the foundation
and the strength of this disgrace, this sacrifice. Absolutely, shame was
not in these women, though they swore to shameful facts. They had been
coached to give these baffling answers, every one of which seemed
to brand them, not the brazen mothers of illegitimate offspring, but
faithful, unfortunate sealed wives. To Shefford the truth was not in
their words, but it sat upon their somber brows.

Was it only his heightened imagination, or did the silence and
the suspense grow more intense when a deputy led that dark-hooded,
white-clad, slender woman to the defendant's chair? She did not walk
with the poise that had been manifest in the other women, and she sank
into the chair as if she could no longer stand.

"Please remove your hood," requested the prosecutor.

How well Shefford remembered the strong, shapely hands! He saw them
tremble at the knot of ribbon, and that tremor was communicated to him
in a sympathy which made his pulses beat. He held his breath while she
removed the hood. And then there was revealed, he thought, the loveliest
and the most tragic face that ever was seen in a court-room.

A low, whispering murmur that swelled like a wave ran through the hall.
And by it Shefford divined, as clearly as if the fact had been blazoned
on the walls, that Mary's face had been unknown to these villagers. But
the name Sago Lily had not been unknown; Shefford heard it whispered on
all sides.

The murmuring subsided. The judge and his assistants stared at Mary.
As for Shefford, there was no need of his personal feeling to make the
situation dramatic. Not improbably Judge Stone had tried many Mormon
women. But manifestly this one was different. Unhooded, Mary appeared
to be only a young girl, and a court, confronted suddenly with her youth
and the suspicion attached to her, could not but have been shocked.
Then her beauty made her seem, in that somber company, indeed the white
flower for which she had been named. But, more likely, it was her
agony that bound the court into silence which grew painful. Perhaps the
thought that flashed into Shefford's mind was telepathic; it seemed to
him that every watcher there realized that in this defendant the judge
had a girl of softer mold, of different spirit, and from her the bitter
truth could be wrung.

Mary faced the court and the crowd on that side of the platform. Unlike
the other women, she did not look at or seem to see any one behind the
railing. Shefford was absolutely sure there was not a man or a woman who
caught her glance. She gazed afar, with eyes strained, humid, fearful.

When the prosecutor swore her to the oath her lips were seen to move,
but no one heard her speak.

"What is your name?" asked the judge.

"Mary." Her voice was low, with a slight tremor.

"What's your other name?"

"I won't tell."

Her singular reply, the tones of her voice, her manner before the judge,
marked her with strange simplicity. It was evident that she was not
accustomed to questions.

"What were your parents' names?"

"I won't tell," she replied, very low.

Judge Stone did not press the point. Perhaps he wanted to make the
examination as easy as possible for her or to wait till she showed more
composure.

"Were your parents Mormons?" he went on.

"No, sir." She added the sir with a quaint respect, contrasting markedly
with the short replies of the women before her.

"Then you were not born a Mormon?"

"No, sir."

"How old are you?"

"Seventeen or eighteen. I'm not sure."

"You don't know your exact age?"

"No."

"Where were you born?"

"I won't tell."

"Was it in Utah?"

"Yes, sir."

"How long have you lived in this state?"

"Always--except last year."

"And that's been over in the hidden village where you were arrested?"

"Yes."

"But you often visited here--this town Stonebridge?"

"I never was here--till yesterday."

Judge Stone regarded her as if his interest as a man was running counter
to his duty as an officer. Suddenly he leaned forward.

"Are you a Mormon NOW?" he queried, forcibly.

"No, sir," she replied, and here her voice rose a little clearer.

It was an unexpected reply. Judge Stone stared at her. The low buzz ran
through the listening crowd. And as for Shefford, he was astounded. When
his wits flashed back and he weighed her words and saw in her face truth
as clear as light, he had the strangest sensation of joy. Almost it
flooded away the gloom and pain that attended this ordeal.

The judge bent his head to his assistants as if for counsel. All of them
were eager where formerly they had been weary. Shefford glanced around
at the dark and somber faces, and a slow wrath grew within him. Then he
caught a glimpse of Waggoner. The steel-blue, piercing intensity of the
Mormon's gaze impressed him at a moment when all that older generation
of Mormons looked as hard and immutable as iron. Either Shefford was
over-excited and mistaken or the hour had become fraught with greater
suspense. The secret, the mystery, the power, the hate, the religion of
a strange people were thick and tangible in that hall. For Shefford the
feeling of the presence of Withers on his left was entirely different
from that of the Mormon on his other side. If there was not a shadow
there, then the sun did not shine so brightly as it had shone when he
entered. The air seemed clogged with nameless passion.

"I gather that you've lived mostly in the country--away from people?"
the judge began.

"Yes, sir," replied the girl.

"Do you know anything about the government of the United States?"

"No, sir."

He pondered again, evidently weighing his queries, leading up to the
fatal and inevitable question.

Still, his interest in this particular defendant had become visible.

"Have you any idea of the consequences of perjury?"

"No, sir."

"Do you understand what perjury is?"

"It's to lie."

"Do you tell lies?"

"No, sir."

"Have you ever told a single lie?"

"Not--yet," she replied, almost whispering.

It was the answer of a child and affected the judge. He fussed with his
papers. Perhaps his task was not easy; certainly it was not pleasant.
Then he leaned forward again and fixed those deep, cavernous eyes upon
the sad face.

"Do you understand what a sealed wife is?"

"I've never been told."

"But you know there are sealed wives in Utah?"

"Yes, sir; I've been told that."

Judge Stone halted there, watching her. The hall was silent except for
faint rustlings and here and there deep breaths drawn guardedly. The
vital question hung like a sword over the white-faced girl. Perhaps she
divined its impending stroke, for she sat like a stone with dilating,
appealing eyes upon her executioner.

"Are you a sealed wife?" he flung at her.

She could not answer at once. She made effort, but the words would not
come. He flung the question again, sternly.

"No!" she cried.

And then there was silence. That poignant word quivered in Shefford's
heart. He believed it was a lie. It seemed he would have known it if
this hour was the first in which he had ever seen the girl. He heard,
he felt, he sensed the fatal thing. The beautiful voice had lacked some
quality before present. And the thing wanting was something subtle, an
essence, a beautiful ring--the truth. What a hellish thing to make that
pure girl a liar--a perjurer! The heat deep within Shefford kindled to
fire.

"You are not married?" went on Judge Stone.

"No, sir," she answered, faintly.

"Have you ever been married?"

"No, sir."

"Do you expect ever to be married?"

"Oh! No, sir."

She was ashen pale now, quivering all over, with her strong hands
clasping the black hood, and she could no longer meet the judge's
glance.

"Have you--any--any children?" the judge asked, haltingly. It was a hard
question to get out.

"No."

Judge Stone leaned far over the table, and that his face was purple
showed Shefford he was a man. His big fist clenched.

"Girl, you're not going to swear you, too, were visited--over there by
men... You're not going to swear that?"

"Oh--no, sir!"

Judge Stone settled back in his chair, and while he wiped his moist face
that same foreboding murmur, almost a menace, moaned through the hall.

Shefford was sick in his soul and afraid of himself. He did not know
this spirit that flamed up in him. His helplessness was a most hateful
fact.

"Come--confess you are a sealed wife," called her interrogator.

She maintained silence, but shook her head.

Suddenly he seemed to leap forward.

"Unfortunate child! Confess."

That forced her to lift her head and face him, yet still she did not
speak. It was the strength of despair. She could not endure much more.

"Who is your husband?" he thundered at her.

She rose wildly, terror-stricken. It was terror that dominated her, not
of the stern judge, for she took a faltering step toward him, lifting
a shaking hand, but of some one or of some thing far more terrible than
any punishment she could have received in the sentence of a court. Still
she was not proof against the judge's will. She had weakened, and the
terror must have been because of that weakening.

"Who is the Mormon who visits you?" he thundered, relentlessly.

"I--never--knew--his--name.

"But you'd know his face. I'll arrest every Mormon in this country and
bring him before you. You'd know his face?"

"Oh, I wouldn't. I COULDN'T TELL!... _I_--NEVER--SAW HIS FACE--IN THE
LIGHT!"

The tragic beauty of her, the certainty of some monstrous crime to youth
and innocence, the presence of an agony and terror that unfathomably
seemed not to be for herself--these transfixed the court and the
audience, and held them silenced, till she reached out blindly and then
sank in a heap to the floor.




XI. AFTER THE TRIAL


Shefford might have leaped over the railing but for Withers's
restraining hand, and when there appeared to be some sign of kindness in
those other women for the unconscious girl Shefford squeezed through the
crowd and got out of the hall.

The gang outside that had been denied admittance pressed upon Shefford,
with jest and curious query, and a good nature that jarred upon him. He
was far from gentle as he jostled off the first importuning fellows; the
others, gaping at him, opened a lane for him to pass through.

Then there was a hand laid on his shoulder that he did not shake off.
Nas Ta Bega loomed dark and tall beside him. Neither the trader nor Joe
Lake nor any white man Shefford had met influenced him as this Navajo.

"Nas Ta Bega! you here, too. I guess the whole country is here. We
waited at Kayenta. What kept you so long?"

The Indian, always slow to answer, did not open his lips till he drew
Shefford apart from the noisy crowd.

"Bi Nai, there is sorrow in the hogan of Hosteen Doetin," he said.

"Glen Naspa!" exclaimed Shefford.

"My sister is gone from the home of her brother. She went away alone in
the summer."

"Blue Cañon! She went to the missionary. Nas Ta Bega, I thought I saw
her there. But I wasn't sure. I didn't want to make sure. I was afraid
it might be true."

"A brave who loved my sister trailed her there."

"Nas Ta Bega, will you--will we go find her, take her home?"

"No. She will come home some day."

What bitter sadness and wisdom in his words!

"But, my friend, that damned missionary--" began Shefford, passionately.
The Indian had met him at a bad hour.

"Willetts is here. I saw him go in there," interrupted Nas Ta Bega, and
he pointed to the hall.

"Here! He gets around a good deal," declared Shefford. "Nas Ta Bega,
what are you going to do to him?"

The Indian held his peace and there was no telling from his inscrutable
face what might be in his mind. He was dark, impassive. He seemed a wise
and bitter Indian, beyond any savagery of his tribe, and the suffering
Shefford divined was deep.

"He'd better keep out of my sight," muttered Shefford, more to himself
than to his companion.

"The half-breed is here," said Nas Ta Bega.

"Shadd? Yes, we saw him. There! He's still with his gang. Nas Ta Bega,
what are they up to?"

"They will steal what they can."

"Withers says Shadd is friendly with the Mormons."

"Yes, and with the missionary, too."

"With Willetts?"

"I saw them talk together--strong talk."

"Strange. But maybe it's not so strange. Shadd is known well in
Monticello and Bluff. He spends money there. They are afraid of him, but
he's welcome just the same. Perhaps everybody knows him. It'd be like
him to ride into Kayenta. But, Nas Ta Bega, I've got to look out for
him, because Withers says he's after me."

"Bi Nai wears a scar that is proof," said the Indian.

"Then it must be he found out long ago I had a little money."

"It might be. But, Bi Nai, the half-breed has a strange step on your
trail."

"What do you mean?" demanded Shefford.

"Nas Ta Bega cannot tell what he does not know," replied the Navajo.
"Let that be. We shall know some day. Bi Nai, there is sorrow to tell
that is not the Indian's.... Sorrow for my brother!"

Shefford lifted his eyes to the Indian's, and if he did not see sadness
there he was much deceived.

"Bi Nai, long ago you told a story to the trader. Nas Ta Bega sat before
the fire that night. You did not know he could understand your language.
He listened. And he learned what brought you to the country of the
Indian. That night he made you his brother.... All his lonely rides into
the cañon have been to find the little golden-haired child, the lost
girl--Fay Larkin.... Bi Nai, I have found the girl you wanted for your
sweetheart."

Shefford was bereft of speech. He could not see steadily, and the last
solemn words of the Indian seemed far away.

"Bi Nai, I have found Fay Larkin," repeated Nas Ta Bega.

"Fay Larkin!" gasped Shefford, shaking his head. "But--she's dead."

"It would be less sorrow for Bi Nai if she were dead."

Shefford clutched at the Indian. There was something terrible to be
revealed. Like an aspen-leaf in the wind he shook all over. He divined
the revelation--divined the coming blow--but that was as far as his mind
got.

"She's in there," said the Indian, pointing toward hall.

"Fay Larkin?" whispered Shefford.

"Yes, Bi Nai."

"My God! HOW do you know? Oh, I could have seen. I've been blind. ...
Tell me, Indian. Which one?"

"Fay Larkin is the Sago Lily."

. . . . . . . . . .

Shefford strode away into a secluded corner of the Square, where in
the shade and quiet of the trees he suffered a storm of heart and mind.
During that short or long time--he had no idea how long--the Indian
remained with him. He never lost the feeling of Nas Ta Bega close beside
him. When the period of acute pain left him and some order began
to replace the tumult in his mind he felt in Nas Ta Bega the same
quality--silence or strength or help--that he had learned to feel in the
deep cañon and the lofty crags. He realized then that the Indian was
indeed a brother. And Shefford needed him. What he had to fight was more
fatal than suffering and love--it was hate rising out of the unsuspected
dark gulf of his heart--the instinct to kill--the murder in his soul.
Only now did he come to understand Jane Withersteen's tragic story and
the passion of Venters and what had made Lassiter a gun-man. The desert
had transformed Shefford. The elements had entered into his muscle and
bone, into the very fiber of his heart. Sun, wind, sand, cold, storm,
space, stone, the poison cactus, the racking toil, the terrible
loneliness--the iron of the desert man, the cruelty of the desert
savage, the wildness of the mustang, the ferocity of hawk and wolf, the
bitter struggle of every surviving thing--these were as if they had been
melted and merged together and now made a dark and passionate stream
that was his throbbing blood. He realized what he had become and gloried
in it, yet there, looking on with grave and earnest eyes, was his old
self, the man of reason, of intellect, of culture, who had been a good
man despite the failure and shame of his life. And he gave heed to the
voice of warning, of conscience. Not by revengefully seeking the Mormon
who had ruined Fay Larkin and blindly dealing a wild justice could he
help this unfortunate girl. This fierce, newborn strength and passion
must be tempered by reason, lest he become merely elemental, a man
answering wholly to primitive impulses. In the darkness of that hour he
mined deep into his heart, understood himself, trembled at the thing he
faced, and won his victory. He would go forth from that hour a man. He
might fight, and perhaps there was death in the balance, but hate would
never overthrow him.

Then when he looked at future action he felt a strange, unalterable
purpose to save Fay Larkin. She was very young--seventeen or eighteen,
she had said--and there could be, there must be some happiness
before her. It had been his dream to chase a rainbow--it had been his
determination to find her in the lost Surprise Valley. Well, he had
found her. It never occurred to him to ask Nas Ta Bega how he had
discovered that the Sago Lily was Fay Larkin. The wonder was, Shefford
thought, that he had so long been blind himself. How simply everything
worked out now! Every thought, every recollection of her was proof. Her
strange beauty like that of the sweet and rare lily, her low voice that
showed the habit of silence, her shapely hands with the clasp strong as
a man's, her lithe form, her swift step, her wonderful agility upon the
smooth, steep trails, and the wildness of her upon the heights, and
the haunting, brooding shadow of her eyes when she gazed across the
cañon--all these fitted so harmoniously the conception of a child
lost in a beautiful Surprise Valley and growing up in its wildness and
silence, tutored by the sad love of broken Jane and Lassiter. Yes, to
save her had been Shefford's dream, and he had loved that dream. He
had loved the dream and he had loved the child. The secret of her
hiding-place as revealed by the story told him and his slow growth from
dream to action--these had strangely given Fay Larkin to him. Then
had come the bitter knowledge that she was dead. In the light of this
subsequent revelation how easy to account for his loving Mary, too.
Never would she be Mary again to him! Fay Larkin and the Sago Lily were
one and the same. She was here, near him, and he was powerless for the
present to help her or to reveal himself. She was held back there in
that gloomy hall among those somber Mormons, alien to the women, bound
in some fatal way to one of the men, and now, by reason of her weakness
in the trial, surely to be hated. Thinking of her past and her present,
of the future, and that secret Mormon whose face she had never seen,
Shefford felt a sinking of his heart, a terrible cold pang in his
breast, a fainting of his spirit. She had sworn she was no sealed wife.
But had she not lied? So, then, how utterly powerless he was!

But here to save him, to uplift him, came that strange mystic insight
which had been the gift of the desert to him. She was not dead. He had
found her. What mattered obstacles, even that implacable creed to which
she had been sacrificed, in the face of this blessed and overwhelming
truth? It was as mighty as the love suddenly dawning upon him. A strong
and terrible and deathly sweet wind seemed to fill his soul with the
love of her. It was her fate that had drawn him; and now it was her
agony, her innocence, her beauty, that bound him for all time. Patience
and cunning and toil, passion and blood, the unquenchable spirit of a
man to save--these were nothing to give--life itself were little, could
he but free her.

Patience and cunning! His sharpening mind cut these out as his greatest
assets for the present. And his thoughts flashed like light through his
brain.... Judge Stone and his court would fail to convict any Mormon
in Stonebridge, just the same as they had failed in the northern towns.
They would go away, and Stonebridge would fall to the slow, sleepy tenor
of its former way. The hidden village must become known to all men,
honest and outlawed, in that country, but this fact would hardly make
any quick change in the plans of the Mormons. They did not soon change.
They would send the sealed wives back to the cañon and, after the
excitement had died down, visit them as usual. Nothing, perhaps, would
ever change these old Mormons but death.

Shefford resolved to remain in Stonebridge and ingratiate himself deeper
into the regard of the Mormons. He would find work there, if the sealed
wives were not returned to the hidden village. In case the women went
back to the valley Shefford meant to resume his old duty of driving
Withers's pack-trains. Wanting that opportunity, he would find some
other work, some excuse to take him there. In due time he would reveal
to Fay Larkin that he knew her. How the thought thrilled him! She might
deny, might persist in her fear, might fight to keep her secret. But he
would learn it--hear her story--hear what had become of Jane Withersteen
and Lassiter--and if they were alive, which now he believed he would
find them--and he would take them and Fay out of the country.

The duty, the great task, held a grim fascination for him. He had a
foreboding of the cost; he had a dark realization of the force he meant
to oppose. There were duty here and pity and unselfish love, but these
alone did not actuate Shefford. Mystically fate seemed again to come
like a gleam and bid him follow.

When Shefford and Nas Ta Bega returned to the town hall the trial had
been ended, the hall was closed, and only a few Indians and cowboys
remained in the square, and they were about to depart. On the street,
however, and the paths and in the doorways of stores were knots of
people, talking earnestly. Shefford walked up and down, hoping to meet
Withers or Joe Lake. Nas Ta Bega said he would take the horses to water
and feed and then return.

There were indications that Stonebridge might experience some of the
excitement and perhaps violence common to towns like Monticello and
Durango. There was only one saloon in Stonebridge, and it was full
of roystering cowboys and horse-wranglers. Shefford saw the bunch of
mustangs, in charge of the same Indian, that belonged to Shadd and
his gang. The men were inside, drinking. Next door was a tavern called
Hopewell House, a stone structure of some pretensions. There were
Indians lounging outside. Shefford entered through a wide door and
found himself in a large bare room, boarded like a loft, with no
ceiling except the roof. The place was full of men and noise. Here he
encountered Joe Lake talking to Bishop Kane and other Mormons. Shefford
got a friendly greeting from the bishop, and then was well received by
the strangers, to whom Joe introduced him.

"Have you seen Withers?" asked Shefford.

"Reckon he's around somewhere," replied Joe. "Better hang up here, for
he'll drop in sooner or later."

"When are you going back to Kayenta?" went on Shefford.

"Hard to say. We'll have to call off our hunt. Nas Ta Bega is here,
too."

"Yes, I've been with him."

The older Mormons drew aside, and then Joe mentioned the fact that he
was half starved. Shefford went with him into another clapboard room,
which was evidently a dining-room. There were half a dozen men at the
long table. The seat at the end was a box, and scarcely large enough or
safe enough for Joe and Shefford, but they risked it.

"Saw you in the hall," said Joe. "Hell--wasn't it?"

"Joe, I never knew how much I dared say to you, so I don't talk much.
But, it was hell," replied Shefford.

"You needn't be so scared of me," spoke up Joe, testily.

That was the first time Shefford had heard the Mormon speak that way.

"I'm not scared, Joe. But I like you--respect you. I can't say so much
of--of your people."

"Did you stick out the whole mix?" asked Joe.

"No. I had enough when--when they got through with Mary." Shefford spoke
low and dropped his head. He heard the Mormon grind his teeth. There was
silence for a little space while neither man looked at the other.

"Reckon the judge was pretty decent," presently said Joe.

"Yes, I thought so. He might have--" But Shefford did not finish that
sentence. "How'd the thing end?"

"It ended all right."

"Was there no conviction--no sentence?" Shefford felt a curious
eagerness.

"Naw," he snorted. "That court might have saved its breath."

"I suppose. Well, Joe, between you and me, as old friends now, that
trial established one fact, even if it couldn't be proved.... Those
women are sealed wives."

Joe had no reply for that. He looked gloomy, and there was a stern line
in his lips. To-day he seemed more like a Mormon.

"Judge Stone knew that as well as I knew," went on Shefford. "Any man of
penetration could have seen it. What an ordeal that was for good women
to go through! I know they're good. And there they were swearing to--"

"Didn't it make me sick?" interrupted Joe in a kind of growl. "Reckon
it made Judge Stone sick, too. After Mary went under he conducted that
trial like a man cuttin' out steers at a round-up. He wanted to get it
over. He never forced any question.... Bad job to ride down Stonebridge
way! It's out of creation. There's only six men in the party, with a
poor lot of horses. Really, government officers or not, they're not
safe. And they've taken a hunch."

"Have they left already?" inquired Shefford.

"Were packed an hour ago. I didn't see them go, but somebody said they
went. Took the trail for Bluff, which sure is the only trail they could
take, unless they wanted to go to Colorado by way of Kayenta. That might
have been the safest trail."

"Joe, what might happen to them?" asked Shefford, quietly, with eyes on
the Mormon.

"Aw, you know that rough trail. Bad on horses. Weathered
slopes--slipping ledges--a rock might fall on you any time. Then Shadd's
here with his gang. And bad Piutes."

"What became of the women?" Shefford asked, 'presently.

"They're around among friends."

"Where are their children?"

"Left over there with the old women. Couldn't be fetched over. But there
are some pretty young babies in that bunch--need their mothers."

"I should--think so," replied Shefford, constrainedly. "When will their
mothers get back to them?"

"To-night, maybe, if this mob of cow-punchers and wranglers get out of
town.... It's a bad mix, Shefford, here's a hunch on that. These fellows
will get full of whisky. And trouble might come if they--approach the
women."

"You mean they might get drunk enough to take the oaths of those poor
women--take the meaning literally--pretend to believe the women what
they swore they were?"

"Reckon you've got the hunch," replied Joe, gloomily.

"My God! man, that would be horrible!" exclaimed Shefford.

"Horrible or not, it's liable to happen. The women can be kept here yet
awhile. Reckon there won't be any trouble here. It'll be over there in
the valley. Shefford, getting the women over there safe is a job that's
been put to me. I've got a bunch of fellows already. Can I count on you?
I'm glad to say you're well thought of. Bishop Kane liked you, and what
he says goes."

"Yes, Joe, you can count on me," replied Shefford.

They finished their meal then and repaired to the big office-room of
the house. Several groups of men were there and loud talk was going
on outside. Shefford saw Withers talking to Bishop Kane and two other
Mormons, both strangers to Shefford. The trader appeared to be speaking
with unwonted force, emphasizing his words with energetic movements of
his hands.

"Reckon something's up," whispered Joe, hoarsely. "It's been in the air
all day."

Withers must have been watching for Shefford.

"Here's Shefford now," he said to the trio of Mormons, as Joe and
Shefford reached the group. "I want you to hear him speak for himself."

"What's the matter?" asked Shefford.

"Give me a hunch and I'll put in my say-so," said Joe Lake.

"Shefford, it's the matter of a good name more than a job," replied the
trader. "A little while back I told the bishop I meant to put you on the
pack job over to the valley--same as when you first came to me. Well,
the bishop was pleased and said he might put something in your way.
Just now I ran in here to find you--not wanted. When I kicked I got the
straight hunch. Willetts has said things about you. One of them--the one
that sticks in my craw--was that you'd do anything, even pretend to
be inclined toward Mormonism, just to be among those Mormon women over
there. Willetts is your enemy. And he's worse than I thought. Now I want
you to tell Bishop Kane why this missionary is bitter toward you."

"Gentlemen, I knocked him down," replied Shefford, simply.

"What for?" inquired the bishop, in surprise and curiosity.

Shefford related the incident which had occurred at Red Lake and that
now seemed again to come forward fatefully.

"You insinuate he had evil intent toward the Indian girl?" queried Kane.

"I insinuate nothing. I merely state what led to my acting as I did."

"Principles of religion, sir?"

"No. A man's principles."

Withers interposed in his blunt way, "Bishop, did you ever see Glen
Naspa?"

"No."

"She's the prettiest Navajo in the country. Willetts was after her,
that's all."

"My dear man, I can't believe that of a Christian missionary. We've
known Willetts for years. He's a man of influence. He has money back of
him. He's doing a good work. You hint of a love relation."

"No, I don't hint," replied Withers, impatiently. "I know. It's not the
first time I've known a missionary to do this sort of thing. Nor is it
the first time for Willetts. Bishop Kane, I live among the Indians. I
see a lot I never speak of. My work is to trade with the Indians, that's
all. But I'll not have Willetts or any other damned hypocrite run down
my friend here. John Shefford is the finest young man that ever came to
me in the desert. And he's got to be put right before you all or I'll
not set foot in Stonebridge again.... Willetts was after Glen Naspa.
Shefford punched him. And later threw him out of the old Indian's hogan
up on the mountain. That explains Willetts's enmity. He was after the
girl."

"What's more, gentlemen, he GOT her," added Shefford. "Glen Naspa has
not been home for six months. I saw her at Blue Cañon.... I would like
to face this Willetts before you all."

"Easy enough," replied Withers, with a grim chuckle. "He's just
outside."

The trader went out; Joe Lake followed at his heels and the three
Mormons were next; Shefford brought up the rear and lingered in the door
while his eye swept the crowd of men and Indians. His feeling was in
direct contrast to his movements. He felt the throbbing of fierce anger.
But it seemed a face came between him and his passion--a sweet and
tragic face that would have had power to check him in a vastly more
critical moment than this. And in an instant he had himself in hand,
and, strangely, suddenly felt the strength that had come to him.

Willetts stood in earnest colloquy with a short, squat Indian--the
half-breed Shadd. They leaned against a hitching-rail. Other Indians
were there, and outlaws. It was a mixed group, rough and hard-looking.

"Hey, Willetts!" called the trader, and his loud, ringing voice, not
pleasant, stilled the movement and sound.

When Willetts turned, Shefford was half-way across the wide walk. The
missionary not only saw him, but also Nas Ta Bega, who was striding
forward. Joe Lake was ahead of the trader, the Mormons followed with
decision, and they all confronted Willetts. He turned pale. Shadd had
cautiously moved along the rail, nearer to his gang, and then they, with
the others of the curious crowd, drew closer.

"Willetts, here's Shefford. Now say it to his face!" declared the
trader. He was angry and evidently wanted the fact known, as well as the
situation.

Willetts had paled, but he showed boldness. For an instant Shefford
studied the smooth face, with its sloping lines, the dark, wine-colored
eyes.

"Willetts, I understand you've maligned me to Bishop Kane and others,"
began Shefford, curtly.

"I called you an atheist," returned the missionary, harshly.

"Yes, and more than that. And I told these men WHY you vented your spite
on me."

Willetts uttered a half-laugh, an uneasy, contemptuous expression of
scorn and repudiation.

"The charges of such a man as you are can't hurt me," he said.

The man did not show fear so much as disgust at the meeting. He seemed
to be absorbed in thought, yet no serious consideration of the situation
made itself manifest. Shefford felt puzzled. Perhaps there was no fire
to strike from this man. The desert had certainly not made him flint. He
had not toiled or suffered or fought.

"But _I_ can hurt you," thundered Shefford, with startling suddenness.
"Here! Look at this Indian! Do you know him? Glen Naspa's brother. Look
at him. Let us see you face him while I accuse you.... You made love to
Glen Naspa--took her from her home!"

"Harping infidel!" replied Willetts, hoarsely. "So that's your game.
Well, Glen Naspa came to my school of her own accord and she will say
so."

"Why will she? Because you blinded the simple Indian girl.... Willetts,
I'll waste little more time on you."

And swift and light as a panther Shefford leaped upon the man and,
fastening powerful hands round the thick neck, bore him to his knees
and bent back his head over the rail. There was a convulsive struggle,
a hard flinging of arms, a straining wrestle, and then Willetts was in a
dreadful position. Shefford held him in iron grasp.

"You damned, white-livered hypocrite--I'm liable to kill you!" cried
Shefford. "I watched you and Glen Naspa that day up on the mountain.
I saw you embrace her. I saw that she loved you. Tell THAT, you liar!
That'll be enough."

The face of the missionary turned purple as Shefford forced his head
back over the rail.

"I'll kill you, man," repeated Shefford, piercingly. "Do you want to go
to your God unprepared? Say you made love to Glen Naspa--tell that you
persuaded her to leave her home. Quick!"

Willetts raised a shaking hand and then Shefford relaxed the paralyzing
grip and let his head come forward. The half-strangled man gasped out a
few incoherent words that his livid, guilty face made unnecessary.

Shefford gave him a shove and he fell into the dust at the feet of the
Navajo.

"Gentlemen, I leave him to Nas Ta Bega," said Shefford, with a strange
change from passion to calmness.

Late that night, when the roystering visitors had gone or were deep
in drunken slumber, a melancholy and strange procession filed out of
Stonebridge. Joe Lake and his armed comrades were escorting the Mormon
women back to the hidden valley. They were mounted on burros and
mustangs, and in all that dark and somber line there was only one figure
which shone white under the pale moon.

At the starting, until that white-clad figure had appeared, Shefford's
heart had seemed to be in his throat; and thereafter its beat was
muffled and painful in his breast. Yet there was some sad sweetness in
the knowledge that he could see her now, be near her, watch over her.

By and by the overcast clouds drifted and the moon shone bright. The
night was still; the great dark mountain loomed to the stars; the
numberless waves of rounded rock that must be crossed and circled lay
deep in shadow. There was only a steady pattering of light hoofs.

Shefford's place was near the end of the line, and he kept well back,
riding close to one woman and then another. No word was spoken. These
sealed wives rode where their mounts were led or driven, as blind in
their hoods as veiled Arab women in palanquins. And their heads drooped
wearily and their shoulders bent, as if under a burden. It took an hour
of steady riding to reach the ascent to the plateau, and here, with the
beginning of rough and smooth and shadowed trail, the work of the escort
began. The line lengthened out and each man kept to the several women
assigned to him. Shefford had three, and one of them was the girl he
loved. She rode as if the world and time and life were naught to her.
As soon as he dared trust his voice and his control he meant to let her
know the man whom perhaps she had not forgotten was there with her, a
friend. Six months! It had been a lifetime to him. Surely eternity to
her! Had she forgotten? He felt like a coward who had basely deserted
her. Oh--had he only known!

She rode a burro that was slow, continually blocking the passage for
those behind, and eventually it became lame. Thus the other women forged
ahead. Shefford dismounted and stopped her burro. It was a moment before
she noted the halt, and twice in that time Shefford tried to speak and
failed. What poignant pain, regret, love made his utterance fail!

"Ride my horse," he finally said, and his voice was not like his own.

Obediently and wearily she dismounted from the burro and got up on
Nack-yal. The stirrups were long for her and he had to change them. His
fingers were all thumbs as he fumbled with the buckles.

Suddenly he became aware that there had been a subtle change in her. He
knew it without looking up and he seemed to be unable to go on with his
task. If his life had depended upon keeping his head lowered he could
not have done it. The listlessness of her drooping form was no longer
manifest. The peak of the dark hood pointed toward him. He knew then
that she was gazing at him.

Never so long as he lived would that moment be forgotten! They were
alone. The others had gotten so far ahead that no sound came back. The
stillness was so deep it could be felt. The moon shone with white, cold
radiance and the shining slopes of smooth stone waved away, crossed by
shadows of pinyons.

Then she leaned a little toward him. One swift hand flew up to tear the
black hood back so that she could see. In its place flashed her white
face. And her eyes were like the night.

"YOU!" she whispered.

His blood came leaping to sting neck and cheek and temple. What dared
he interpret from that single word? Could any other word have meant so
much?

"No--one--else," he replied, unsteadily.

Her white hand flashed again to him, and he met it with his own. He
felt himself standing cold and motionless in the moonlight. He saw her,
wonderful, with the deep, shadowy eyes, and a silver sheen on her hair.
And as he looked she released her hand and lifted it, with the other,
to her hood. He saw the shiny hair darken and disappear--and then the
lovely face with its sad eyes and tragic lips.

He drew Nack-yal's bridle forward, and led him up the moonlit trail.




XII. THE REVELATION


The following afternoon cowboys and horse-wranglers, keen-eyed as
Indians for tracks and trails, began to arrive in the quiet valley to
which the Mormon women had been returned.

Under every cedar clump there were hobbled horses, packs, and rolled
bedding in tarpaulins. Shefford and Joe Lake had pitched camp in the old
site near the spring. The other men of Joe's escort went to the homes of
the women; and that afternoon, as the curious visitors began to arrive,
these homes became barred and dark and quiet, as if they had been closed
and deserted for the winter. Not a woman showed herself.

Shefford and Joe, by reason of the location of their camp and their
alertness, met all the new-comers. The ride from Stonebridge was a long
and hard one, calculated to wear off the effects of the whisky
imbibed by the adventure-seekers. This fact alone saved the situation.
Nevertheless, Joe expected trouble. Most of the visitors were decent,
good-natured fellows, merely curious, and simple enough to believe that
this really was what the Mormons had claimed--a village of free women.
But there were those among them who were coarse, evil-minded, and
dangerous.

By supper-time there were two dozen or more of these men in the valley,
camped along the west wall. Fires were lighted, smoke curled up over the
cedars, gay songs disturbed the usual serenity of the place. Later in
the early twilight the curious visitors, by twos and threes, walked
about the village, peering at the dark cabins and jesting among
themselves. Joe had informed Shefford that all the women had been put in
a limited number of cabins, so that they could be protected. So far as
Shefford saw or heard there was no unpleasant incident in the village;
however, as the sauntering visitors returned toward their camps they
loitered at the spring, and here developments threatened.

In spite of the fact that the majority of these cowboys and their
comrades were decent-minded and beginning to see the real relation
of things, they were not disposed to be civil to Shefford. They were
certainly not Mormons. And his position, apparently as a Gentile, among
these Mormons was one open to criticism. They might have been jealous,
too; at any rate, remarks were passed in his hearing, meant for his
ears, that made it exceedingly trying for him not to resent. Moreover,
Joe Lake's increasing impatience rendered the situation more difficult.
Shefford welcomed the arrival of Nas Ta Bega. The Indian listened to the
loud talk of several loungers round the camp-fire; and thereafter he was
like Shefford's shadow, silent, somber, watchful.

Nevertheless, it did not happen to be one of the friendly and sarcastic
cowboys that precipitated the crisis. A horse-wrangler named Hurley, a
man of bad repute, as much outlaw as anything, took up the bantering.

"Say, Shefford, what in the hell's your job here, anyway?" he queried
as he kicked a cedar branch into the camp-fire. The brightening blaze
showed him swarthy, unshaven, a large-featured, ugly man.

"I've been doing odd jobs for Withers," replied Shefford. "Expect to
drive pack-trains in here for a while."

"You must stand strong with these Mormons. Must be a Mormon yerself?"

"No," replied Shefford, briefly.

"Wal, I'm stuck on your job. Do you need a packer? I can throw a
diamond-hitch better 'n any feller in this country."

"I don't need help."

"Mebbe you'll take me over to see the ladies," he went on, with a coarse
laugh.

Shefford did not show that he had heard. Hurley waited, leering as
looked from the keen listeners to Shefford.

"Want to have them all yerself, eh?" he jeered.

Shefford struck him--sent him tumbling heavily, like a log. Hurley,
cursing as he half rose, jerked his gun out. Nas Ta Bega, swift as
light, kicked the gun out of his hand. And Joe Lake picked it up.

Deliberately the Mormon cocked the weapon and stood over Hurley.

"Get up!" he ordered, and Shefford heard the ruthless Mormon in him
then.

Hurley rose slowly. Then Joe prodded him in the middle with the cocked
gun. Shefford startled, expected the gun to go off. So did the others,
especially Hurley, who shrank in panic from the dark Mormon.

"Rustle!" said Joe, and gave the man a harder prod. Assuredly the gun
did not have a hair-trigger.

"Joe, mebbe it's loaded!" protested one of the cowboys.

Hurley shrank back, and turned to hurry away, with Joe close after him.
They disappeared in the darkness. A constrained silence was maintained
around the camp-fire for a while. Presently some of the men walked off
and others began to converse. Everybody heard the sound of hoofs passing
down the trail. The patter ceased, and in a few moments Lake returned.
He still carried Hurley's gun.

The crowd dispersed then. There was no indication of further trouble.
However, Shefford and Joe and Nas Ta Bega divided the night in watches,
so that some one would be wide awake.

Early next morning there was an exodus from the village of the better
element among the visitors. "No fun hangin' round hyar," one of them
expressed it, and as good-naturedly as they had come they rode away. Six
or seven of the desperado class remained behind, bent on mischief; and
they were reinforced by more arrivals from Stonebridge. They avoided the
camp by the spring, and when Shefford and Lake attempted to go to them
they gave them a wide berth. This caused Joe to assert that they were
up to some dirty work. All morning they lounged around under the cedars,
keeping out of sight, and evidently the reinforcement from Stonebridge
had brought liquor. When they gathered together at their camp, half
drunk, all noisy, some wanting to swagger off into the village and
others trying to hold them back, Joe Lake said, grimly, that somebody
was going to get shot. Indeed, Shefford saw that there was every
likelihood of bloodshed.

"Reckon we'd better take to one of the cabins," said Joe.

Thereupon the three repaired to the nearest cabin, and, entering, kept
watch from the windows. During a couple of hours, however, they did not
see or hear anything of the ruffians. Then came a shot from over in
the village, a single yell, and, after that, a scattering volley. The
silence and suspense which followed were finally broken by hoof-beats.
Nas Ta Bega called Joe and Shefford to the window he had been stationed
at. From here they saw the unwelcome visitors ride down the trail, to
disappear in the cedars toward the outlet of the valley. Joe, who had
numbered them, said that all but one of them had gone.

"Reckon he got it," added Joe.

So indeed it turned out; one of the men, a well-known rustler named
Harker, had been killed, by whom no one seemed to know. He had brazenly
tried to force his way into one of the houses, and the act had cost him
his life. Naturally Shefford, never free from his civilized habit of
thought, remarked apprehensively that he hoped this affair would not
cause the poor women to be arrested again and haled before some rude
court.

"Law!" grunted Joe. "There ain't any. The nearest sheriff is in Durango.
That's Colorado. And he'd give us a medal for killing Harker. It was a
good job, for it'll teach these rowdies a lesson."

Next day the old order of life was resumed in the village. And the
arrival of a heavily laden pack-train, under the guidance of Withers,
attested to the fact that the Mormons meant not only to continue to live
in the valley, but also to build and plant and enlarge. This was good
news to Shefford. At least the village could be made less lonely.
And there was plenty of work to give him excuse for staying there.
Furthermore, Withers brought a message form Bishop Kane to the effect
that the young man was offered a place as teacher in the school, in
co-operation with the Mormon teachers. Shefford experienced no twinge of
conscience when he accepted.

It was the fourth evening after the never-to-be-forgotten moonlight ride
to the valley that Shefford passed under the dark pinyon-trees on his
way to Fay Larkin's cottage. He paused in the gloom and memory beset
him. The six months were annihilated, and it was the night he had fled.
But now all was silent. He seemed to be trying to drag himself back.
A beginning must be made. Only how to meet her--what to say--what to
conceal!

He tapped on the door and she came out. After all, it was a meeting
vastly different from what his feeling made him imagine it might have
been. She was nervous, frightened, as were all the other women, for
that matter. She was alone in the cottage. He made haste to reassure her
about the improbability of any further trouble such as had befallen
the last week. As he had always done on those former visits to her,
he talked rapidly, using all his wit, and here his emotion made him
eloquent; he avoided personalities, except to tell about his prospects
of work in the village, and he sought above all to lead her mind from
thought of herself and her condition. Before he left her he had the
gladness of knowing he had succeeded.

When he said good night he felt the strange falsity of his position. He
did not expect to be able to keep up the deception for long. That roused
him, and half the night he lay awake, thinking. Next day he was the life
of the work and study and play in that village. Kindness and good-will
did not need inspiration, but it was keen, deep passion that made him a
plotter for influence and friendship. Was there a woman in the village
whom he might trust, in case he needed one? And his instinct guided him
to her whom he had liked well--Ruth. Ruth Jones she had called herself
at the trial, and when Shefford used the name she laughed mockingly.
Ruth was not very religious, and sometimes she was bitter and hard.
She wanted life, and here she was a prisoner in a lonely valley. She
welcomed Shefford's visits. He imagined that she had slightly changed,
and whether it was the added six months with its trouble and pain or
a growing revolt he could not tell. After a time he divined that the
inevitable retrogression had set in: she had not enough faith to uphold
the burden she had accepted, nor the courage to cast it off. She was
ready to love him. That did not frighten Shefford, and if she did love
him he was not so sure it would not be an anchor for her. He saw her
danger, and then he became what he had never really been in all the days
of his ministry--the real helper. Unselfishly, for her sake, he found
power to influence her; and selfishly, for the sake of Fay Larkin, he
began slowly to win her to a possible need.

The days passed swiftly. Mormons came and went, though in the open day,
as laborers; new cabins went up, and a store, and other improvements.
Some part of every evening Shefford spent with Fay, and these visits
were no longer unknown to the village. Women gossiped, in a friendly way
about Shefford, but with jealous tongues about the girl. Joe Lake told
Shefford the run of the village talk. Anything concerning the Sago Lily
the droll Mormon took to heart. He had been hard hit, and admitted it.
Sometimes he went with Shefford to call upon her, but he talked little
and never remained long. Shefford had anticipated antagonism on the part
of Joe; however, he did not find it.

Shefford really lived through the busy day for that hour with Fay in the
twilight. And every evening seemed the same. He would find her in the
dark, alone, silent, brooding, hopeless. Her mood did not puzzle him,
but how to keep from plunging her deeper into despair baffled him. He
exhausted all his powers trying to do for her what he had been able to
do for Ruth. Yet he failed. Something had blunted her. The shadow of
that baneful trial hovered over her, and he came to sense a strange
terror in her. It was mostly always present. Was she thinking of Jane
Withersteen and Lassiter, left dead or imprisoned in the valley from
which she had been brought so mysteriously? Shefford wearied his brain
revolving these questions. The fate of her friends, and the cross she
bore--of these was tragedy born, but the terror--that Shefford divined
came of waiting for the visit of the Mormon whose face she had never
seen. Shefford prayed that he might never meet this man. Finally he grew
desperate. When he first arrived at the girl's home she would speak, she
showed gladness, relief, and then straightway she dropped back into the
shadow of her gloom. When he got up to go then there was a wistfulness,
an unspoken need, an unconscious reliance, in her reluctant good night.

Then the hour came when he reached his limit. He must begin his
revelation.

"You never ask me anything--let alone about myself," he said.

"I'd like to hear," she replied, timidly.

"Do I strike you as an unhappy man?"

"No, indeed."

"Well, how DO I strike you?"

This was an entirely new tack he had veered to.

"Very good and kind to us women," she said.

"I don't know about that. If I am so, it doesn't bring me happiness.
... Do you remember what I told you once, about my being a
preacher--disgrace, ruin, and all that--and my rainbow-chasing dream out
here after a--a lost girl?"

"I--remember all--you said," she replied, very low.

"Listen." His voice was a little husky, but behind it there seemed a
tide of resistless utterance. "Loss of faith and name did not send me to
this wilderness. But I had love--love for that lost girl, Fay Larkin. I
dreamed about her till I loved her. I dreamed that I would find her--my
treasure--at the foot of a rainbow. Dreams!... When you told me she was
dead I accepted that. There was truth in your voice. I respected your
reticence. But something died in me then. I lost myself, the best of me,
the good that might have uplifted me. I went away, down upon the barren
desert, and there I rode and slept and grew into another and a harder
man. Yet, strange to say, I never forgot her, though my dreams were
done. As I toiled and suffered and changed I loved her--if not her,
the thought of her--more and more. Now I have come back to these walled
valleys--to the smell of pinyon, to the flowers in the nooks, to the
wind on the heights, to the silence and loneliness and beauty. And here
the dreams come back and SHE is WITH me always. Her spirit is all that
keeps me kind and good, as you say I am. But I suffer, I long for her
alive. If I love her dead, how could I love her living! Always I torture
myself with the vain dream that--that she MIGHT not be dead. I have
never been anything but a dreamer. And here I go about my work by day
and lie awake at night with that lost girl in my mind.... I love her.
Does that seem strange to you? But it would not if you understood.
Think. I had lost faith, hope. I set myself a great work--to find Fay
Larkin. And by the fire and the iron and the blood that I felt it
would cost to save her some faith must come to me again.... My work
is undone--I've never saved her. But listen, how strange it is to
feel--now--as I let myself go--that just the loving her and the living
here in the wildness that holds her somewhere have brought me hope
again. Some faith must come, too. It was through her that I met this
Indian, Nas Ta Bega. He has saved my life--taught me much. What would I
ever have learned of the naked and vast earth, of the sublimity of the
wild uplands, of the storm and night and sun, if I had not followed a
gleam she inspired? In my hunt for a lost girl perhaps I wandered into
a place where I shall find a God and my salvation. Do you marvel that I
love Fay Larkin--that she is not dead to me? Do you marvel that I love
her, when I KNOW, were she alive, chained in a cañon, or bound, or lost
in any way, my destiny would lead me to her, and she should be saved?"

Shefford ended, overcome with emotion. In the dusk he could not see the
girl's face, but the white form that had drooped so listlessly
seemed now charged by some vitalizing current. He knew he had spoken
irrationally; still he held it no dishonor to have told her he loved
her as one dead. If she took that love to the secret heart of living Fay
Larkin, then perhaps a spirit might light in her darkened soul. He had
no thought yet that Fay Larkin might ever belong to him. He divined a
crime--he had seen her agony. And this avowal of his was only one step
toward her deliverance.

Softly she rose, retreating into the shadow.

"Forgive me if I--I disturb you, distress you," he said. "I wanted to
tell you. She was--somehow known to you. I am not happy. And are YOU
happy?... Let her memory be a bond between us.... Good night."

"Good night."

Faintly as the faintest whisper breathed her reply, and, though it came
from a child forced into womanhood, it whispered of girlhood not dead,
of sweet incredulity, of amazed tumult, of a wondering, frantic desire
to run and hide, of the bewilderment incident to a first hint of love.

Shefford walked away into the darkness. The whisper filled his soul. Had
a word of love ever been spoken to that girl? Never--not the love which
had been on his lips. Fay Larkin's lonely life spoke clearly in her
whisper.

. . . . . . . . . . .

Next morning as the sun gilded the looming peaks and shafts of gold
slanted into the valley she came swiftly down the path to the spring.

Shefford paused in his task of chopping wood. Joe Lake, on his knees,
with his big hands in a pan of dough, lifted his head to stare. She
had left off the somber black hood, and, although that made a vast
difference in her, still it was not enough to account for what struck
both men.

"Good morning," she called, brightly.

They both answered, but not spontaneously. She stopped at the spring and
with one sweep of her strong arm filled the bucket and lifted it. Then
she started back down the path and, pausing opposite the camp, set the
bucket down.

"Joe, do you still pride yourself on your sour dough?" she asked.

"Reckon I do," replied Joe, with a grin.

"I've heard your boasts, but never tasted your bread," she went on.

"I'll ask you to eat with us some day."

"Don't forget," she replied.

And then shyly she looked at Shefford. She was like the fresh dawn, and
the gold of the sun shone on her head.

"Have you chopped all that wood--so early?" she asked.

"Sure," replied Shefford, laughing. "I have to get up early to keep Joe
from doing all the camp chores."

She smiled, and then to Shefford she seemed to gleam, to be radiant.

"It'd be a lovely morning to climb--'way high."

"Why--yes--it would," replied Shefford, awkwardly. "I wish I didn't have
my work."

"Joe, will YOU climb with me some day?"

"I should smile I will," declared Joe.

"But I can run right up the walls."

"I reckon. Mary, it wouldn't surprise me to see you fly."

"Do you mean I'm like a cañon swallow or an angel?"

Then, as Joe stared speechlessly, she said good-by and, taking up the
bucket, went on with her swift, graceful step.

"She's perked up," said the Mormon, staring after her. "Never heard her
say more 'n yes or no till now."

"She did seem--bright," replied Shefford.

He was stunned. What had happened to her? To-day this girl had not been
Mary, the sealed wife, or the Sago Lily, alien among Mormon women. Then
it flashed upon him--she was Fay Larkin. She who had regarded herself
as dead had come back to life. In one short night what had transformed
her--what had taken place in her heart? Shefford dared not accept, nor
allow lodgment in his mind, a thrilling idea that he had made her forget
her misery.

"Shefford, did you ever see her like that?" asked Joe.

"Never."

"Haven't you--something to do with it?"

"Maybe I have. I--I hope so."

"Reckon you've seen how she's faded--since the trial?"

"No," replied Shefford, swiftly. "But I've not seen her face in daylight
since then."

"Well, take my hunch," said Joe, soberly. "She's begun to fade like the
cañon lily when it's broken. And she's going to die unless--"

"Why man!" ejaculated Shefford. "Didn't you see--"

"Sure I see," interrupted the Mormon. "I see a lot you don't. She's so
white you can look through her. She's grown thin, all in a week. She
doesn't eat. Oh, I know, because I've made it my business to find out.
It's no news to the women. But they'd like to see her die. And she will
die unless--"

"My God!" exclaimed Shefford, huskily. "I never noticed--I never
thought.... Joe, hasn't she any friends?"

"Sure. You and Ruth--and me. Maybe Nas Ta Bega, too. He watches her a
good deal."

"We can do so little, when she needs so much."

"Nobody can help her, unless it's you," went on the Mormon. "That's
plain talk. She seemed different this morning. Why, she was alive--she
talked--she smiled.... Shefford, if you cheer her up I'll go to hell for
you!"

The big Mormon, on his knees, with his hands in a pan of dough, and his
shirt all covered with flour, presented an incongruous figure of a man
actuated by pathos and passion. Yet the contrast made his emotion all
the simpler and stronger. Shefford grew closer to Joe in that moment.

"Why do you think _I_ can cheer her, help her?" queried Shefford.

"I don't know. But she's different with you. It's not that you're a
Gentile, though, for all the women are crazy about you. You talk to her.
You have power over her, Shefford. I feel that. She's only a kid."

"Who is she, Joe? Where did she come from?" asked Shefford, very low,
with his eyes cast down.

"I don't know. I can't find out. Nobody knows. It's a mystery--to all
the younger Mormons, anyway."

Shefford burned to ask questions about the Mormon whose sealed wife the
girl was, but he respected Joe too much to take advantage of him in a
poignant moment like this. Besides, it was only jealousy that made him
burn to know the Mormon's identity, and jealousy had become a creeping,
insidious, growing fire. He would be wise not to add fuel to it. He
rejected many things before he thought of one that he could voice to his
friend.

"Joe, it's only her body that belongs to--to.... Her soul is lost to--"

"John Shefford, let that go. My mind's tired. I've been taught so and
so, and I'm not bright.... But, after all, men are much alike. The thing
with you and me is this--we don't want to see HER grave!"

Love spoke there. The Mormon had seized upon the single elemental point
that concerned him and his friend in their relation to this unfortunate
girl. His simple, powerful statement united them; it gave the lie to his
hint of denseness; it stripped the truth naked. It was such a wonderful
thought-provoking statement that Shefford needed time to ponder how
deep the Mormon was. To what limit would he go? Did he mean that here,
between two men who loved the same girl, class, duty, honor, creed were
nothing if they stood in the way of her deliverance and her life?

"Joe Lake, you Mormons are impossible," said Shefford, deliberately.
"You don't want to see her grave. So long as she lives--remains on the
earth--white and gold like the flower you call her, that's enough for
you. It's her body you think of. And that's the great and horrible error
in your religion.... But death of the soul is infinitely worse than
death of the body. I have been thinking of her soul.... So here we
stand, you and I. You to save her life--I to save her soul! What will
you do?"

"Why, John, I'd turn Gentile," he said, with terrible softness. It was
a softness that scorned Shefford for asking, and likewise it flung
defiance at his creed and into the face of hell.

Shefford felt the sting and the exaltation.

"And I'd be a Mormon," he said.

"All right. We understand each other. Reckon there won't be any call for
such extremes. I haven't an idea what you mean--what can be done. But I
say, go slow, so we won't all find graves. First cheer her up somehow.
Make her want to live. But go slow, John. AND DON'T BE WITH HER LATE!"

. . . . . . . . . . .

That night Shefford found her waiting for him in the moonlight--a girl
who was as transparent as crystal-clear water, who had left off the
somber gloom with the black hood, who tremulously embraced happiness
without knowing it, who was one moment timid and wild like a
half-frightened fawn, and the next, exquisitely half-conscious of
what it meant to be thought dead, but to be alive, to be awakening,
wondering, palpitating, and to be loved.

Shefford lived the hour as a dream and went back to the quiet darkness
under the cedars to lie wide-eyed, trying to recall all that she had
said. For she had talked as if utterance had long been dammed behind a
barrier of silence.

There followed other hours like that one, indescribable hours, so sweet
they stung, and in which, keeping pace with his love, was the nobler
stride of a spirit that more every day lightened her burden.

The thing he had to do, sooner or later, was to tell her he knew she was
Fay Larkin, not dead, but alive, and that, not love nor religion, but
sacrifice, nailed her down to her martyrdom. Many and many a time he
had tried to force himself to tell her, only to fail. He hated to risk
ending this sweet, strange, thoughtless, girlish mood of hers. It might
not be soon won back--perhaps never. How could he tell what chains bound
her? And so as he vacillated between Joe's cautious advice to go slow
and his own pity the days and weeks slipped by.

One haunting fear kept him sleepless half the nights and sick even in
his dreams, and it was that the Mormon whose sealed wife she was might
come, surely would come, some night. Shefford could bear it. But what
would that visit do to Fay Larkin? Shefford instinctively feared the
awakening in the girl of womanhood, of deeper insight, of a spiritual
realization of what she was, of a physical dawn.

He might have spared himself needless torture. One day Joe Lake eyed him
with penetrating glance.

"Reckon you don't have to sleep right on that Stonebridge trail," said
the Mormon, significantly.

Shefford felt the blood burn his neck and face. He had pulled his
tarpaulin closer to the trail, and his motive was as an open page to the
keen Mormon.

"Why?" asked Shefford.

"There won't be any Mormons riding in here soon--by night--to visit
the women," replied Joe, bluntly. "Haven't you figured there might be
government spies watching the trails?"

"No, I haven't."

"Well, take a hunch, then," added the Mormon, gruffly, and Shefford
divined, as well as if he had been told, that warning word had gone to
Stonebridge. Gone despite the fact that Nas Ta Bega had reported
every trail free of watchers! There was no sign of any spies, cowboys,
outlaws, or Indians in the vicinity of the valley. A passionate
gratitude to the Mormon overcame Shefford; and the unreasonableness of
it, the nature of it, perturbed him greatly. But, something hammered
into his brain, if he loved one of these sealed wives, how could he help
being jealous?

The result of Joe's hint was that Shefford put off the hour of
revelation, lived in his dream, helped the girl grow farther and farther
away from her trouble, until that inevitable hour arrived when he was
driven by accumulated emotion as much as the exigency of the case.

He had not often walked with her beyond the dark shade of the pinyons
round the cottage, but this night, when he knew he must tell her, he led
her away down the path, through the cedar grove to the west end of the
valley where it was wild and lonely and sad and silent.

The moon was full and the great peaks were crowned as with snow. A
coyote uttered his cutting cry. There were a few melancholy notes from
a night bird of the stone walls. The air was clear and cold, with a
tang of frost in it. Shefford gazed about him at the vast, uplifted,
insulating walls, and that feeling of his which was more than a sense
told him how walls like these and the silence and shadow and mystery had
been nearly all of Fay Larkin's life. He felt them all in her.

He stopped out in the open, near the line where dark shadow of the wall
met the silver moonlight on the grass, and here, by a huge flat stone
where he had come often alone and sometimes with Ruth, he faced Fay
Larkin in the spirit to tell her gently that he knew her, and sternly to
force her secret from her.

"Am I your friend?" he began.

"Ah!--my only friend," she said.

"Do you trust me, believe I mean well by you, want to help you?"

"Yes, indeed."

"Well, then, let me speak of you. You know one topic we've never touched
upon. You!"

She was silent, and looked wonderingly, a little fearfully, at him, as
if vague, disturbing thoughts were entering the fringe of her mind.

"Our friendship is a strange one, is it not?" he went on.

"How do I know? I never had any other friendship. What do you mean by
strange?"

"Well, I'm a young man. You're a--a married woman. We are together a
good deal--and like to be."

"Why is that strange?" she asked.

Suddenly Shefford realized that there was nothing strange in what was
natural. A remnant of sophistication clung to him and that had spoken.
He needed to speak to her in a way which in her simplicity she would
understand.

"Never mind strange. Say that I am interested in you, and, as you're not
happy, I want to help you. And say that your neighbors are curious and
oppose my idea. Why do they?"

"They're jealous and want you themselves," she replied, with sweet
directness. "They've said things I don't understand. But I felt
they--they hated in me what would be all right in themselves."

Here to simplicity she added truth and wisdom, as an Indian might have
expressed them. But shame was unknown to her, and she had as yet only
vague perceptions of love and passion. Shefford began to realize the
quickness of her mind, that she was indeed awakening.

"They are jealous--were jealous before I ever came here. That's only
human nature. I was trying to get to a point. Your neighbors are
curious. They oppose me. They hate you. It's all bound up in the--the
fact of your difference from them, your youth, beauty, that you're not
a Mormon, that you nearly betrayed their secret at the trial in
Stonebridge."

"Please--please don't--speak of that!" she faltered.

"But I must," he replied, swiftly. "That trial was a torture to you. It
revealed so much to me.... I know you are a sealed wife. I know there
has been a crime. I know you've sacrificed yourself. I know that love
and religion have nothing to do with--what you are.... Now, is not all
that true?"

"I must not tell," she whispered.

"But I shall MAKE you tell," he replied, and his voice rang.

"Oh no, you cannot," she said.

"I can--with just one word!"

Her eyes were great, starry, shadowy gulfs, dark in the white beauty of
her face. She was calm now. She had strength. She invited him to speak
the word, and the wistful, tremulous quiver of her lips was for his
earnest thought of her.

"Wait--a--little," said Shefford, unsteadily. "I'll come to that
presently. Tell me this--have you ever thought of being free?"

"Free!" she echoed, and there was singular depth and richness in her
voice. That was the first spark of fire he had struck from her. "Long
ago, the minute I was unwatched, I'd have leaped from a wall had I
dared. Oh, I wasn't afraid. I'd love to die that way. But I never
dared."

"Why?" queried Shefford, piercingly.

She was silent then.

"Suppose I offered to give you freedom that meant life?"

"I--couldn't--take it."

"Why?"

"Oh, my friend, don't ask me any more."

"I know, I can see--you want to tell me--you need to tell."

"But I daren't."

"Won't you trust me?"

"I do--I do."

"Then tell me."

"No--no--oh no!"

The moment had come. How sad, tragic, yet glorious for him! It would be
like a magic touch upon this lovely, cold, white ghost of Fay Larkin,
transforming her into a living, breathing girl. He held his love as a
thing aloof, and, as such, intangible because of the living death she
believed she lived, it had no warmth and intimacy for them. What might
it not become with a lightning flash of revelation? He dreaded, yet he
was driven to speak. He waited, swallowing hard, fighting the tumultuous
storm of emotion, and his eyes dimmed.

"What did I come to this country for?" he asked, suddenly, in ringing,
powerful voice.

"To find a girl," she whispered.

"I've found her!"

She began to shake. He saw a white hand go to her breast.

"Where is Surprise Valley?... How were you taken from Jane Withersteen
and Lassiter?... I know they're alive. But where?"

She seemed to turn to stone.

"Fay!--FAY LARKIN!... I KNOW YOU!" he cried, brokenly.

She slipped off the stone to her knees, swayed forward blindly with her
hands reaching out, her head falling back to let the moon fall full upon
the beautiful, snow-white, tragically convulsed face.




XIII. THE STORY OF SURPRISE VALLEY


"... Oh, I remember so well! Even now I dream of it sometimes. I hear
the roll and crash of falling rock--like thunder.... We rode and rode.
Then the horses fell. Uncle Jim took me in his arms and started up the
cliff. Mother Jane climbed close after us. They kept looking back. Down
there in the gray valley came the Mormons. I see the first one now.
He rode a white horse. That was Tull. Oh, I remember so well! And I was
five or six years old.

"We climbed up and up and into dark cañon and wound in and out. Then
there was the narrow white trail, straight up, with the little cut
steps and the great, red, ruined walls. I looked down over Uncle Jim's
shoulder. I saw Mother Jane dragging herself up. Uncle Jim's blood
spotted the trail. He reached a flat place at the top and fell with me.
Mother Jane crawled up to us.

"Then she cried out and pointed. Tull was 'way below, climbing the
trail. His men came behind him. Uncle Jim went to a great, tall rock and
leaned against it. There was a bloody hole in his hand. He pushed
the rock. It rolled down, banging the loose walls. They crashed and
crashed--then all was terrible thunder and red smoke. I couldn't hear--I
couldn't see.

"Uncle Jim carried me down and down out of the dark and dust into a
beautiful valley all red and gold, with a wonderful arch of stone over
the entrance.

"I don't remember well what happened then for what seemed a long, long
time. I can feel how the place looked, but not so clear as it is now
in my dreams. I seem to see myself with the dogs, and with Mother Jane,
learning my letters, marking with red stone on the walls.

"But I remember now how I felt when I first understood we were shut in
for ever. Shut in Surprise Valley where Venters had lived so long. I
was glad. The Mormons would never get me. I was seven or eight years old
then. From that time all is clear in my mind.

"Venters had left supplies and tools and grain and cattle and burros, so
we had a good start to begin life there. He had killed off the wildcats
and kept the coyotes out, so the rabbits and quail multiplied till there
were thousands of them. We raised corn and fruit, and stored what we
didn't use. Mother Jane taught me to read and write with the soft red
stone that marked well on the walls.

"The years passed. We kept track of time pretty well. Uncle Jim's hair
turned white and Mother Jane grew gray. Every day was like the one
before. Mother Jane cried sometimes and Uncle Jim was sad because they
could never be able to get me out of the valley. It was long before they
stopped looking and listening for some one. Venters would come back,
Uncle Jim always said. But Mother Jane did not think so.

"I loved Surprise Valley. I wanted to stay there always. I remembered
Cottonwoods, how the children there hated me, and I didn't want to go
back. The only unhappy times I ever had in the valley were when Ring and
Whitie, my dogs, grew old and died. I roamed the valley. I climbed to
every nook upon the mossy ledges. I learned to run up the steep cliffs.
I could almost stick on the straight walls. Mother Jane called me a wild
girl. We had put away the clothes we wore when we got there, to save
them, and we made clothes of skins. I always laughed when I thought of
my little dress--how I grew out of it. I think Uncle Jim and Mother Jane
talked less as the years went by. And after I'd learned all she could
teach me we didn't talk much. I used to scream into the caves just to
hear my voice, and the echoes would frighten me.

"The older I grew the more I was alone. I was always running round the
valley. I would climb to a high place and sit there for hours,
doing nothing. I just watched and listened. I used to stay in the
cliff-dwellers' caves and wonder about them. I loved to be out in the
wind. And my happiest time was in the summer storms with the thunder
echoes under the walls. At evening it was such a quiet place--after
the night bird's cry, no sound. The quiet made me sad but I loved it. I
loved to watch the stars as I lay awake.

"So it was beautiful and happy for me there till--till...

"Two years or more ago there was a bad storm, and one of the great walls
caved. The walls were always weathering, slipping. Many and many a time
have I heard the rumble of an avalanche, but most of them were in other
cañon. This slide in the valley made it possible, Uncle Jim said,
for men to get down into the valley. But we could not climb out unless
helped from above. Uncle Jim never rested well after that. But it never
worried me.

"One day, over a year ago, while I was across the valley, I heard
strange shouts, and then screams. I ran to our camp. I came upon men
with ropes and guns. Uncle Jim was tied, and a rope was round his neck.
Mother Jane was lying on the ground. I thought she was dead until I
heard her moan. I was not afraid. I screamed and flew at Uncle Jim to
tear the ropes off him. The men held me back. They called me a pretty
cat. Then they talked together, and some were for hanging Lassiter--that
was the first time I ever knew any name for him but Uncle Jim--and some
were for leaving him in the valley. Finally they decided to hang him.
But Mother Jane pleaded so and I screamed and fought so that they left
off. Then they went away and we saw them climb out of the valley.

"Uncle Jim said they were Mormons, and some among them had been born in
Cottonwoods. I was not told why they had such a terrible hate for him.
He said they would come back and kill him. Uncle Jim had no guns to
fight with.

"We watched and watched. In five days they did come back, with more men,
and some of them wore black masks. They came to our cave with ropes and
guns. One was tall. He had a cruel voice. The others ran to obey him. I
could see white hair and sharp eyes behind the mask. The men caught me
and brought me before him.

"He said Lassiter had killed many Mormons. He said Lassiter had killed
his father and should be hanged. But Lassiter would be let live and
Mother Jane could stay with him, both prisoners there in the valley, if
I would marry the Mormon. I must marry him, accept the Mormon faith, and
bring up my children as Mormons. If I refused they would hang Lassiter,
leave the heretic Jane Withersteen alone in the valley, and take me and
break me to their rule.

"I agreed. But Mother Jane absolutely forbade me to marry him. Then the
Mormons took me away. It nearly killed me to leave Uncle Jim and Mother
Jane. I was carried and lifted out of the valley, and rode a long way
on a horse. They brought me here, to the cabin where I live, and I have
never been away except that--that time--to--Stonebridge. Only little by
little did I learn my position. Bishop Kane was kind, but stern, because
I could not be quick to learn the faith.

"I am not a sealed wife. But they're trying to make me one. The master
Mormon--he visited me often--at night--till lately. He threatened me. He
never told me a name--except Saint George. I don't--know him--except his
voice. I never--saw his face--in the light!"

. . . . . . . . . . .

Fay Larkin ended her story. Toward its close Shefford had grown
involuntarily restless, and when her last tragic whisper ceased all his
body seemed shaken with a terrible violence of his joy. He strode to and
fro in the dark shadow of the stone. The receding blood left him cold,
with a pricking, sickening sensation over his body, but there seemed
to be an overwhelming tide accumulating deep in his breast--a tide of
passion and pain. He dominated the passion, but the ache remained. And
he returned to the quiet figure on the stone.

"Fay Larkin!" he exclaimed, with a deep breath of relief that the secret
was disclosed. "So you're not a wife!... You're free! Thank Heaven! But
I felt it was sacrifice. I knew there had been a crime. For crime it is.
You child! You can't understand what crime. Oh, almost I wish you and
Jane and Lassiter had never been found. But that's wrong of me. One year
of agony--that shall not ruin your life. Fay, I will take you away."

"Where?" she whispered.

"Away from this Mormon country--to the East," he replied, and he spoke
of what he had known, of travel, of cities, of people, of happiness
possible for a young girl who had spent all her life hidden between the
narrow walls of a silent, lonely valley--he spoke swiftly and eloquently
till he lost his breath.

There was an instant of flashing wonder and joy on her white face, and
then the radiance paled, the glow died. Her soul was the darker for that
one strange, leaping glimpse of a glory not for such as she.

"I must stay here," she said, shudderingly.

"Fay!--How strange to SAY Fay aloud to YOU!--Fay, do you know the way to
Surprise Valley?"

"I don't know where it is, but I could go straight to it," she replied.

"Take me there. Show me your beautiful valley. Let me see where you ran
and climbed and spent so many lonely years."

"Ah, how I'd love to! But I dare not. And why should you want me to take
you? We can run and climb here."

"I want to--I mean to save Jane Withersteen and Lassiter," he declared.

She uttered a little cry of pain. "Save them?"

"Yes, save them. Get them out of the valley, take them out of the
country, far away where they and YOU--"

"But I can't go," she wailed. "I'm afraid. I'm bound. It CAN'T be
broken. If I dared--if I tried to go they would catch me. They would
hang Uncle Jim and leave Mother Jane alone there to starve."

"Fay, Lassiter and Jane both will starve--at least they will die there
if we do not save them. You have been terribly wronged. You're a slave.
You're not a wife."

"They--said I'll be burned in hell if I don't marry him.... Mother Jane
never taught me about God. I don't know. But HE--he said God was there.
I dare not break it."

"Fay, you have been deceived by old men. Let them have their creed. But
YOU mustn't accept it."

"John, what is God to you?"

"Dear child, I--I am not sure of that myself," he replied, huskily.
"When all this trouble is behind us, surely I can help you to understand
and you can help me. The fact that you are alive--that Lassiter and Jane
are alive--that I shall save you all--that lifts me up. I tell you--Fay
Larkin will be my salvation."

"Your words trouble me. Oh, I shall be torn one way and another.... But,
John, I daren't run away. I will not tell you where to find Lassiter and
Mother Jane."

"I shall find them--I have the Indian. He found you for me. Nas Ta Bega
will find Surprise Valley."

"Nas Ta Bega!... Oh, I remember. There was an Indian with the Mormons
who found us. But he was a Piute."

"Nas Ta Bega never told me how he learned about you. That he learned was
enough. And, Fay, he will find Surprise Valley. He will save Uncle Jim
and Mother Jane."

Fay's hands clasped Shefford's in strong, trembling pressure; the tears
streamed down her white cheeks; a tragic and eloquent joy convulsed her
face.

"Oh, my friend, save them! But I can't go.... Let them keep me! Let him
kill me!"

"Him! Fay--he shall not harm you," replied Shefford in passionate
earnestness.

She caught the hand he had struck out with.

"You talk--you look like Uncle Jim when he spoke of the Mormons," she
said. "Then I used to be afraid of him. He was so different. John, you
must not do anything about me. Let me be. It's too late. He--and his
men--they would hang you. And I couldn't bear that. I've enough to bear
without losing my friend. Say you won't watch and wait--for--for him."

Shefford had to promise her. Like an Indian she gave expression to
primitive feeling, for it certainly never occurred to her that, whatever
Shefford might do, he was not the kind of man to wait in hiding for an
enemy. Fay had faltered through her last speech and was now weak and
nervous and frightened. Shefford took her back to the cabin.

"Fay, don't be distressed," he said. "I won't do anything right away.
You can trust me. I won't be rash. I'll consult you before I make a
move. I haven't any idea what I could do, anyway.... You must bear up.
Why, it looks as if you're sorry I found you."

"Oh! I'm glad!" she whispered.

"Then if you're glad you mustn't break down this way again. Suppose some
of the women happened to run into us."

"I won't again. It's only you--you surprised me so. I used to think how
I'd like you to know--I wasn't really dead. But now--it's different.
It hurts me here. Yet I'm glad--if my being alive makes you--a little
happier."

Shefford felt that he had to go then. He could not trust himself any
further.

"Good night, Fay," he said.

"Good night, John," she whispered. "I promise--to be good to-morrow."

She was crying softly when he left her. Twice he turned to see the dim,
white, slender form against the gloom of the cabin. Then he went on
under the pinyons, blindly down the path, with his heart as heavy as
lead. That night as he rolled in his blanket and stretched wearily he
felt that he would never be able to sleep. The wind in the cedars made
him shiver. The great stars seemed relentless, passionless, white eyes,
mocking his little destiny and his pain. The huge shadow of the mountain
resembled the shadow of the insurmountable barrier between Fay and him.

. . . . . . . . . . .

Her pitiful, childish promise to be good was in his mind when he went
to her home on the next night. He wondered how she would be, and he
realized a desperate need of self-control.

But that night Fay Larkin was a different girl. In the dark, before she
spoke, he felt a difference that afforded him surprise and relief. He
greeted her as usual. And then it seemed, though not at all clearly,
that he was listening to a girl, strangely and unconsciously glad to see
him, who spoke with deeper note in her voice, who talked where always
she had listened, whose sadness was there under an eagerness, a subdued
gaiety as new to her, as sweet as it was bewildering. And he responded
with emotion, so that the hour passed swiftly, and he found himself back
in camp, in a kind of dream, unable to remember much of what she had
said, sure only of this strange sweetness suddenly come to her.

Upon the following night, however, he discovered what had wrought this
singular change in Fay Larkin. She loved him and she did not know it.
How passionately sweet and sad and painful was that realization for
Shefford! The hour spent with her then was only a moment.

He walked under the stars that night and they shed a glorious light upon
him. He tried to think, to plan, but the sweetness of remembered word or
look made mental effort almost impossible. He got as far as the thought
that he would do well to drift, to wait till she learned she loved
him, and then, perhaps, she could be persuaded to let him take her and
Lassiter and Jane away together.

And from that night he went at his work and the part he played in the
village with a zeal and a cunning that left him free to seek Fay when he
chose.

Sometimes in the afternoon, always for a while in the evening, he was
with her. They climbed the walls, and sat upon a lonely height to look
afar; they walked under the stars, and the cedars, and the shadows
of the great cliffs. She had a beautiful mind. Listening to her, he
imagined he saw down into beautiful Surprise Valley with all its weird
shadows, its colored walls and painted caves, its golden shafts of
morning light and the red haze at sunset; and he felt the silence that
must have been there, and the singing of the wind in the cliffs, and the
sweetness and fragrance of the flowers, and the wildness of it all. Love
had worked a marvelous transformation in this girl who had lived her
life in a cañon. The burden upon her did not weigh heavily. She could
not have an unhappy thought. She spoke of the village, of her Mormon
companions, of daily happenings, of Stonebridge, of many things in a
matter-of-fact way that showed how little they occupied her mind. She
even spoke of sealed wives in a kind of dreamy abstraction. Something
had possession of her, something as strong as the nature which had
developed her, and in its power she, in her simplicity, was utterly
unconscious, a watching and feeling girl. A strange, witching, radiant
beauty lurked in her smile. And Shefford heard her laugh in his dreams.

The weeks slipped by. The black mountain took on a white cap of snow;
in the early mornings there was ice in the crevices on the heights and
frost in the valley. In the sheltered cañon where sunshine seemed
to linger it was warm and pleasant, so that winter did not kill the
flowers.

Shefford waited so long for Fay's awakening that he believed it would
never come, and, believing, had not the heart to force it upon her. Then
there was a growing fear with him. What would Fay Larkin do when she
awakened to the truth? Fay was indeed like that white and fragile lily
which bloomed in the silent, lonely cañon, but the same nature that
had created it had created her. Would she droop as the lily would in a
furnace blast? More than that, he feared a sudden flashing into life of
strength, power, passion, hate. She did not hate yet because she did not
yet realize love. She was utterly innocent of any wrong having been done
her. More and more he began to fear, and a foreboding grew upon him.
He made up his mind to broach the subject of Surprise Valley and of
escaping with Lassiter and Jane; still, every time he was with Fay the
girl and her beauty and her love were so wonderful that he put off the
ordeal till the next night. As time flew by he excused his vacillation
on the score that winter was not a good time to try to cross the desert.
There was no grass for the mustangs, except in well-known valleys, and
these he must shun. Spring would soon come. So the days passed, and he
loved Fay more all the time, desperately living out to its limit the
sweetness of every moment with her, and paying for his bliss in the
increasing trouble that beset him when once away from her charm.

. . . . . . . . . . .

One starry night, about ten o'clock, he went, as was his custom, to
drink at the spring. Upon his return to the cedars Nas Ta Bega, who
slept under the same tree with him, had arisen, with his blanket hanging
half off his shoulder.

"Listen," said the Indian.

Shefford took one glance at the dark, somber face, with its inscrutable
eyes, now so strange and piercing, and then, with a kind of cold
excitement, he faced the way the Indian looked, and listened. But he
heard only the soft moan of the night wind in the cedars.

Nas Ta Bega kept the rigidity of his position for a moment, and then
he relaxed, and stood at ease. Shefford knew the Indian had made a
certainty of what must have been a doubtful sound. And Shefford leaned
his ear to the wind and strained his hearing.

Then the soft night breeze brought a faint patter--the slow trot of
horses on a hard trail. Some one was coming into the village at a late
hour. Shefford thought of Joe Lake. But Joe lay right behind him, asleep
in his blankets. It could not be Withers, for the trader was in Durango
at that time. Shefford thought of Willetts and Shadd.

"Who's coming?" he asked low of the Indian.

Nas Ta Bega pointed down the trail without speaking.

Shefford peered through the white dim haze of starlight and presently
he made out moving figures. Horses, with riders--a string of
them--one--two--three--four--five--and he counted up to eleven. Eleven
horsemen riding into the village! He was amazed, and suddenly keenly
anxious. This visit might be one of Shadd's raids.

"Shadd's gang!" he whispered.

"No, Bi Nai," replied Nas Ta Bega, and he drew Shefford farther into the
shade of the cedars. His voice, his action, the way he kept a hand on
Shefford's shoulder, all this told much to the young man.

Mormons come on a night visit! Shefford realized it with a slight shock.
Then swift as a lightning flash he was rent by another shock--one that
brought cold moisture to his brow and to his heart a flame of hell.

He was shaking when he sank down to find the support of a log. Like
a shadow the Indian silently moved away. Shefford watched the eleven
horses pass the camp, go down the road, to disappear in the village.
They vanished, and the soft clip-clops of hoofs died away. There was
nothing left to prove he had not dreamed.

Nothing to prove it except this sudden terrible demoralization of his
physical and spiritual being! While he peered out into the valley,
toward the black patch of cedars and pinyons that hid the cabins,
moments and moments passed, and in them he was gripped with cold and
fire.

Was the Mormon who had abducted Fay--the man with the cruel voice--was
he among those eleven horsemen? He might not have been. What a torturing
hope! But vain--vain, for inevitably he must be among them. He was there
in the cabin already. He had dismounted, tied his horse, had knocked on
her door. Did he need to knock? No, he would go in, he would call her in
that cruel voice, and then...

Shefford pulled a blanket from his bed and covered his cold and
trembling body. He had sunk down off the log, was leaning back upon it.
The stars were pale, far off, and the valley seemed unreal. He found
himself listening--listening with sick and terrible earnestness, trying
to hear against the thrum and beat of his heart, straining to catch a
sound in all that cold, star-blanched, silent valley. But he could hear
no sound. It was as if death held the valley in its perfect silence.
How he hated that silence! There ought to have been a million horrible,
bellowing demons making the night hideous. Did the stars serenely look
down upon the lonely cabins of these exiles? Was there no thunderbolt
to drop down from that dark and looming mountain upon the silent cabin
where tragedy had entered? In all the world, under the sea, in the
abysmal caves, in the vast spaces of the air, there was no such terrible
silence as this. A scream, a long cry, a moan--these were natural to
a woman, and why did not one of these sealed wives, why did not Fay
Larkin, damn this everlasting acquiescent silence? Perhaps she would fly
out of her cabin, come running along the path. Shefford peered into the
bright patches of starlight and into the shadows of the cedars. But he
saw no moving form in the open, no dim white shape against the gloom.
And he heard no sound--not even a whisper of wind in the branches
overhead.

Nas Ta Bega returned to the shade of the cedars and, lying down on his
blankets, covered himself and went to sleep. The fact seemed to bring
bitter reality to Shefford. Nothing was going to happen. The valley
was to be the same this night as any other night. Shefford accepted the
truth. He experienced a kind of self-pity. The night he had thought so
much about, prepared for, and had forgotten had now arrived. Then he
threw another blanket round him, and, cold, dark, grim, he faced that
lonely vigil, meaning to sit there, wide-eyed, to endure and to wait.

Jealousy and pain, following his frenzy, abided with him long hours, and
when they passed he divined that selfishness passed with them. What he
suffered then was for Fay Larkin and for her sisters in misfortune. He
grew big enough to pity these fanatics. The fiery, racing tide of blood
that had made of him only an animal had cooled with thought of others.
Still he feared that stultifying thing which must have been hate. What
a tempest had raged within him! This blood of his, that had received a
stronger strain from his desert life, might in a single moment flood out
reason and intellect and make him a vengeful man. So in those starlit
hours that dragged interminably he looked deep into his heart and tried
to fortify himself against a dark and evil moment to come.

Midnight--and the valley seemed a tomb! Did he alone keep wakeful? The
sky was a darker blue, the stars burned a whiter fire, the peaks stood
looming and vast, tranquil sentinels of that valley, and the wind rose
to sigh, to breathe, to mourn through the cedars. It was a sad music.
The Indian lay prone, dark face to the stars. Joe Lake lay prone,
sleeping as quietly, with his dark face exposed to the starlight. The
gentle movement of the cedar branches changed the shape of the bright
patches on the grass where shadow and light met. The walls of the valley
waved upward, dark below and growing paler, to shine faintly at the
rounded rims. And there was a tiny, silvery tinkle of running water over
stones.

Here was a little nook of the vast world. Here were tranquillity,
beauty, music, loneliness, life. Shefford wondered--did he alone keep
watchful? Did he feel that he could see dark, wide eyes peering into
the gloom? And it came to him after a time that he was not alone in his
vigil, nor was Fay Larkin alone in her agony. There was some one else in
the valley, a great and breathing and watchful spirit. It entered
into Shefford's soul and he trembled. What had come to him? And he
answered--only added pain and new love, and a strange strength from the
firmament and the peaks and the silence and the shadows.

The bright belt with its three radiant stars sank behind the western
wall and there was a paler gloom upon the valley.

Then a few lights twinkled in the darkness that enveloped the cabins; a
woman's laugh strangely broke the silence, profaning it, giving the lie
to that somber yoke which seemed to consist of the very shadows; the
voices of men were heard, and then the slow clip-clop of trotting horses
on the hard trail.

Shefford saw the Mormons file out into the paling starlight, ride down
the valley, and vanish in the gray gloom. He was aware that the Indian
sat up to watch the procession ride by, and that Joe turned over, as if
disturbed.

One by one the stars went out. The valley became a place of gray
shadows. In the east a light glowed. Shefford sat there, haggard and
worn, watching the coming of the dawn, the kindling of the light; and
had the power been his the dawn would never have broken and the rose and
gold never have tipped the lofty peaks.

. . . . . . . . . . .

Shefford attended to his camp chores as usual. Several times he was
aware of Joe's close scrutiny, and finally, without looking at him,
Shefford told of the visit of the Mormons. A violent expulsion of breath
was Joe's answer and it might have been a curse. Straightway Joe ceased
his cheery whistling and became as somber as the Indian. The camp was
silent; the men did not look at one another. While they sat at breakfast
Shefford's back was turned toward the village--he had not looked in that
direction since dawn.

"Ugh!" suddenly exclaimed Nas Ta Bega.

Joe Lake muttered low and deep, and this time there was no mistake about
the nature of his speech. Shefford did not have the courage to turn to
see what had caused these exclamations. He knew since today had dawned
that there was calamity in the air.

"Shefford, I reckon if I know women there's a little hell coming to
you," said the Mormon, significantly.

Shefford wheeled as if a powerful force had turned him on a pivot. He
saw Fay Larkin. She seemed to be almost running. She was unhooded and
her bright hair streamed down. Her swift, lithe action was without
its usual grace. She looked wild, and she almost fell crossing the
stepping-stones of the brook.

Joe hurried to meet her, took hold of her arm and spoke, but she did not
seem to hear him. She drew him along with her, up the little bench under
the cedars straight toward Shefford. Her face held a white, mute agony,
as if in the hour of strife it had hardened into marble. But her eyes
were dark-purple fire--windows of an extraordinarily intense and vital
life. In one night the girl had become a woman. But the blight Shefford
had dreaded to see--the withering of the exquisite soul and spirit and
purity he had considered inevitable, just as inevitable as the death of
something similar in the flower she resembled, when it was broken and
defiled--nothing of this was manifest in her. Straight and swiftly she
came to him back in the shade of the cedars and took hold of his hands.

"Last night--HE CAME!" she said.

"Yes--Fay--I--I know," replied Shefford, haltingly.

He was tremblingly conscious of amaze at her--of something wonderful in
her. She did not heed Joe, who stepped aside a little; she did not see
Nas Ta Bega, who sat motionless on a log, apparently oblivious to her
presence.

"You knew he came?"

"Yes, Fay. I was awake when--they rode in. I watched them. I sat up all
night. I saw them ride away."

"If you knew when he came why didn't you run to me--to get to me before
he did?"

Her question was unanswerable. It had the force of a blow. It stunned
him. Its sharp, frank directness sprang from a simplicity and a strength
that had not been nurtured in the life he had lived. So far men had
wandered from truth and nature!

"I came to you as soon as I was able," she went on. "I must have
fainted. I just had to drag myself around.... And now I can tell you."

He was powerless to reply, as if she had put another unanswerable
question. What did she mean to tell him? What might she not tell him?
She loosed her hands from his and lifted them to his shoulders, and that
was the first conscious action of feeling, of intimacy, which she had
ever shown. It quite robbed Shefford of strength, and in spite of his
sorrow there was an indefinable thrill in her touch. He looked at her,
saw the white-and-gold beauty that was hers yesterday and seemed changed
to-day, and he recognized Fay Larkin in a woman he did not know.

"Listen! He came--"

"Fay, don't--tell me," interrupted Shefford.

"I WILL tell you," she said.

Did the instinct of love teach her how to mitigate his pain? Shefford
felt that, as he felt the new-born strength in her.

"Listen," she went on. "He came when I was undressing for bed. I heard
the horse. He knocked on the door. Something terrible happened to me
then. I felt sick and my head wasn't clear. I remember next--his being
in the room--the lamp was out--I couldn't see very well. He thought I
was sick and he gave me a drink and let the air blow in on me through
the window. I remember I lay back in the chair and I thought. And I
listened. When would you come? I didn't feel that you could leave me
there alone with him. For his coming was different this time. That pain
like a blade in my side!... When it came I was not the same. I loved
you. I understood then. I belonged to you. I couldn't let him touch me.
I had never been his wife. When I realized this--that he was there, that
you might suffer for it--I cried right out.

"He thought I was sick. He worked over me. He gave me medicine. And then
he prayed. I saw him, in the dark, on his knees, praying for me. That
seemed strange. Yet he was kind, so kind that I begged him to let me go.
I was not a Mormon. I couldn't marry him. I begged him to let me go.

"Then he thought I had been deceiving him. He fell into a fury. He
talked for a long time. He called upon God to visit my sins upon me. He
tried to make me pray. But I wouldn't. And then I fought him. I'd have
screamed for you had he not smothered me. I got weak.... And you never
came. I know I thought you would come. But you didn't. Then I--I gave
out. And after--some time--I must have fainted."

"Fay! For Heaven's sake, how could I come to you?" burst out Shefford,
hoarse and white with remorse, passion, pain.

"If I'm any man's wife I'm yours. It's a thing you FEEL, isn't it? I
know that now.... But I want to know what to do?"

"Fay!" he cried, huskily.

"I'm sick of it all. If it weren't for you I'd climb the wall and throw
myself off. That would be easy for me. I'd love to die that way. All my
life I've been high up on the walls. To fall would be nothing!"

"Oh, you mustn't talk like that!"

"Do you love me?" she asked, with a low and deathless sweetness.

"Love you? With all my heart! Nothing can change that!"

"Do you want me--as you used to want the Fay Larkin lost in Surprise
Valley? Do you love me that way? I understand things better than before,
but still--not all. I AM Fay Larkin. I think I must have dreamed of you
all my life. I was glad when you came here. I've been happy lately. I
forgot--till last night. Maybe it needed that to make me see I've loved
you all the time.... And I fought him like a wildcat!... Tell me the
truth. I feel I'm yours. Is that true? If I'm not--I'll not live another
hour. Something holds me up. I am the same.... Do you want me?"

"Yes, Fay Larkin, I want you," replied Shefford, steadily, with his grip
on her arms.

"Then take me away. I don't want to live here another hour."

"Fay, I'll take you. But it can't be done at once. We must plan. I need
help. There are Lassiter and Jane to get out of Surprise Valley. Give
me time, dear--give me time. It'll be a hard job. And we must plan so we
can positively get away. Give me time, Fay."

"Suppose HE comes back?" she queried, with a singular depth of voice.

"We'll have to risk that," replied Shefford, miserably. "But--he won't
come soon."

"He said he would," she flashed.

Shefford seemed to freeze inwardly with her words. Love had made her
a woman and now the woman in her was speaking. She saw the truth as he
could not see it. And the truth was nature. She had been hidden all her
life from the world, from knowledge as he had it, yet when love betrayed
her womanhood to her she acquired all its subtlety.

"If I wait and he DOES come will you keep me from him?" she asked.

"How can I? I'm staking all on the chance of his not coming soon. ...
But, Fay, if he DOES come and I don't give up our secret--how on earth
can I keep you from him?" demanded Shefford.

"If you love me you will do it," she said, as simply as if she were
fate.

"But how?" cried Shefford, almost beside himself.

"You are a man. Any man would save the woman who loves him
from--from--Oh, from a beast!... How would Lassiter do it?"

"Lassiter!"

"YOU CAN KILL HIM!"

It was there, deep and full in her voice, the strength of the elemental
forces that had surrounded her, primitive passion and hate and love, as
they were in woman in the beginning.

"My God!" Shefford cried aloud with his spirit when all that was red in
him sprang again into a flame of hell. That was what had been wrong with
him last night. He could kill this stealthy night-rider, and now, face
to face with Fay, who had never been so beautiful and wonderful as in
this hour when she made love the only and the sacred thing of life, now
he had it in him to kill. Yet, murder--even to kill a brute--that was
not for John Shefford, not the way for him to save a woman. Reason
and wisdom still fought the passion in him. If he could but cling to
them--have them with him in the dark and contending hour!

She leaned against him now, exhausted, her soul in her eyes, and they
saw only him. Shefford was all but powerless to resist the longing to
take her into his arms, to hold her to his heart, to let himself go. Did
not her love give her to him? Shefford gazed helplessly at the stricken
Joe Lake, at the somber Indian, as if from them he expected help.

"I know him now," said Fay, breaking the silence with startling
suddenness.

"What!"

"I've seen him in the light. I flashed a candle in his face. I saw it. I
know him now. He was there at Stonebridge with us, and I never knew him.
But I know him now. His name is--"

"For God's sake don't tell me who he is!" implored Shefford.

Ignorance was Shefford's safeguard against himself. To make a name of
this heretofore intangible man, to give him an identity apart from the
crowd, to be able to recognize him--that for Shefford would be fatal.

"Fay--tell me--no more," he said, brokenly. "I love you and I will give
you my life. Trust me. I swear I'll save you."

"Will you take me away soon?"

"Yes."

She appeared satisfied with that and dropped her hands and moved back
from him. A light flitted over her white face, and her eyes grew
dark and humid, losing their fire in changing, shadowing thought of
submission, of trust, of hope.

"I can lead you to Surprise Valley," she said. "I feel the way. It's
there!" And she pointed to the west.

"Fay, we'll go--soon. I must plan. I'll see you to-night. Then we'll
talk. Run home now, before some of the women see you here."

She said good-by and started away under the cedars, out into the
open where her hair shone like gold in the sunlight, and she took the
stepping-stones with her old free grace, and strode down the path swift
and lithe as an Indian. Once she turned to wave a hand.

Shefford watched her with a torture of pride, love, hope, and fear
contending within him.




XIV. THE NAVAJO


That morning a Piute rode into the valley.

Shefford recognized him as the brave who had been in love with Glen
Naspa. The moment Nas Ta Bega saw this visitor he made a singular motion
with his hands--a motion that somehow to Shefford suggested despair--and
then he waited, somber and statuesque, for the messenger to come to him.
It was the Piute who did all the talking, and that was brief. Then
the Navajo stood motionless, with his hands crossed over his breast.
Shefford drew near and waited.

"Bi Nai," said the Navajo, "Nas Ta Bega said his sister would come home
some day.... Glen Naspa is in the hogan of her grandfather."

He spoke in his usual slow, guttural voice, and he might have been
bronze for all the emotion he expressed; yet Shefford instinctively
felt the despair that had been hinted to him, and he put his hand on the
Indian's shoulder.

"If I am the Navajo's brother, then I am brother to Glen Naspa," he
said. "I will go with you to the hogan of Hosteen Doetin."

Nas Ta Bega went away into the valley for the horses. Shefford hurried
to the village, made his excuses at the school, and then called to
explain to Fay that trouble of some kind had come to the Indian.

Soon afterward he was riding Nack-yal on the rough and winding trail up
through the broken country of cliffs and cañon to the great league-long
sage and cedar slope of the mountain. It was weeks since he had ridden
the mustang. Nack-yal was fat and lazy. He loved his master, but he did
not like the climb, and so fell far behind the lean and wiry pony that
carried Nas Ta Bega. The sage levels were as purple as the haze of the
distance, and there was a bitter-sweet tang on the strong, cool wind.
The sun was gold behind the dark line of fringe on the mountain-top. A
flock of sheep swept down one of the sage levels, looking like a narrow
stream of white and black and brown. It was always amazing for Shefford
to see how swiftly these Navajo sheep grazed along. Wild mustangs
plunged out of the cedar clumps and stood upon the ridges, whistling
defiance or curiosity, and their manes and tails waved in the wind.

Shefford mounted slowly to the cedar bench in the midst of which were
hidden the few hogans. And he halted at the edge to dismount and take
a look at that downward-sweeping world of color, of wide space, at the
wild desert upland which from there unrolled its magnificent panorama.

Then he passed on into the cedars. How strange to hear the lambs
bleating again! Lambing-time had come early, but still spring was there
in the new green of grass, in the bright upland flower. He led his
mustang out of the cedars into the cleared circle. It was full of colts
and lambs, and there were the shepherd-dogs and a few old rams and ewes.
But the circle was a quiet place this day. There were no Indians in
sight. Shefford loosened the saddle-girths on Nack-yal and, leaving him
to graze, went toward the hogan of Hosteen Doetin. A blanket was hung
across the door. Shefford heard a low chanting. He waited beside the
door till the covering was pulled in, then he entered.

Hosteen Doetin met him, clasped his hand. The old Navajo could not
speak; his fine face was working in grief; tears streamed from his
dim old eyes and rolled down his wrinkled cheeks. His sorrow was no
different from a white man's sorrow. Beyond him Shefford saw Nas Ta Bega
standing with folded arms, somehow terrible in his somber impassiveness.
At his feet crouched the old woman, Hosteen Doetin's wife, and beside
her, prone and quiet, half covered with a blanket, lay Glen Naspa.

She was dead. To Shefford she seemed older than when he had last seen
her. And she was beautiful. Calm, cold, dark, with only bitter lips to
give the lie to peace! There was a story in those lips.

At her side, half hidden under the fold of blanket, lay a tiny bundle.
Its human shape startled Shefford. Then he did not need to be told
the tragedy. When he looked again at Glen Naspa's face he seemed to
understand all that had made her older, to feel the pain that had lined
and set her lips.

She was dead, and she was the last of Nas Ta Bega's family. In the old
grandfather's agony, in the wild chant of the stricken grandmother, in
the brother's stern and terrible calmness Shefford felt more than the
death of a loved one. The shadow of ruin, of doom, of death hovered
over the girl and her family and her tribe and her race. There was no
consolation to offer these relatives of Glen Naspa. Shefford took one
more fascinated gaze at her dark, eloquent, prophetic face, at the
tragic tiny shape by her side, and then with bowed head he left the
hogan.

. . . . . . . . . . .

Outside he paced to and fro, with an aching heart for Nas Ta Bega, with
something of the white man's burden of crime toward the Indian weighing
upon his soul.

Old Hosteen Doetin came to him with shaking hands and words memorable of
the time Glen Naspa left his hogan.

"Me no savvy Jesus Christ. Me hungry. Me no eat Jesus Christ!"

That seemed to be all of his trouble that he could express to Shefford.
He could not understand the religion of the missionary, this Jesus
Christ who had called his granddaughter away. And the great fear of an
old Indian was not death, but hunger. Shefford remembered a custom of
the Navajos, a thing barbarous looked at with a white man's mind. If an
old Indian failed on a long march he was inclosed by a wall of stones,
given plenty to eat and drink, and left there to die in the desert. Not
death did he fear, but hunger! Old Hosteen Doetin expected to starve,
now that the young and strong squaw of his family was gone.

Shefford spoke in his halting Navajo and assured the old Indian that Nas
Ta Bega would never let him starve.

At sunset Shefford stood with Nas Ta Bega facing the west. The Indian
was magnificent in repose. He watched the sun go down upon the day that
had seen the burial of the last of his family. He resembled an impassive
destiny, upon which no shocks fell. He had the light of that flaring
golden sky in his face, the majesty of the mountain in his mien, the
silence of the great gulf below on his lips. This educated Navajo, who
had reverted to the life of his ancestors, found in the wildness and
loneliness of his environment a strength no white teaching could
ever have given him. Shefford sensed in him a measureless grief, an
impenetrable gloom, a tragic acceptance of the meaning of Glen Naspa's
ruin and death--the vanishing of his race from the earth. Death had
written the law of such bitter truth round Glen Naspa's lips, and the
same truth was here in the grandeur and gloom of the Navajo.

"Bi Nai," he said, with the beautiful sonorous roll in his voice, "Glen
Naspa is in her grave and there are no paths to the place of her sleep.
Glen Naspa is gone."

"Gone! Where? Nas Ta Bega, remember I lost my own faith, and I have not
yet learned yours."

"The Navajo has one mother--the earth. Her body has gone to the earth
and it will become dust. But her spirit is in the air. It shall whisper
to me from the wind. I shall hear it on running waters. It will hide in
the morning music of a mocking-bird and in the lonely night cry of the
cañon hawk. Her blood will go to make the red of the Indian flowers and
her soul will rest at midnight in the lily that opens only to the moon.
She will wait in the shadow for me, and live in the great mountain that
is my home, and for ever step behind me on the trail."

"You will kill Willetts?" demanded Shefford.

"The Navajo will not seek the missionary."

"But if you meet him you'll kill him?"

"Bi Nai, would Nas Ta Bega kill after it is too late? What good could
come? The Navajo is above revenge."

"If he crosses my trail I think I couldn't help but kill him," muttered
Shefford in a passion that wrung the threat from him.

The Indian put his arm round the white man's shoulders.

"Bi Nai, long ago I made you my brother. And now you make me your
brother. Is it not so? Glen Naspa's spirit calls for wisdom, not
revenge. Willetts must be a bad man. But we'll let him live. Life will
punish him. Who knows if he was all to blame? Glen Naspa was only one
pretty Indian girl. There are many white men in the desert. She loved
a white man when she was a baby. The thing was a curse. ... Listen, Bi
Nai, and the Navajo will talk.

"Many years ago the Spanish padres, the first white men, came into the
land of the Indian. Their search was for gold. But they were not wicked
men. They did not steal and kill. They taught the Indian many useful
things. They brought him horses. But when they went away they left him
unsatisfied with his life and his god.

"Then came the pioneers. They crossed the great river and took the
pasture-lands and the hunting-grounds of the Indian. They drove him
backward, and the Indian grew sullen. He began to fight. The white man's
government made treaties with the Indian, and these were broken. Then
war came--fierce and bloody war. The Indian was driven to the waste
places. The stream of pioneers, like a march of ants, spread on into the
desert. Every valley where grass grew, every river, became a place for
farms and towns. Cattle choked the water-holes where the buffalo and
deer had once gone to drink. The forests in the hills were cut and the
springs dried up. And the pioneers followed to the edge of the desert.

"Then came the prospectors, mad, like the padres for the gleam of
gold. The day was not long enough for them to dig in the creeks and the
cañon; they worked in the night. And they brought weapons and rum to
the Indian, to buy from him the secret of the places where the shining
gold lay hidden.

"Then came the traders. And they traded with the Indian. They gave him
little for much, and that little changed his life. He learned a taste
for the sweet foods of the white man. Because he could trade for a sack
of flour he worked less in the field. And the very fiber of his bones
softened.

"Then came the missionaries. They were proselytizers for converts
to their religion. The missionaries are good men. There may be a bad
missionary, like Willetts, the same as there are bad men in other
callings, or bad Indians. They say Shadd is a half-breed. But the Piutes
can tell you he is a full-blood, and he, like me, was sent to a white
man's school. In the beginning the missionaries did well for the Indian.
They taught him cleaner ways of living, better farming, useful work with
tools--many good things. But the wrong to the Indian was the undermining
of his faith. It was not humanity that sent the missionary to the
Indian. Humanity would have helped the Indian in his ignorance of
sickness and work, and left him his god. For to trouble the Indian about
his god worked at the roots of his nature.

"The beauty of the Indian's life is in his love of the open, of all that
is nature, of silence, freedom, wildness. It is a beauty of mind and
soul. The Indian would have been content to watch and feel. To a white
man he might be dirty and lazy--content to dream life away without
trouble or what the white man calls evolution. The Indian might seem
cruel because he leaves his old father out in the desert to die. But the
old man wants to die that way, alone with his spirits and the sunset.
And the white man's medicine keeps his old father alive days and days
after he ought to be dead. Which is more cruel? The Navajos used to
fight with other tribes, and then they were stronger men than they are
to-day.

"But leaving religion, greed, and war out of the question, contact with
the white man would alone have ruined the Indian. The Indian and the
white man cannot mix. The Indian brave learns the habits of the white
man, acquires his diseases, and has not the mind or body to withstand
them. The Indian girl learns to love the white man--and that is death of
her Indian soul, if not of life.

"So the red man is passing. Tribes once powerful have died in the life
of Nas Ta Bega. The curse of the white man is already heavy upon my race
in the south. Here in the north, in the wildest corner of the desert,
chased here by the great soldier, Carson, the Navajo has made his last
stand.

"Bi Nai, you have seen the shadow in the hogan of Hosteen Doetin. Glen
Naspa has gone to her grave, and no sisters, no children, will make
paths to the place of her sleep. Nas Ta Bega will never have a wife--a
child. He sees the end. It is the sunset of the Navajo.... Bi Nai, the
Navajo is dying--dying--dying!"




XV. WILD JUSTICE


A crescent moon hung above the lofty peak over the valley and a train
of white stars ran along the bold rim of the western wall. A few young
frogs peeped plaintively. The night was cool, yet had a touch of balmy
spring, and a sweeter fragrance, as if the cedars and pinyons had
freshened in the warm sun of that day.

Shefford and Fay were walking in the aisles of moonlight and the patches
of shade, and Nas Ta Bega, more than ever a shadow of his white brother,
followed them silently.

"Fay, it's growing late. Feel the dew?" said Shefford. "Come, I must
take you back."

"But the time's so short. I have said nothing that I wanted to say," she
replied.

"Say it quickly, then, as we go."

"After all, it's only--will you take me away soon?"

"Yes, very soon. The Indian and I have talked. But we've made no
plan yet. There are only three ways to get out of this country. By
Stonebridge, by Kayenta and Durango, and by Red Lake. We must choose
one. All are dangerous. We must lose time finding Surprise Valley. I
hoped the Indian could find it. Then we'd bring Lassiter and Jane here
and hide them near till dark, then take you and go. That would give us a
night's start. But you must help us to Surprise Valley."

"I can go right to it, blindfolded, or in the dark.... Oh, John, hurry!
I dread the wait. He might come again."

"Joe says--they won't come very soon."

"Is it far--where we're going--out of the country?"

"Ten days' hard riding."

"Oh! That night ride to and from Stonebridge nearly killed me. But I
could walk very far, and climb for ever."

"Fay, we'll get out of the country if I have to carry you."

When they arrived at the cabin Fay turned on the porch step and, with
her face nearer a level with his, white and sweet in the moonlight, with
her eyes shining and unfathomable, she was more than beautiful.

"You've never been inside my house," she said. "Come in. I've something
for you."

"But it's late," he remonstrated. "I suppose you've got me a cake or
pie--something to eat. You women all think Joe and I have to be fed."

"No. You'd never guess. Come in," she said, and the rare smile on her
face was something Shefford would have gone far to see.

"Well, then, for a minute."

He crossed the porch, the threshold, and entered her home. Her dim,
white shape moved in the darkness. And he followed into a room where the
moon shone through the open window, giving soft, mellow, shadowy light.
He discerned objects, but not clearly, for his senses seemed absorbed in
the strange warmth and intimacy of being for the first time with her in
her home.

"No, it's not good to eat," she said, and her laugh was happy. "Here--"

Suddenly she abruptly ceased speaking. Shefford saw her plainly, and the
slender form had stiffened, alert and strained. She was listening.

"What was that?" she whispered.

"I didn't hear anything," he whispered back.

He stepped softly nearer the open window and listened.

Clip-clop! clip-clop! clip-clop! Hard hoofs on the hard path outside!

A strong and rippling thrill went over Shefford. In the soft light her
eyes seemed unnaturally large and black and fearful.

Clip-clop! clip-clop!

The horse stopped outside. Then followed a metallic clink of spur
against stirrup--thud of boots on hard ground--heavy footsteps upon the
porch.

A swift, cold contraction of throat, of breast, convulsed Shefford. His
only thought was that he could not think.

"Ho--Mary!"

A voice liberated both Shefford's muscle and mind--a voice of strange,
vibrant power. Authority of religion and cruelty of will--these
Mormon attributes constituted that power. And Shefford suffered a
transformation which must have been ordered by demons. That sudden flame
seemed to curl and twine and shoot along his veins with blasting force.
A rancorous and terrible cry leaped to his lips.

"Ho--Mary!" Then came a heavy tread across the threshold of the outer
room.

Shefford dared not look at Fay. Yet, dimly, from the corner of his eye,
he saw her, a pale shadow, turned to stone, with her arms out. If he
looked, if he made sure of that, he was lost. When had he drawn his gun?
It was there, a dark and glinting thing in his hand. He must fly--not
through cowardice and fear, but because in one more moment he would
kill a man. Swift as the thought he dove through the open window. And,
leaping up, he ran under the dark pinyons toward camp.

Joe Lake had been out late himself. He sat by the fire, smoking his
pipe. He must have seen or heard Shefford coming, for he rose with
unwonted alacrity, and he kicked the smoldering logs into a flickering
blaze.

Shefford, realizing his deliverance, came panting, staggering into the
light. The Mormon uttered an exclamation. Then he spoke, anxiously, but
what he said was not clear in Shefford's thick and throbbing ears. He
dropped his pipe, a sign of perturbation, and he stared.

But Shefford, without a word, lunged swiftly away into the shadow of the
cedars. He found relief in action. He began a steep ascent of the east
wall, a dangerous slant he had never dared even in daylight, and he
climbed it without a slip. Danger, steep walls, perilous heights, night,
and black cañon the same--these he never thought of. But something
drove him to desperate effort, that the hours might seem short.

. . . . . . . . . . .

The red sun was tipping the eastern wall when he returned to camp, and
he was neither calm nor sure of himself nor ready for sleep or food.
Only he had put the night behind him.

The Indian showed no surprise. But Joe Lake's jaw dropped and his eyes
rolled. Moreover, Joe bore a singular aspect, the exact nature of which
did not at once dawn upon Shefford.

"By God! you've got nerve--or you're crazy!" he ejaculated, hoarsely.

Then it was Shefford's turn to stare. The Mormon was haggard, grieved,
frightened, and utterly amazed. He appeared to be trying to make certain
of Shefford's being there in the flesh and then to find reason for it.

"I've no nerve and I am crazy," replied Shefford. "But, Joe--what do you
mean? Why do you look at me like that?"

"I reckon if I get your horse that'll square us. Did you come back for
him? You'd better hit the trail quick."

"It's you now who're crazy," burst out Shefford.

"Wish to God I was," replied Joe.

It was then Shefford realized catastrophe, and cold fear gnawed at his
vitals, so that he was sick.

"Joe, what has happened?" he asked, with the blood thick in his heart.

"Hadn't you better tell me?" demanded the Mormon, and a red wave blotted
out the haggard shade of his face.

"You talk like a fool," said Shefford, sharply, and he strode right up
to Joe.

"See here, Shefford, we've been pards. You're making it hard for me.
Reckon you ain't square."

Shefford shot out a long arm and his hand clutched the Mormon's burly
shoulder.

"Why am I not square? What do you mean?"

Joe swallowed hard and gave himself a shake. Then he eyed his comrade
steadily.

"I was afraid you'd kill him. I reckon I can't blame you. I'll help you
get away. And I'm a Mormon! Do you take the hunch?... But don't deny you
killed him!"

"Killed whom?" gasped Shefford.

"Her husband!"

Shefford seemed stricken by a slow, paralyzing horror. The Mormon's
changing face grew huge and indistinct and awful in his sight. He was
clutched and shaken in Joe's rude hands, yet scarcely felt them. Joe
seemed to be bellowing at him, but the voice was far off. Then Shefford
began to see, to hear through some cold and terrible deadness that had
come between him and everything.

"Say YOU killed him!" hoarsely supplicated the Mormon.

Shefford had not yet control of speech. Something in his gaze appeared
to drive Joe frantic.

"Damn you! Tell me quick. Say YOU killed him!... If you want to know
my stand, why, I'm glad!... Shefford, don't look so stony! ... For HER
sake, say you killed him!"

Shefford stood with a face as gray and still as stone. With a groan the
Mormon drew away from him and sank upon a log. He bowed his head; his
broad shoulders heaved; husky sounds came from him. Then with a violent
wrench he plunged to his feet and shook himself like a huge, savage dog.

"Reckon it's no time to weaken," he said, huskily, and with the words a
dark, hard, somber bitterness came to his face.

"Where--is--she?" whispered Shefford.

"Shut up in the school-house," he replied.

"Did she--did she--"

"She neither denied nor confessed."

"Have you--seen her?"

"Yes."

"How did--she look?"

"Cool and quiet as the Indian there.... Game as hell! She always had
stuff in her."

"Oh, Joe!... It's unbelievable!" cried Shefford. "That lovely, innocent
girl! She couldn't--she couldn't."

"She's fixed him. Don't think of that. It's too late. We ought to have
saved her."

"God!... She begged me to hurry--to take her away."

"Think what we can do NOW to save her," cut in the Mormon.

Shefford sustained a vivifying shock. "To save her?" he echoed.

"Think, man!"

"Joe, I can hit the trail and let you tell them I killed him," burst out
Shefford in panting excitement.

"Reckon I can."

"So help me God I'll do it!"

The Mormon turned a dark and austere glance upon Shefford.

"You mustn't leave her. She killed him for your sake.... You must fight
for her now--save her--take her away."

"But the law!"

"Law!" scoffed Joe. "In these wilds men get killed and there's no law.
But if she's taken back to Stonebridge those iron-jawed old Mormons will
make law enough to--to... Shefford, the thing is--get her away. Once out
of the country, she's safe. Mormons keep their secrets."

"I'll take her. Joe, will you help me?"

Shefford, even in his agitation, felt the Mormon's silence to be a
consent that need not have been asked. And Shefford had a passionate
gratefulness toward his comrade. That stultifying and blinding prejudice
which had always seemed to remove a Mormon outside the pale of certain
virtue suffered final eclipse; and Joe Lake stood out a man, strange and
crude, but with a heart and a soul.

"Joe, tell me what to do," said Shefford, with a simplicity that meant
he needed only to be directed.

"Pull yourself together. Get your nerve back," replied Joe. "Reckon
you'd better show yourself over there. No one saw you come in this
morning--your absence from camp isn't known. It's better you seem
curious and shocked like the rest of us. Come on. We'll go over. And
afterward we'll get the Indian, and plan."

They left camp and, crossing the brook, took the shaded path toward the
village. Hope of saving Fay, the need of all his strength and nerve
and cunning to effect that end, gave Shefford the supreme courage to
overcome his horror and fear. On that short walk under the pinyons to
Fay's cabin he had suffered many changes of emotion, but never anything
like this change which made him fierce and strong to fight, deep and
crafty to plan, hard as iron to endure.

The village appeared very quiet, though groups of women stood at the
doors of cabins. If they talked, it was very low. Henninger and Smith,
two of the three Mormon men living in the village, were standing
before the closed door of the school-house. A tigerish feeling thrilled
Shefford when he saw them on guard there. Shefford purposely avoided
looking at Fay's cabin as long as he could keep from it. When he had to
look he saw several hooded, whispering women in the yard, and Beal, the
other Mormon man, standing in the cabin door. Upon the porch lay the
long shape of a man, covered with blankets.

Shefford experienced a horrible curiosity.

"Say, Beal, I've fetched Shefford over," said Lake. "He's pretty much
cut up."

Beal wagged a solemn head, but said nothing. His mind seemed absent or
steeped in gloom, and he looked up as one silently praying.

Joe Lake strode upon the little porch and, reaching down, he stripped
the blanket from the shrouded form.

Shefford saw a sharp, cold, ghastly face. "WAGGONER!" he whispered.

"Yes," replied Lake.

Waggoner! Shefford remembered the strange power in his face, and, now
that life had gone, that power was stripped of all disguise. Death, in
Shefford's years of ministry, had lain under his gaze many times and in
a multiplicity of aspects, but never before had he seen it stamped so
strangely. Shefford did not need to be told that here was a man who
believed he had conversed with God on earth, who believed he had a
divine right to rule women, who had a will that would not yield itself
to death utterly. Waggoner, then, was the devil who had come masked to
Surprise Valley, had forced a martyrdom upon Fay Larkin. And this was
the Mormon who had made Fay Larkin a murderess. Shefford had hated
him living, and now he hated him dead. Death here was robbed of all
nobility, of pathos, of majesty. It was only retribution. Wild justice!
But alas! that it had to be meted out by a white-soled girl whose
innocence was as great as the unconscious savagery which she had
assimilated from her lonely and wild environment. Shefford laid a
despairing curse upon his own head, and a terrible remorse knocked at
his heart. He had left her alone, this girl in whom love had made the
great change--like a coward he had left her alone. That curse he visited
upon himself because he had been the spirit and the motive of this wild
justice, and his should have been the deed.

Joe Lake touched Shefford's arm and pointed at the haft of a knife
protruding from Waggoner's breast. It was a wooden haft. Shefford had
seen it before somewhere.

Then he was struck with what perhaps Joe meant him to see--the singular
impression the haft gave of one sweeping, accurate, powerful stroke. A
strong arm had driven that blade home. The haft was sunk deep; there was
a little depression in the cloth; no blood showed; and the weapon looked
as if it could not be pulled out. Shefford's thought went fatally and
irresistibly to Fay Larkin's strong arm. He saw her flash that white arm
and lift the heavy bucket from the spring with an ease he wondered at.
He felt the strong clasp of her hand as she had given it to him in a
flying leap across a crevice upon the walls. Yes, her fine hand and the
round, strong arm possessed the strength to have given that blade
its singular directness and force. The marvel was not in the physical
action. It hid inscrutably in the mystery of deadly passion rising out
of a gentle and sad heart.

Joe Lake drew up the blanket and shut from Shefford's fascinated gaze
that spare form, that accusing knife, that face of strange, cruel power.

"Anybody been sent for?" asked Lake of Beal.

"Yes. An Indian boy went for the Piute. We'll send him to Stonebridge,"
replied the Mormon.

"How soon do you expect any one here from Stonebridge?"

"To-morrow, mebbe by noon."

"Meantime what's to be done with--this?"

"Elder Smith thinks the body should stay right here where it fell till
they come from Stonebridge."

"Waggoner was found here, then?"

"Right here."

"Who found him?"

"Mother Smith. She came over early. An' the sight made her scream. The
women all came runnin'. Mother Smith had to be put to bed."

"Who found--Mary?"

"See here, Joe, I told you all I knowed once before," replied the
Mormon, testily.

"I've forgotten. Was sort of bewildered. Tell me again.... Who
found--her?"

"The women folks. She laid right inside the door, in a dead faint. She
hadn't undressed. There was blood on her hands an' a cut or scratch. The
women fetched her to. But she wouldn't talk. Then Elder Smith come an'
took her. They've got her locked up."

Then Joe led Shefford away from the cabin farther on into the village.
When they were halted by the somber, grieving women it was Joe who did
the talking. They passed the school-house, and here Shefford quickened
his step. He could scarcely bear the feeling that rushed over him. And
the Mormon gripped his arm as if he understood.

"Shefford, which one of these younger women do you reckon your best
friend? Ruth?" asked Lake, earnestly.

"Ruth, by all means. Just lately I haven't seen her often. But we've
been close friends. I think she'd do much for me."

"Maybe there'll be a chance to find out. Maybe we'll need Ruth. Let's
have a word with her. I haven't seen her out among the women."

They stopped at the door of Ruth's cabin. It was closed. When Joe
knocked there came a sound of footsteps inside, a hand drew aside the
window-blind, and presently the door opened. Ruth stood there, dressed
in somber hue. She was a pretty, slender, blue-eyed, brown-haired young
woman.

Shefford imagined from her pallor and the set look of shock upon her
face, that the tragedy had affected her more powerfully than it had the
other women. When he remembered that she had been more friendly with
Fay Larkin than any other neighbor, he made sure he was right in his
conjecture.

"Come in," was Ruth's greeting.

"No. We just wanted to say a word. I noticed you've not been out. Do you
know--all about it?"

She gave them a strange glance.

"Any of the women folks been in?" added Joe.

"Hester ran over. She told me through the window. Then I barred my door
to keep the other women out."

"What for?" asked Joe, curiously.

"Please come in," she said, in reply.

They entered, and she closed the door after them. The change that came
over her then was the loosing of restraint.

"Joe--what will they do with Mary?" she queried, tensely.

The Mormon studied her with dark, speculative eyes. "Hang her!" he
rejoined in brutal harshness.

"O Mother of Saints!" she cried, and her hands went up.

"You're sorry for Mary, then?" asked Joe, bluntly.

"My heart is breaking for her."

"Well, so's Shefford's," said the Mormon, huskily. "And mine's kind of
damn shaky."

Ruth glided to Shefford with a woman's swift softness.

"You've been my good--my best friend. You were hers, too. Oh, I know!
... Can't you do something for her?"

"I hope to God I can," replied Shefford.

Then the three stood looking from one to the other, in a strong and
subtly realizing moment drawn together.

"Ruth," whispered Joe, hoarsely, and then he glanced fearfully around,
at the window and door, as if listeners were there. It was certain
that his dark face had paled. He tried to whisper more, only to fail.
Shefford divined the weight of Mormonism that burdened Joe Lake then.
Joe was faithful to a love for Fay Larkin, noble in friendship to
Shefford, desperate in a bitter strait with his own manliness, but the
power of that creed by which he had been raised struck his lips mute.
For to speak on meant to be false to that creed. Already in his heart he
had decided, yet he could not voice the thing.

"Ruth"--Shefford took up the Mormon's unfinished whisper--"if we plan to
save her--if we need you--will you help?"

Ruth turned white, but an instant and splendid fire shone in her eyes.

"Try me," she whispered back. "I'll change places with her--so you can
get her away. They can't do much to me."

Shefford wrung her hands. Joe licked his lips and found his voice:
"We'll come back later." Then he led the way out and Shefford followed.
They were silent all the way back to camp.

Nas Ta Bega sat in repose where they had left him, a thoughtful, somber
figure. Shefford went directly to the Indian, and Joe tarried at the
camp-fire, where he raked out some red embers and put one upon the bowl
of his pipe. He puffed clouds of white smoke, then found a seat beside
the others.

"Shefford, go ahead. Talk. It'll take a deal of talk. I'll listen. Then
I'll talk. It'll be Nas Ta Bega who makes the plan out of it all."

Shefford launched himself so swiftly that he scarcely talked coherently.
But he made clear the points that he must save Fay, get her away from
the village, let her lead him to Surprise Valley, rescue Lassiter and
Jane Withersteen, and take them all out of the country.

Joe Lake dubiously shook his head. Manifestly the Surprise Valley part
of the situation presented a new and serious obstacle. It changed the
whole thing. To try to take the three out by way of Kayenta and Durango
was not to be thought of, for reasons he briefly stated. The Red Lake
trail was the only one left, and if that were taken the chances were
against Shefford. It was five days over sand to Red Lake--impossible to
hide a trail--and even with a day's start Shefford could not escape the
hard-riding men who would come from Stonebridge. Besides, after reaching
Red Lake, there were days and days of desert-travel needful to avoid
places like Blue Cañon, Tuba, Moencopie, and the Indian villages.

"We'll have to risk all that," declared Shefford, desperately.

"It's a fool risk," retorted Joe. "Listen. By tomorrow noon all of
Stonebridge, more or less, will be riding in here. You've got to get
away to-night with the girl--or never! And to-morrow you've got to find
that Lassiter and the woman in Surprise Valley. This valley must be
back, deep in the cañon country. Well, you've got to come out this
way again. No trail through here would be safe. Why, you'd put all your
heads in a rope!... You mustn't come through this way. It'll have to be
tried across country, off the trails, and that means hell--day-and-night
travel, no camp, no feed for horses--maybe no water. Then you'll have
the best trackers in Utah like hounds on your trail."

When the Mormon ceased his forceful speech there was a silence fraught
with hopeless meaning. He bowed his head in gloom. Shefford, growing
sick again to his marrow, fought a cold, hateful sense of despair.

"Bi Nai!" In his extremity he called to the Indian.

"The Navajo has heard," replied Nas Ta Bega, strangely speaking in his
own language.

With a long, slow heave of breast Shefford felt his despair leave him.
In the Indian lay his salvation. He knew it. Joe Lake caught the subtle
spirit of the moment and looked up eagerly.

Nas Ta Bega stretched an arm toward the east, and spoke in Navajo.
But Shefford, owing to the hurry and excitement of his mind, could not
translate. Joe Lake listened, gave a violent start, leaped up with all
his big frame quivering, and then fired question after question at the
Indian. When the Navajo had replied to all, Joe drew himself up as if
facing an irrevocable decision which would wring his very soul. What did
he cast off in that moment? What did he grapple with? Shefford had no
means to tell, except by the instinct which baffled him. But whether the
Mormon's trial was one of spiritual rending or the natural physical
fear of a perilous, virtually impossible venture, the fact was he was
magnificent in his acceptance of it. He turned to Shefford, white, cold,
yet glowing.

"Nas Ta Bega believes he can take you down a cañon to the big
river--the Colorado. He knows the head of this cañon. Nonnezoshe Boco
it's called--cañon of the rainbow bridge. He has never been down it.
Only two or three living Indians have ever seen the great stone bridge.
But all have heard of it. They worship it as a god. There's water runs
down this cañon and water runs to the river. Nas Ta Bega thinks he can
take you down to the river."

"Go on," cried Shefford breathlessly, as Joe paused.

"The Indian plans this way. God, it's great!... If only I can do my
end!... He plans to take mustangs to-day and wait with them for you
to-night or to-morrow till you come with the girl. You'll go get
Lassiter and the woman out of Surprise Valley. Then you'll strike east
for Nonnezoshe Boco. If possible, you must take a pack of grub. You may
be days going down--and waiting for me at the mouth of the cañon, at
the river."

"Joe! Where will you be?"

"I'll ride like hell for Kayenta, get another horse there, and ride
like hell for the San Juan River. There's a big flatboat at the Durango
crossing. I'll go down the San Juan in that--into the big river. I'll
drift down by day, tie up by night, and watch for you at the mouth of
every cañon till I come to Nonnezoshe Boco."

Shefford could not believe the evidence of his ears. He knew the
treacherous San Juan River. He had heard of the great, sweeping,
terrible red Colorado and its roaring rapids.

"Oh, it seems impossible!" he gasped. "You'll just lose your life for
nothing."

"The Indian will turn the trick, I tell you. Take my hunch. It's nothing
for me to drift down a swift river. I worked a ferry-boat once."

Shefford, to whom flying straws would have seemed stable, caught the
inflection of defiance and daring and hope of the Mormon's spirit.

"What then--after you meet us at the mouth of Nonnezoshe Boco?" he
queried.

"We'll all drift down to Lee's Ferry. That's at the head of Marble
Cañon. We'll get out on the south side of the river, thus avoiding
any Mormons at the ferry. Nas Ta Bega knows the country. It's open
desert--on the other side of these plateaus. He can get horses from
Navajos. Then you'll strike south for Willow Springs."

"Willow Springs? That's Presbrey's trading-post," said Shefford.

"Never met him. But he'll see you safe out of the Painted Desert. ...
The thing that worries me most is how not to miss you all at the mouth
of Nonnezoshe. You must have sharp eyes. But I forget the Indian. A bird
couldn't pass him.... And suppose Nonnezoshe Boco has a steep-walled,
narrow mouth opening into a rapids!... Whew! Well, the Indian will
figure that, too. Now, let's put our heads together and plan how to turn
this end of the trick here. Getting the girl!"

After a short colloquy it was arranged that Shefford would go to Ruth
and talk to her of the aid she had promised. Joe averred that this aid
could be best given by Ruth going in her somber gown and hood to the
school-house, and there, while Joe and Shefford engaged the guards
outside, she would change apparel and places with Fay and let her come
forth.

"What'll they do to Ruth?" demanded Shefford. "We can't accept her
sacrifice if she's to suffer--or be punished."

"Reckon Ruth has a strong hunch that she can get away with it. Did you
notice how strange she said that? Well, they can't do much to her. The
bishop may damn her soul. But--Ruth--"

Here Lake hesitated and broke off. Not improbably he had meant to say
that of all the Mormon women in the valley Ruth was the least likely to
suffer from punishment inflicted upon her soul.

"Anyway, it's our only chance," went on Joe, "unless we kill a couple of
men. Ruth will gladly take what comes to help you."

"All right; I consent," replied Shefford, with emotion. "And now after
she comes out--the supposed Ruth--what then?"

"You can be natural-like. Go with her back to Ruth's cabin. Then stroll
off into the cedars. Then climb the west wall. Meanwhile Nas Ta Bega
will ride off with a pack of grub and Nack-yal and several other
mustangs. He'll wait for you or you'll wait for him, as the case may be,
at some appointed place. When you're gone I'll jump my horse and hit the
trail for Kayenta and the San Juan."

"Very well; that's settled," said Shefford, soberly. "I'll go at once to
see Ruth. You and Nas Ta Bega decide on where I'm to meet him."

"Reckon you'd do just as well to walk round and come up to Ruth's from
the other side--instead of going through the village," suggested Joe.

Shefford approached Ruth's cabin in a roundabout way; nevertheless, she
saw him coming before he got there and, opening the door, stood pale,
composed, and quietly bade him enter. Briefly, in low and earnest voice,
Shefford acquainted her with the plan.

"You love her so much," she said, wistfully, wonderingly.

"Indeed I do. Is it too much to ask of you to do this thing?" he asked.

"Do it?" she queried, with a flash of spirit. "Of course I'll do it."

"Ruth, I can't thank you. I can't. I've only a faint idea what you're
risking. That distresses me. I'm afraid of what may happen to you."

She gave him another of the strange glances. "I don't risk so much as
you think," she said, significantly.

"Why?"

She came close to him, and her hands clasped his arms and she looked up
at him, her eyes darkening and her face growing paler. "Will you swear
to keep my secret?" she asked, very low.

"Yes, I swear."

"I was one of Waggoner's sealed wives!"

"God Almighty!" broke out Shefford, utterly overwhelmed.

"Yes. That's why I say I don't risk so much. I will make up a story to
tell the bishop and everybody. I'll tell that Waggoner was jealous, that
he was brutal to Mary, that I believed she was goaded to her mad deed,
that I thought she ought to be free. They'll be terrible. But what can
they do to me? My husband is dead... and if I have to go to hell to keep
from marrying another married Mormon, I'll go!"

In that low, passionate utterance Shefford read the death-blow to the
old Mormon polygamous creed. In the uplift of his spirit, in the joy at
this revelation, he almost forgot the stern matter at hand. Ruth and Joe
Lake belonged to a younger generation of Mormons. Their nobility in this
instance was in part a revolt at the conditions of their lives. Doubt
was knocking at Joe Lake's heart, and conviction had come to this young
sealed wife, bitter and hopeless while she had been fettered, strong and
mounting now that she was free. In a flash of inspiration Shefford saw
the old order changing. The Mormon creed might survive, but that part of
it which was an affront to nature, a horrible yoke on women's necks,
was doomed. It could not live. It could never have survived more than a
generation or two of religious fanatics. Shefford had marked a different
force and religious fervor in the younger Mormons, and now he understood
them.

"Ruth, you talk wildly," he said. "But I understand. I see. You are free
and you're going to stay free.... It stuns me to think of that man of
many wives. What did you feel when you were told he was dead?"

"I dare not think of that. It makes me--wicked. And he was good to
me.... Listen. Last night about midnight he came to my window and woke
me. I got up and let him in. He was in a terrible state. I thought he
was crazy. He walked the floor and called on his saints and prayed. When
I wanted to light a lamp he wouldn't let me. He was afraid I'd see his
face. But I saw well enough in the moonlight. And I knew something
had happened. So I soothed and coaxed him. He had been a man as
close-mouthed as a stone. Yet then I got him to talk.... He had gone
to Mary's, and upon entering, thought he heard some one with her. She
didn't answer him at first. When he found her in her bedroom she was
like a ghost. He accused her. Her silence made him furious. Then he
berated her, brought down the wrath of God upon her, threatened her with
damnation. All of which she never seemed to hear. But when he tried to
touch her she flew at him like a she-panther. That's what he called her.
She said she'd kill him! And she drove him out of her house.... He was
all weak and unstrung, and I believe scared, too, when he came to me.
She must have been a fury. Those quiet, gentle women are furies when
they're once roused. Well, I was hours up with him and finally he
got over it. He didn't pray any more. He paced the room. It was just
daybreak when he said the wrath of God had come to him. I tried to keep
him from going back to Mary. But he went.... An hour later the women ran
to tell me he had been found dead at Mary's door."

"Ruth--she was mad--driven--she didn't know what she--was doing," said
Shefford, brokenly.

"She was always a strange girl, more like an Indian than any one I
ever knew. We called her the Sago Lily. I gave her the name. She was so
sweet, lovely, white and gold, like those flowers.... And to think!
Oh, it's horrible for her! You must save her. If you get her away there
never will be anything come of it. The Mormons will hush it up."

"Ruth, time is flying," rejoined Shefford, hurriedly. "I must go back
to Joe. You be ready for us when we come. Wear something loose, easily
thrown off, and don't forget the long hood."

"I'll be ready and watching," she said. "The sooner the better, I'd
say."

He left her and returned toward camp in the same circling route by which
he had come. The Indian had disappeared and so had his mustang. This
significant fact augmented Shefford's hurried, thrilling excitement.
But one glance at Joe's face changed all that to a sudden numbness, a
sinking of his heart.

"What is it?" he queried.

"Look there!" exclaimed the Mormon.

Shefford's quick eye caught sight of horses and men down the valley. He
saw several Indians and three or four white men. They were making camp.

"Who are they?" demanded Shefford.

"Shadd and some of his gang. Reckon that Piute told the news. By
to-morrow the valley will be full as a horse-wrangler's corral.... Lucky
Nas Ta Bega got away before that gang rode in. Now things won't look
as queer as they might have looked. The Indian took a pack of grub, six
mustangs, and my guns. Then there was your rifle in your saddle-sheath.
So you'll be well heeled in case you come to close quarters. Reckon
you can look for a running fight. For now, as soon as your flight is
discovered, Shadd will hit your trail. He's in with the Mormons. You
know him--what you'll have to deal with. But the advantage will all be
yours. You can ambush the trail."

"We're in for it. And the sooner we're off the better," replied
Shefford, grimly.

"Reckon that's gospel. Well--come on!"

The Mormon strode off, and Shefford, catching up with him, kept at his
side. Shefford's mind was full, but Joe's dark and gloomy face did not
invite communication. They entered the pinyon grove and passed the
cabin where the tragedy had been enacted. A tarpaulin had been stretched
across the front porch. Beal was not in sight, nor were any of the
women.

"I forgot," said Shefford, suddenly. "Where am I to meet the Indian?"

"Climb the west wall, back of camp," replied Joe. "Nas Ta Bega took the
Stonebridge trail. But he'll leave that, climb the rocks, then hide the
outfit and come back to watch for you. Reckon he'll see you when you top
the wall."

They passed on into the heart of the village. Joe tarried at the window
of a cabin, and passed a few remarks to a woman there, and then he
inquired for Mother Smith at her house. When they left here the Mormon
gave Shefford a nudge. Then they separated, Joe going toward the
school-house, while Shefford bent his steps in the direction of Ruth's
home.

Her door opened before he had a chance to knock. He entered. Ruth, white
and resolute, greeted him with a wistful smile.

"All ready?" she asked.

"Yes. Are you?" he replied, low-voiced.

"I've only to put on my hood. I think luck favors you. Hester was here
and she said Elder Smith told some one that Mary hadn't been offered
anything to eat yet. So I'm taking her a little. It'll be a good excuse
for me to get in the school-house to see her. I can throw off this dress
and she can put it on in a minute. Then the hood. I mustn't forget to
hide her golden hair. You know how it flies. But this is a big hood....
Well, I'm ready now. And--this 's our last time together."

"Ruth, what can I say--how can I thank you?"

"I don't want any thanks. It'll be something to think of always--to make
me happy.... Only I'd like to feel you--you cared a little."

The wistful smile was there, a tremor on the sad lips, and a shadow of
soul-hunger in her eyes. Shefford did not misunderstand her. She did
not mean love, although it was a yearning for real love that she mutely
expressed.

"Care! I shall care all my life," he said, with strong feeling. "I shall
never forget you."

"It's not likely I'll forget you.... Good-by, John!"

Shefford took her in his arms and held her close. "Ruth--good-by!" he
said, huskily.

Then he released her. She adjusted the hood and, taking up a little tray
which held food covered with a napkin, she turned to the door. He opened
it and they went out.

They did not speak another word.

It was not a long walk from Ruth's home to the school-house, yet if it
were to be measured by Shefford's emotion the distance would have been
unending. The sacrifice offered by Ruth and Joe would have been noble
under any circumstances had they been Gentiles or persons with no
particular religion, but, considering that they were Mormons, that Ruth
had been a sealed-wife, that Joe had been brought up under the strange,
secret, and binding creed, their action was no less than tremendous in
its import. Shefford took it to mean vastly more than loyalty to him
and pity for Fay Larkin. As Ruth and Joe had arisen to this height,
so perhaps would other young Mormons, have arisen. It needed only the
situation, the climax, to focus these long-insulated, slow-developing
and inquiring minds upon the truth--that one wife, one mother of
children, for one man at one time as a law of nature, love, and
righteousness. Shefford felt as if he were marching with the whole
younger generation of Mormons, as if somehow he had been a humble
instrument in the working out of their destiny, in the awakening that
was to eliminate from their religion the only thing which kept it from
being as good for man, and perhaps as true, as any other religion.

And then suddenly he turned the corner of school-house to encounter Joe
talking with the Mormon Henninger. Elder Smith was not present.

"Why, hello, Ruth!" greeted Joe. "You've fetched Mary some dinner. Now
that's good of you."

"May I go in?" asked Ruth.

"Reckon so," replied Henninger, scratching his head. He appeared to be
tractable, and probably was good-natured under pleasant conditions. "She
ought to have somethin' to eat. An' nobody 'pears--to have remembered
that--we're so set up."

He unbarred the huge, clumsy door and allowed Ruth to pass in.

"Joe, you can go in if you want," he said. "But hurry out before Elder
Smith comes back from his dinner."

Joe mumbled something, gave a husky cough, and then went in.

Shefford experienced great difficulty in presenting to this mild Mormon
a natural and unagitated front. When all his internal structure seemed
to be in a state of turmoil he did not see how it was possible to keep
the fact from showing in his face. So he turned away and took aimless
steps here and there.

"'Pears like we'd hev rain," observed Henninger. "It's right warm an'
them clouds are onseasonable."

"Yes," replied Shefford. "Hope so. A little rain would be good for the
grass."

"Joe tells me Shadd rode in, an' some of his fellers."

"So I see. About eight in the party."

Shefford was gritting his teeth and preparing to endure the ordeal of
controlling his mind and expression when the door opened and Joe stalked
out. He had his sombrero pulled down so that it hid the upper half of
his face. His lips were a shade off healthy color. He stood there with
his back to the door.

"Say, what Mary needs is quiet--to be left alone," he said. "Ruth says
if she rests, sleeps a little, she won't get fever.... Henninger, don't
let anybody disturb her till night."

"All right, Joe," replied the Mormon. "An' I take it good of Ruth an'
you to concern yourselves."

A slight tap on the inside of the door sent Shefford's pulses to
throbbing. Joe opened it with a strong and vigorous sweep that meant
more than the mere action.

"Ruth--reckon you didn't stay long," he said, and his voice rang clear.
"Sure you feel sick and weak. Why, seeing her flustered even me!"

A slender, dark-garbed woman wearing a long black hood stepped
uncertainly out. She appeared to be Ruth. Shefford's heart stood still
because she looked so like Ruth. But she did not step steadily, she
seemed dazed, she did not raise the hooded head.

"Go home," said Joe, and his voice rang a little louder. "Take her home,
Shefford. Or, better, walk her round some. She's faintish .... And see
here, Henninger--"

Shefford led the girl away with a hand in apparent carelessness on her
arm. After a few rods she walked with a freer step and then a swifter.
He found it necessary to make that hold on her arm a real one, so as
to keep her from walking too fast. No one, however, appeared to observe
them. When they passed Ruth's house then Shefford began to lose his
fear that this was not Fay Larkin. He was far from being calm or
clear-sighted. He thought he recognized that free step; nevertheless,
he could not make sure. When they passed under the trees, crossed
the brook, and turned down along the west wall, then doubt ceased in
Shefford's mind. He knew this was not Ruth. Still, so strange was his
agitation, so keen his suspense, that he needed confirmation of ear, of
eye. He wanted to hear her voice, to see her face. Yet just as strangely
there was a twist of feeling, a reluctance, a sadness that kept off the
moment.

They reached the low, slow-swelling slant of wall and started to ascend.
How impossible not to recognize Fay Larkin now in that swift grace and
skill on the steep wall! Still, though he knew her, he perversely clung
to the unreality of the moment. But when a long braid of dead-gold hair
tumbled from under the hood, then his heart leaped. That identified
Fay Larkin. He had freed her. He was taking her away. Then a sadness
embittered his joy.

As always before, she distanced him in the ascent to the top. She went
on without looking back. But Shefford had an irresistible desire to took
again and the last time at this valley where he had suffered and loved
so much.




XVI. SURPRISE VALLEY


From the summit of the wall the plateau waved away in red and yellow
ridges, with here and there little valleys green with cedar and pinyon.

Upon one of these ridges, silhouetted against the sky, appeared
the stalking figure of the Indian. He had espied the fugitives. He
disappeared in a niche, and presently came again into view round a
corner of cliff. Here he waited, and soon Shefford and Fay joined him.

"Bi Nai, it is well," he said.

Shefford eagerly asked for the horses, and Nas Ta Bega silently pointed
down the niche, which was evidently an opening into one of the shallow
cañon. Then he led the way, walking swiftly. It was Shefford, and
not Fay, who had difficulty in keeping close to him. This speed caused
Shefford to become more alive to the business, instead of the feeling,
of the flight. The Indian entered a crack between low cliffs--a very
narrow cañon full of rocks and clumps of cedars--and in a half-hour or
less he came to where the mustangs were halted among some cedars. Three
of the mustangs, including Nack-yal, were saddled; one bore a small
pack, and the remaining two had blankets strapped on their backs.

"Fay, can you ride in that long skirt?" asked Shefford. How strange
it seemed that his first words to her were practical when all his
impassioned thought had been only mute! But the instant he spoke he
experienced a relief, a relaxation.

"I'll take it off," replied Fay, just as practically. And in a twinkling
she slipped out of both waist and skirt. She had worn them over the
short white-flannel dress with which Shefford had grown familiar.

As Nack-yal appeared to be the safest mustang for her to ride, Shefford
helped her upon him and then attended to the stirrups. When he had
adjusted them to the proper length he drew the bridle over Nack-yal's
head and, upon handing it to her, found himself suddenly looking into
her face. She had taken off the hood, too. The instant there eyes met he
realized that she was strangely afraid to meet his glance, as he was to
meet hers. That seemed natural. But her face was flushed and there were
unmistakable signs upon it of growing excitement, of mounting happiness.
Save for that fugitive glance she would have been the Fay Larkin of
yesterday. How he had expected her to look he did not know, but it was
not like this. And never had he felt her strange quality of simplicity
so powerfully.

"Have you ever been here--through this little cañon?" he asked.

"Oh yes, lots of times."

"You'll be able to lead us to Surprise Valley, you think?"

"I know it. I shall see Uncle Jim and Mother Jane before sunset!"

"I hope--you do," he replied, a little shakily. "Perhaps we'd better not
tell them of the--the--about what happened last night."

Her beautiful, grave, and troubled glance returned to meet his, and
he received a shock that he considered was amaze. And after more swift
consideration he believed he was amazed because that look, instead of
betraying fear or gloom or any haunting shadow of darkness, betrayed
apprehension for him--grave, sweet, troubled love for him. She was not
thinking of herself at all--of what he might think of her, of a possible
gulf between them, of a vast and terrible change in the relation of
soul to soul. He experienced a profound gladness. Though he could not
understand her, he was happy that the horror of Waggoner's death had
escaped her. He loved her, he meant to give his life to her, and right
then and there he accepted the burden of her deed and meant to bear it
without ever letting her know of the shadow between them.

"Fay, we'll forget--what's behind us," he said. "Now to find Surprise
Valley. Lead on. Nack-yal is gentle. Pull him the way you want to go.
We'll follow."

Shefford mounted the other saddled mustang, and they set off, Fay
in advance. Presently they rode out of this cañon up to level
cedar-patched, solid rock, and here Fay turned straight west. Evidently
she had been over the ground before. The heights to which he had climbed
with her were up to the left, great slopes and looming promontories. And
the course she chose was as level and easy as any he could have picked
out in that direction.

When a mile or more of this up-and-down travel had been traversed Fay
halted and appeared to be at fault. The plateau was losing its rounded,
smooth, wavy characteristics, and to the west grew bolder, more rugged,
more cut up into low crags and buttes. After a long, sweeping glance Fay
headed straight for this rougher country. Thereafter from time to time
she repeated this action.

"Fay, how do you know you're going in the right direction?" asked
Shefford, anxiously.

"I never forget any ground I've been over. I keep my eyes close ahead.
All that seems strange to me is the wrong way. What I've seen, before
must be the right way, because I saw it when they brought me from
Surprise Valley."

Shefford had to acknowledge that she was following an Indian's instinct
for ground he had once covered.

Still Shefford began to worry, and finally dropped back to question Nas
Ta Bega.

"Bi Nai, she has the eye of a Navajo," replied the Indian. "Look!
Iron-shod horses have passed here. See the marks in the stone?"

Shefford indeed made out faint cut tracks that would have escaped his
own sight. They had been made long ago, but they were unmistakable.

"She's following the trail by memory--she must remember the stones,
trees, sage, cactus," said Shefford in surprise.

"Pictures in her mind," replied the Indian.

Thereafter the farther she progressed the less at fault she appeared and
the faster she traveled. She made several miles an hour, and about
the middle of the afternoon entered upon the more broken region of the
plateau. View became restricted. Low walls, and ruined cliffs of red
rock with cedars at their base, and gullies growing into cañon and
cañon opening into larger ones--these were passed and crossed and
climbed and rimmed in travel that grew more difficult as the going
became wilder. Then there was a steady ascent, up and up all the time,
though not steep, until another level, green with cedar and pinyon, was
reached.

It reminded Shefford of the forest near the mouth of the Sagi. It was so
dense he could not see far ahead of Fay, and often he lost sight of her
entirely. Presently he rode out of the forest into a strip of purple
sage. It ended abruptly, and above that abrupt line, seemingly far away,
rose a long, red wall. Instantly he recognized that to be the opposite
wall of a cañon which as yet he could not see.

Fay was acting strangely and he hurried forward. She slipped off
Nack-yal and fell, sprang up and ran wildly, to stand upon a promontory,
her arms uplifted, her hair a mass of moving gold in the wind, her
attitude one of wild and eloquent significance.

Shefford ran, too, and as he ran the red wall in his eager sight seemed
to enlarge downward, deeper and deeper, and then it merged into a strip
of green.

Suddenly beneath him yawned a red-walled gulf, a deceiving gulf seen
through transparent haze, a softly shining green-and-white valley,
strange, wild, beautiful, like a picture in his memory.

"Surprise Valley!" he cried, in wondering recognition.

Fay Larkin waved her arms as if they were wings to carry her swiftly
downward, and her plaintive cry fitted the wildness of her manner and
the lonely height where she leaned.

Shefford drew her back from the rim.

"Fay, we are here," he said. "I recognize the valley. I miss only one
thing--the arch of stone."

His words seemed to recall her to reality.

"The arch? That fell when the wall slipped, in the great avalanche. See!
There is the place. We can get down there. Oh, let us hurry!"

The Indian reached the rim and his falcon gaze swept the valley. "Ugh!"
he exclaimed. He, too, recognized the valley that he had vainly sought
for half a year.

"Bring the lassos," said Shefford.

With Fay leading, they followed the rim toward the head of the valley.
Here the wall had caved in, and there was a slope of jumbled rock a
thousand feet wide and more than that in depth. It was easy to descend
because there were so many rocks waist-high that afforded a handhold.
Shefford marked, however, that Fay never took advantage of these. More
than once he paused to watch her. Swiftly she went down; she stepped
from rock to rock; lightly she crossed cracks and pits; she ran along
the sharp and broken edge of a long ledge; she poised on a pointed stone
and, sure-footed as a mountain-sheep, she sprang to another that had
scarce surface for a foothold; her moccasins flashed, seemed to hold
wondrously on any angle; and when a rock tipped or slipped with her she
leaped to a surer stand. Shefford watched her performance, so swift,
agile, so perfectly balanced, showing such wonderful accord between eye
and foot; and then when he swept his gaze down upon that wild valley
where she had roamed alone for twelve years he marveled no more.

The farther down he got the greater became the size of rocks, until
he found himself amid huge pieces of cliff as large as houses. He lost
sight of Fay entirely, and he anxiously threaded a narrow, winding,
descending way between the broken masses. Finally he came out upon flat
rock again. Fay stood on another rim, looking down. He saw that the
slide had moved far out into the valley, and the lower part of it
consisted of great sections of wall. In fact, the base of the great
wall had just moved out with the avalanche, and this much of it held its
vertical position. Looking upward, Shefford was astounded and thrilled
to see how far he had descended, how the walls leaned like a great,
wide, curving, continuous rim of mountain.

"Here! Here!" called Fay. "Here's where they got down--where they
brought me up. Here are the sticks they used. They stuck them in this
crack, down to that ledge."

Shefford ran to her side and looked down. There was a narrow split in
this section of wall and it was perhaps sixty feet in depth. The floor
of rock below led out in a ledge, with a sheer drop to the valley level.

As Shefford gazed, pondering on a way to descend lower, the Indian
reached his side. He had no sooner looked than he proceeded to act.
Selecting one of the sticks, which were strong pieces of cedar, well
hewn and trimmed, he jammed it between the walls of the crack till it
stuck fast. Then sitting astride this one he jammed in another some
three feet below. When he got down upon that one it was necessary for
Shefford to drop him a third stick. In a comparatively short time the
Indian reached the ledge below. Then he called for the lassos. Shefford
threw them down. His next move was an attempt to assist Fay, but she
slipped out of his grasp and descended the ladder with a swiftness
that made him hold his breath. Still, when his turn came, her spirit
so governed him that he went down as swiftly, and even leaped sheer the
last ten feet.

Nas Ta Bega and Fay were leaning over the ledge.

"Here's the place," she said, excitedly. "Let me down on the rope."

It took two thirty-foot lassos tied together to reach the floor of the
valley. Shefford folded his vest, put it round Fay, and slipped a loop
of the lasso under her arms. Then he and Nas Ta Bega lowered her to
the grass below. Fay, throwing off the loop, bounded away like a wild
creature, uttering the strangest cries he had ever heard, and she
disappeared along the wall.

"I'll go down," said Shefford to the Indian. "You stay here to help pull
us up."

Hand over hand Shefford descended, and when his feet touched the grass
he experienced a shock of the most singular exultation.

"In Surprise Valley!" he breathed, softly. The dream that had come to
him with his friend's story, the years of waiting, wondering, and then
the long, fruitless, hopeless search in the desert uplands--these were
in his mind as he turned along the wall where Fay had disappeared. He
faced a wide terrace, green with grass and moss and starry with strange
white flowers, and dark-foliaged, spear-pointed spruce-trees. Below the
terrace sloped a bench covered with thick copse, and this merged into
a forest of dwarf oaks, and beyond that was a beautiful strip of white
aspens, their leaves quivering in the stillness. The air was close,
sweet, warm, fragrant, and remarkably dry. It reminded him of the air he
had smelled in dry caves under cliffs. He reached a point from where he
saw a meadow dotted with red-and-white-spotted cattle and little black
burros. There were many of them. And he remembered with a start the
agony of toil and peril Venters had endured bringing the progenitors of
this stock into the valley. What a strange, wild, beautiful story it
all was! But a story connected with this valley could not have been
otherwise.

Beyond the meadow, on the other side of the valley, extended the forest,
and that ended in the rising bench of thicket, which gave place to green
slope and mossy terrace of sharp-tipped spruces--and all this led the
eye irresistibly up to the red wall where a vast, dark, wonderful cavern
yawned, with its rust-colored streaks of stain on the wall, and the
queer little houses of the cliff-dwellers, with their black, vacant,
silent windows speaking so weirdly of the unknown past.

Shefford passed a place where the ground had been cultivated, but not
as recently as the last six months. There was a scant shock of corn and
many meager standing stalks. He became aware of a low, whining hum and a
fragrance overpowering in its sweetness. And there round another corner
of wall he came upon an orchard all pink and white in blossom and
melodious with the buzz and hum of innumerable bees.

He crossed a little stream that had been dammed, went along a pond, down
beside an irrigation-ditch that furnished water to orchard and vineyard,
and from there he strode into a beautiful cove between two jutting
corners of red wall. It was level and green and the spruces stood
gracefully everywhere. Beyond their dark trunks he saw caves in the
wall.

Suddenly the fragrance of blossom was overwhelmed by the stronger
fragrance of smoke from a wood fire. Swiftly he strode under the
spruces. Quail fluttered before him as tame as chickens. Big gray
rabbits scarcely moved out of his way. The branches above him were full
of mockingbirds. And then--there before him stood three figures.

Fay Larkin was held close to the side of a magnificent woman,
barbarously clad in garments made of skins and pieces of blanket. Her
face worked in noble emotion. Shefford seemed to see the ghost of that
fair beauty Venters had said was Jane Withersteen's. Her hair was
gray. Near her stood a lean, stoop-shouldered man whose long hair was
perfectly white. His gaunt face was bare of beard. It had strange,
sloping, sad lines. And he was staring with mild, surprised eyes.

The moment held Shefford mute till sight of Fay Larkin's tear-wet face
broke the spell. He leaped forward and his strong hands reached for the
woman and the man.

"Jane Withersteen!... Lassiter! I have found you!"

"Oh, sir, who are you?" she cried, with rich and deep and quivering
voice. "This child came running--screaming. She could not speak. We
thought she had gone mad--and escaped to come back to us."

"I am John Shefford," he replied, swiftly. "I am a friend of Bern
Venters--of his wife Bess. I learned your story. I came west. I've
searched a year. I found Fay. And we've come to take you away."

"You found Fay? But that masked Mormon who forced her to sacrifice
herself to save us!... What of him? It's not been so many long years--I
remember what my father was--and Dyer and Tull--all those cruel
churchmen."

"Waggoner is dead," replied Shefford.

"Dead? She is free! Oh, what--how did he die?"

"He was killed."

"Who did it?"

"That's no matter," replied Shefford, stonily, and he met her gaze with
steady eyes. "He's out of the way. Fay was never his wife. Fay's free.
We've come to take you out of the country. We must hurry. We'll be
tracked--pursued. But we've horses and an Indian guide. We'll get
away.... I think it better to leave here at once. There's no telling how
soon we'll be hunted. Get what things you want to take with you."

"Oh--yes--Mother Jane, let us hurry!" cried Fay. "I'm so full--I can't
talk--my heart hurts so!"

Jane Withersteen's face shone with an exceedingly radiant light, and a
glory blended with a terrible fear in her eyes.

"Fay! my little Fay!"

Lassiter had stood there with his mild, clear blue eyes upon Shefford.

"I shore am glad to see you--all," he drawled, and extended his hand as
if the meeting were casual. "What'd you say your name was?"

Shefford repeated it as he met the proffered hand.

"How's Bern an' Bess?" Lassiter inquired.

"They were well, prosperous, happy when last I saw them.... They had a
baby."

"Now ain't thet fine?... Jane, did you hear? Bess has a baby. An', Jane,
didn't I always say Bern would come back to get us out? Shore it's just
the same."

How cool, easy, slow, and mild this Lassiter seemed! Had the man grown
old, Shefford wondered? The past to him manifestly was only yesterday,
and the danger of the present was as nothing. Looking in Lassiter's
face, Shefford was baffled. If he had not remembered the greatness of
this old gun-man he might have believed that the lonely years in the
valley had unbalanced his mind. In an hour like this coolness seemed
inexplicable--assuredly would have been impossible in an ordinary man.
Yet what hid behind that drawling coolness? What was the meaning of
those long, sloping, shadowy lines of the face? What spirit lay in the
deep, mild, clear eyes? Shefford experienced a sudden check to what had
been his first growing impression of a drifting, broken old man.

"Lassiter, pack what little you can carry--mustn't be much--and we'll
get out of here," said Shefford.

"I shore will. Reckon I ain't a-goin' to need a pack-train. We saved the
clothes we wore in here. Jane never thought it no use. But I figgered we
might need them some day. They won't be stylish, but I reckon they'll do
better 'n these skins. An' there's an old coat thet was Venters's."

The mild, dreamy look became intensified in Lassiter's eyes.

"Did Venters have any hosses when you knowed him?" he asked.

"He had a farm full of horses," replied Shefford, with a smile. "And
there were two blacks--the grandest horses I ever saw. Black Star and
Night! You remember, Lassiter?"

"Shore. I was wonderin' if he got the blacks out. They must be growin'
old by now.... Grand hosses, they was. But Jane had another hoss, a big
devil of a sorrel. His name was Wrangle. Did Venters ever tell you about
him--an' thet race with Jerry Card?"

"A hundred times!" replied Shefford.

"Wrangle run the blacks off their legs. But Jane never would believe
thet. An' I couldn't change her all these years.... Reckon mebbe we'll
get to see them blacks?"

"Indeed, I hope--I believe you will," replied Shefford, feelingly.

"Shore won't thet be fine. Jane, did you hear? Black Star an' Night are
livin' an' we'll get to see them."

But Jane Withersteen only clasped Fay in her arms, and looked at
Lassiter with wet and glistening eyes.

Shefford told them to hurry and come to the cliff where the ascent from
the valley was to be made. He thought best to leave them alone to make
their preparations and bid farewell to the cavern home they had known
for so long.

Then he strolled back along the wall, loitering here to gaze into a
cave, and there to study crude red paintings in the nooks. And sometimes
he halted thoughtfully and did not see anything. At length he rounded
a corner of cliff to espy Nas Ta Bega sitting upon the ledge, reposeful
and watchful as usual. Shefford told the Indian they would be climbing
out soon, and then he sat down to wait and let his gaze rove over the
valley.

He might have sat there a long while, so sad and reflective and
wondering was his thought, but it seemed a very short time till Fay came
in sight with her free, swift grace, and Lassiter and Jane some distance
behind. Jane carried a small bundle and Lassiter had a sack over his
shoulder that appeared no inconsiderable burden.

"Them beans shore is heavy," he drawled, as he deposited the sack upon
the ground.

Shefford curiously took hold of the sack and was amazed to find that a
second and hard muscular effort was required to lift it.

"Beans?" he queried.

"Shore," replied Lassiter.

"That's the heaviest sack of beans I ever saw. Why--it's not possible
it can be.... Lassiter, we've a long, rough trail. We've got to pack
light--"

"Wal, I ain't a-goin' to leave this here sack behind. Reckon I've been
all of twelve years in fillin' it," he declared, mildly.

Shefford could only stare at him.

"Fay may need them beans," went on Lassiter.

"Why?"

"Because they're gold."

"Gold!" ejaculated Shefford.

"Shore. An' they represent some work. Twelve years of diggin' an'
washin'!"

Shefford laughed constrainedly. "Well, Lassiter, that alters the case
considerably. A sack of gold nuggets or grains, or beans, as you call
them, certainly must not be left behind.... Come, now, we'll tackle this
climbing job."

He called up to the Indian and, grasping the rope, began to walk up the
first slant, and then by dint of hand-over-hand effort and climbing
with knees and feet he succeeded, with Nas Ta Bega's help, in making the
ledge. Then he let down the rope to haul up the sack and bundle. That
done, he directed Fay to fasten the noose round her as he had fixed it
before. When she had complied he called to her to hold herself out from
the wall while he and Nas Ta Bega hauled her up.

"Hold the rope tight," replied Fay, "I'll walk up."

And to Shefford's amaze and admiration, she virtually walked up that
almost perpendicular wall by slipping her hands along the rope and
stepping as she pulled herself up. There, if never before, he saw the
fruit of her years of experience on steep slopes. Only such experience
could have made the feat possible.

Jane had to be hauled up, and the task was a painful one for her.
Lassiter's turn came then, and he showed more strength and agility than
Shefford had supposed him capable of. From the ledge they turned their
attention to the narrow crack with its ladder of sticks. Fay had already
ascended and now hung over the rim, her white face and golden hair
framed vividly in the narrow stream of blue sky above.

"Mother Jane! Uncle Jim! You are so slow," she called.

"Wal, Fay, we haven't been second cousins to a cañon squirrel all these
years," replied Lassiter.

This upper half of the climb bid fair to be as difficult for Jane, if
not so painful, as the lower. It was necessary for the Indian to go
up and drop the rope, which was looped around her, and then, with him
pulling from above and Shefford assisting Jane as she climbed, she was
finally gotten up without mishap. When Lassiter reached the level they
rested a little while and then faced the great slide of jumbled rocks.
Fay led the way, light, supple, tireless, and Shefford never ceased
looking at her. At last they surmounted the long slope and, winding
along the rim, reached the point where Fay had led out of the cedars.

Nas Ta Bega, then, was the one to whom Shefford looked for every
decision or action of the immediate future. The Indian said he had seen
a pool of water in a rocky hole, that the day was spent, that here was a
little grass for the mustangs, and it would be well to camp right there.
So while Nas Ta Bega attended to the mustangs Shefford set about such
preparations for camp and supper as their light pack afforded. The
question of beds was easily answered, for the mats of soft needles under
pinyon and cedar would be comfortable places to sleep.

When Shefford felt free again the sun was setting. Lassiter and Jane
were walking under the trees. The Indian had returned to camp. But Fay
was missing. Shefford imagined he knew where to find her, and upon
going to the edge of the forest he saw her sitting on the promontory.
He approached her, drawn in spite of a feeling that perhaps he ought to
stay away.

"Fay, would you rather be alone?" he asked.

His voice startled her.

"I want you," she replied, and held out her hand.

Taking it in his own, he sat beside her.

The red sun was at their backs. Surprise Valley lay hazy, dusky, shadowy
beneath them. The opposite wall seemed fired by crimson flame, save far
down at its base, which the sun no longer touched. And the dark line
of red slowly rose, encroaching upon the bright crimson. Changing,
transparent, yet dusky veils seemed to float between the walls; long,
red rays, where the sun shone through notch or crack in the rim, split
the darker spaces; deep down at the floor the forest darkened, the strip
of aspen paled, the meadow turned gray; and all under the shelves and in
the great caverns a purple gloom deepened. Then the sun set. And swiftly
twilight was there below while day lingered above. On the opposite wall
the fire died and the stone grew cold.

A cañon night-hawk voiced his lonely, weird, and melancholy cry, and it
seemed to pierce and mark the silence.

A pale star, peering out of a sky that had begun to turn blue, marked
the end of twilight. And all the purple shadows moved and hovered and
changed till, softly and mysteriously, they embraced black night.

Beautiful, wild, strange, silent Surprise Valley! Shefford saw it before
and beneath him, a dark abyss now, the abode of loneliness. He imagined
faintly what was in Fay Larkin's heart. For the last time she had seen
the sun set there and night come with its dead silence and sweet mystery
and phantom shadows, its velvet blue sky and white trains of stars.

He, who had dreamed and longed and searched, found that the hour had
been incalculable for him in its import.




XVII. THE TRAIL TO NONNEZOSHE


When Shefford awoke next morning and sat up on his bed of pinyon boughs
the dawn had broken cold with a ruddy gold brightness under the trees.
Nas Ta Bega and Lassiter were busy around a camp-fire; the mustangs were
haltered near by; Jane Withersteen combed out her long, tangled tresses
with a crude wooden comb; and Fay Larkin was not in sight. As she
had been missing from the group at sunset, so she was now at sunrise.
Shefford went out to take his last look at Surprise Valley.

On the evening before the valley had been a place of dusky red veils and
purple shadows, and now it was pink-walled, clear and rosy and green
and white, with wonderful shafts of gold slanting down from the notched
eastern rim. Fay stood on the promontory, and Shefford did not break the
spell of her silent farewell to her wild home. A strange emotion abided
with him and he knew he would always, all his life, regret leaving
Surprise Valley.

Then the Indian called.

"Come, Fay," said Shefford, gently.

And she turned away with dark, haunted eyes and a white, still face.

The somber Indian gave a silent gesture for Shefford to make haste.
While they had breakfast the mustangs were saddled and packed. And soon
all was in readiness for the flight. Fay was given Nack-yal, Jane the
saddled horse Shefford had ridden, and Lassiter the Indian's roan.
Shefford and Nas Ta Bega were to ride the blanketed mustangs, and the
sixth and last one bore the pack. Nas Ta Bega set off, leading this
horse; the others of the party lined in behind, with Shefford at the
rear.

Nas Ta Bega led at a brisk trot, and sometimes, on level stretches of
ground, at an easy canter; and Shefford had a grim realization of
what this flight was going to be for these three fugitives, now so
unaccustomed to riding. Jane and Lassiter, however, needed no watching,
and showed they had never forgotten how to manage a horse. The Indian
back-trailed yesterday's path for an hour, then headed west to the left,
and entered a low pass. All parts of this plateau country looked alike,
and Shefford was at some pains to tell the difference of this strange
ground from that which he had been over. In another hour they got out
of the rugged, broken rock to the wind-worn and smooth, shallow cañon.
Shefford calculated that they were coming to the end of the plateau.
The low walls slanted lower; the cañon made a turn; Nas Ta Bega
disappeared; and then the others of the party. When Shefford turned the
corner of wall he saw a short strip of bare, rocky ground with only sky
beyond. The Indian and his followers had halted in a group. Shefford
rode to them, halted himself, and in one sweeping glance realized the
meaning of their silent gaze. But immediately Nas Ta Bega started
down; and the mustangs, without word or touch, followed him. Shefford,
however, lingered on the promontory.

His gaze seemed impelled and held by things afar--the great
yellow-and-purple corrugated world of distance, now on a level with
his eyes. He was drawn by the beauty and the grandeur of that scene and
transfixed by the realization that he had dared to venture to find a
way through this vast, wild, and upflung fastness. He kept looking afar,
sweeping the three-quartered circle of horizon till his judgment of
distance was confounded and his sense of proportion dwarfed one moment
and magnified the next. Then he withdrew his fascinated gaze to adopt
the Indian's method of studying unlimited spaces in the desert--to look
with slow, contracted eyes from near to far.

His companions had begun to zigzag down a long slope, bare of rock, with
yellow gravel patches showing between the scant strips of green, and
here and there a scrub-cedar. Half a mile down, the slope merged into
green level. But close, keen gaze made out this level to be a rolling
plain, growing darker green, with blue lines of ravines, and thin,
undefined spaces that might be mirage. Miles and miles it swept and
relied and heaved to lose its waves in apparent darker level. A round,
red rock stood isolated, marking the end of the barren plain, and
farther on were other round rocks, all isolated, all of different shape.
They resembled huge grazing cattle. But as Shefford gazed, and his sight
gained strength from steadily holding it to separate features these
rocks were strangely magnified. They grew and grew into mounds, castles,
domes, crags--great, red, wind-carved buttes. One by one they drew his
gaze to the wall of upflung rock. He seemed to see a thousand domes of a
thousand shapes and colors, and among them a thousand blue clefts, each
one a little mark in his sight, yet which he knew was a cañon. So far
he gained some idea of what he saw. But beyond this wide area of curved
lines rose another wall, dwarfing the lower, dark red, horizon--long,
magnificent in frowning boldness, and because of its limitless deceiving
surfaces, breaks, and lines, incomprehensible to the sight of man. Away
to the eastward began a winding, ragged, blue line, looping back upon
itself, and then winding away again, growing wider and bluer. This
line was the San Juan Cañon. Where was Joe Lake at that moment? Had he
embarked yet on the river--did that blue line, so faint, so deceiving,
hold him and the boat? Almost it was impossible to believe. Shefford
followed the blue line all its length, a hundred miles, he fancied, down
toward the west where it joined a dark, purple, shadowy cleft. And this
was the Grand Cañon of the Colorado. Shefford's eye swept along with
that winding mark, farther and farther to the west, round to the left,
until the cleft, growing larger and coming closer, losing its deception,
was seen to be a wild and winding cañon. Still farther to the left, as
he swung in fascinated gaze, it split the wonderful wall--a vast plateau
now with great red peaks and yellow mesas. The cañon was full of purple
smoke. It turned, it gaped, it lost itself and showed again in that
chaos of a million cliffs. And then farther on it became again a cleft,
a purple line, at last to fail entirely in deceiving distance.

Shefford imagined there was no scene in all the world to equal that. The
tranquillity of lesser spaces was not here manifest. Sound, movement,
life, seemed to have no fitness here. Ruin was there and desolation
and decay. The meaning of the ages was flung at him, and a man became
nothing. When he had gazed at the San Juan Cañon he had been appalled
at the nature of Joe Lake's Herculean task. He had lost hope, faith.
The thing was not possible. But when Shefford gazed at that sublime and
majestic wilderness, in which the Grand Cañon was only a dim line, he
strangely lost his terror and something else came to him from across the
shining spaces. If Nas Ta Bega led them safely down to the river, if
Joe Lake met them at the mouth of Nonnezoshe Boco, if they survived the
rapids of that terrible gorge, then Shefford would have to face his soul
and the meaning of this spirit that breathed on the wind.

He urged his mustang to the descent of the slope, and as he went down,
slowly drawing nearer to the other fugitives, his mind alternated
between this strange intimation of faith, this subtle uplift of his
spirit, and the growing gloom and shadow in his love for Fay Larkin. Not
that he loved her less, but more! A possible God hovering near him,
like the Indian's spirit-step on the trail, made his soul the darker for
Fay's crime, and he saw with light, with deeper sadness, with sterner
truth.

More than once the Indian turned on his mustang to look up the slope
and the light flashed from his dark, somber face. Shefford instinctively
looked back himself, and then realized the unconscious motive of the
action. Deep within him there had been a premonition of certain pursuit,
and the Indian's reiterated backward glance had at length brought the
feeling upward. Thereafter, as they descended, Shefford gradually added
to his already wrought emotions a mounting anxiety.

No sign of a trail showed where the base of the slope rolled out to
meet the green plain. The earth was gravelly, with dark patches of heavy
silt, almost like cinders; and round, black rocks, flinty and glassy,
cracked away from the hoofs of the mustangs. There was a level bench a
mile wide, then a ravine, and then an ascent, and after that, rounded
ridge and ravine, one after the other, like huge swells of a monstrous
sea. Indian paint-brush vied in its scarlet hue with the deep magenta
of cactus. There was no sage. Soapweed and meager grass and a bunch of
cactus here and there lent the green to that barren; and it was green
only at a distance. Nas Ta Bega kept on a steady, even trot. The sun
climbed. The wind rose and whipped dust from under the mustangs.

Shefford looked back often, and the farther out in the plain he reached
the higher loomed the plateau they had descended; and as he faced ahead
again the lower sank the red-domed and castled horizon to the fore.
The ravines became deeper, with dry rock bottoms, and the ridge-tops
sharper, with outcroppings of yellow, crumbling ledges. Once across the
central depression of that plain a gradual ascent became evident, and
the round rocks grew clearer in sight, began to rise shine and grow. And
thereafter every slope brought them nearer.

The sun was straight overhead and hot when Nas Ta Bega halted the party
under the first lonely scrub-cedar. They all dismounted to stretch their
limbs, and rest the horses. It was not a talkative group, Lassiter's
comments on the never-ending green plain elicited no response. Jane
Withersteen looked afar with the past in her eyes. Shefford felt Fay's
wistful glance and could not meet it; indeed, he seemed to want to hide
something from her. The Indian bent a falcon gaze on the distant
slope, and Shefford did not like that intent, searching, steadfast
watchfulness. Suddenly Nas Ta Bega stiffened and whipped the halter he
held.

"Ugh!" he exclaimed.

All eyes followed the direction of his dark hand. Puffs of dust rose
from the base of the long slope they had descended; tiny dark specks
moved with the pace of a snail.

"Shadd!" added the Indian.

"I expected it," said Shefford, darkly, as he rose.

"An' who's Shadd?" drawled Lassiter in his cool, slow speech.

Briefly Shefford explained, and then, looking at Nas Ta Bega, he added:

"The hardest-riding outfit in the country! We can't get away from them."

Jane Withersteen was silent, but Fay uttered a low cry. Shefford did
not look at either of them. The Indian began swiftly to tighten the
saddle-cinches of his roan, and Shefford did likewise for Nack-yal. Then
Shefford drew his rifle out of the saddle-sheath and Joe Lake's big guns
from the saddle-bag.

"Here, Lassiter, maybe you haven't forgotten how to use these," he said.

The old gun-man started as if he had seen ghosts. His hands grew
clawlike as he reached for the guns. He threw open the cylinders,
spilled out the shells, snapped back the cylinders. Then he went through
motions too swift for Shefford to follow. But Shefford heard the hammers
falling so swiftly they blended their clicks almost in one sound.
Lassiter reloaded the guns with a speed comparable with the other
actions. A remarkable transformation had come over him. He did not seem
the same man. The mild eyes had changed; the long, shadowy, sloping
lines were tense cords; and there was a cold, ashy shade on his face.

"Twelve years!" he muttered to himself. "I dropped them old guns back
there where I rolled the rock.... Twelve years!"

Shefford realized the twelve years were as if they had never been. And
he would rather have had this old gun-man with him than a dozen ordinary
men.

The Indian spoke rapidly in Navajo, saying that once in the rocks
they were safe. Then, after another look at the distant dust-puffs, he
wheeled his mustang.

It was doubtful if the party could have kept near him had they been
responsible for the gait of their mounts. The fact was that the way the
Indian called to his mustang or some leadership in the one rode drew the
others to a like trot or climb or canter. For a long time Shefford did
not turn round; he knew what to expect. And when he did turn he was
startled at the gain made by the pursuers. But he was encouraged as well
by the looming, red, rounded peaks seemingly now so close. He could see
the dark splits between the sloping curved walls, the pinyon patches in
the amphitheater under the circled walls. That was a wild place they
were approaching, and, once in there, he believed pursuit would be
useless. However, there were miles to go still, and those hard-riding
devils behind made alarming decrease in the intervening distance.
Shefford could see the horses plainly now. How they made the dust fly!
He counted up to six--and then the dust and moving line caused the
others to be indistinguishable.

At last only a long, gently rising slope separated the fugitives from
that labyrinthine network of wildly carved rock. But it was the clear
air that made the distance seem short. Mile after mile the mustangs
climbed, and when they were perhaps half-way across that last slope to
the rocks the first horse of the pursuers mounted to the level behind.
In a few moments the whole band was strung out in sight. Nas Ta Bega
kept his mustang at a steady walk, in spite of the gaining pursuers.
There came a point, however, when the Indian, reaching comparatively
level ground, put his mount to a swinging canter. The other mustangs
broke into the same gait.

It became a race then, with the couple of miles between fugitives and
pursuers only imperceptibly lessened. Nas Ta Bega had saved his mustangs
and Shadd had ridden his to the limit. Shefford kept looking back,
gripping his rifle, hoping it would not come to a fight, yet slowly
losing that reluctance.

Sage began to show on the slope, and other kinds of brush and cedars
straggled everywhere. The great rocks loomed closer, the red color
mixed with yellow, and the slopes lengthening out, not so steep, yet
infinitely longer than they had seemed at a distance.

Shefford ceased to feel the dry wind in his face. They were already in
the lee of the wall. He could see the rock-squirrels scampering to their
holes. The mustangs valiantly held to the gait, and at last the Indian
disappeared between two rounded comers of cliff. The others were close
behind. Shefford wheeled once more. Shadd and his gang were a mile in
the rear, but coming fast, despite winded horses.

Shefford rode around the wall into a widening space thick with cedars.
It ended in a bare slope of smooth rock. Here the Indian dismounted.
When the others came up with him he told them to lead their horses and
follow. Then he began the ascent of the rock.

It was smooth and hard, though not slippery. There was not a crack.
Shefford did not see a broken piece of stone. Nas Ta Bega climbed
straight up for a while, and then wound around a swell, to turn this way
and that, always going up. Shefford began to see similar mounds of rock
all around him, of every shape that could be called a curve. There were
yellow domes far above, and small red domes far below. Ridges ran from
one hill of rock to another. There were no abrupt breaks, but holes
and pits and caves were everywhere, and occasionally, deep down, an
amphitheater green with cedar and pinyon. The Indian appeared to have
a clear idea of where he wanted to go, though there was no vestige of
a trail on those bare slopes. At length Shefford was high enough to see
back upon the plain, but the pursuers were no longer in sight.

Nas Ta Bega led to the top of that wall, only to disclose to his
followers another and a higher wall beyond, with a ridged, bare, wild,
and scalloped depression between. Here footing began to be precarious
for both man and beast. When the ascent of the second wall began it was
necessary to zigzag up, slowly and carefully, taking advantage of every
level bulge or depression. They must have consumed half an hour mounting
this slope to the summit. Once there, Shefford drew a sharp breath with
both backward and forward glances. Shadd and his gang, in single file,
showed dark upon the bare stone ridge behind. And to the fore there
twisted and dropped and curved the most dangerous slopes Shefford had
ever seen. The fugitives had reached the height of stone wall, of the
divide, and many of the drops upon this side were perpendicular and too
steep to see the bottom.

Nas Ta Bega led along the ridge-top and then started down, following the
waves in the rock. He came out upon a round promontory from which there
could not have been any turning of a horse. The long slant leading down
was at an angle Shefford declared impossible for the animals. Yet the
Indian started down. His mustang needed urging, but at last edged upon
the steep descent. Shefford and the others had to hold back and wait. It
was thrilling to see the intelligent mustang. He did not step. He slid
his fore hoofs a few inches at a time and kept directly behind the
Indian. If he fell he would knock Nas Ta Bega off his feet and they
would both roll down together. There was no doubt in Shefford's mind
that the mustang knew this as well as the Indian. Foot by foot they
worked down to a swelling bulge, and here Nas Ta Bega left his mustang
and came back for the pack-horse. It was even more difficult to get this
beast down. Then the Indian called for Lassiter and Jane and Fay to come
down. Shefford began to keep a sharp lookout behind and above, and did
not see how the three fared on the slope, but evidently there was no
mishap. Nas Ta Bega mounted the slope again, and at the moment sight of
Shadd's dark bays silhouetted against the sky caused Shefford to call
out:

"We've got to hurry!"

The Indian led one mustang and called to the others. Shefford stepped
close behind. They went down in single file, inch by inch, foot by foot,
and safely reached the comparative level below.

"Shadd's gang are riding their horses up and down these walls!"
exclaimed Shefford.

"Shore," replied Lassiter.

Both the women were silent.

Nas Ta Bega led the way swiftly to the right. He rounded a huge dome,
climbed a low, rolling ridge, descended and ascended, and came out upon
the rim of a steep-walled amphitheater. Along the rim was a yard-wide
level, with the chasm to the left and steep slope to the right. There
was no time to flinch at the danger, when an even greater danger menaced
from the rear. Nas Ta Bega led, and his mustang kept at his heels.
One misstep would have plunged the animal to his death. But he was
surefooted and his confidence helped the others. At the apex of the
curve the only course led away from the rim, and here there was no
level. Four of the mustangs slipped and slid down the smooth rock until
they stopped in a shallow depression. It cost time to get them out, to
straighten pack and saddles. Shefford thought he heard a yell in the
rear, but he could not see anything of the gang.

They rounded this precipice only to face a worse one. Shefford's nerve
was sorely tried when he saw steep slants everywhere, all apparently
leading down into chasms, and no place a man, let alone a horse, could
put a foot with safety. Nevertheless the imperturbable Indian never
slacked his pace. Always he appeared to find a way, and he never had to
turn back. His winding course, however, did not now cover much distance
in a straight line, and herein lay the greatest peril. Any moment Shadd
and his men might come within range.

Upon a particularly tedious and dangerous side of rocky hill the
fugitives lost so much time that Shefford grew exceedingly alarmed.
Still, they accomplished it without accident, and their pursuers did not
heave in sight. Perhaps they were having trouble in a bad place.

The afternoon was waning. The red sun hung low above the yellow mesa to
the left, and there was a perceptible shading of light.

At last Nas Ta Bega came to a place that halted him. It did not look
so bad as places they had successfully passed. Yet upon closer study
Shefford did not see how they were to get around the neck of the gully
at their feet. Presently the Indian put the bridle over the head of his
mustang and left him free. He did likewise for two more mustangs, while
Lassiter and Shefford rendered a like service to theirs. Then the Indian
started down, with his mustang following him. The pack-animal came next,
then Fay and Nack-yal, then Lassiter and his mount, with Jane and hers
next, and Shefford last. They followed the Indian, picking their steps
swiftly, looking nowhere except at the stone under their feet. The right
side of the chasm was rimmed, the curve at the head crossed, and then
the real peril of this trap had to be faced. It was a narrow slant of
ledge, doubling back parallel with the course already traversed.

A sharp warning cry from Nas Ta Bega scarcely prepared Shefford for
hoarse yells, and then a rattling rifle-volley from the top of the slope
opposite. Bullets thudded on the cliff, whipped up red dust, and spanged
and droned away.

Fay Larkin screamed and staggered back against the wall. Nack-yal was
hit, and with frightened snort he reared, pawed the air, and came down,
pounding the stone. The mustang behind him went to his knees, sank with
his head over the rim, and, slipping off, plunged into the depths. In an
instant a dull crash came up.

For a moment there was imminent peril for the horses, more in the
yawning hole than in the spanging of badly aimed bullets. Lassiter drew
Jane up a little slope out of the way of the frightened mustangs, and
Shefford, risking his neck, rushed to Fay. She was holding her arm,
which was bleeding. Unheeding the rain of bullets, he half carried,
half dragged her along the slope of the low bluff, where he hid behind
a corner till the Indian drove the mustangs round it. Shefford's swift
fingers were wet and red with the blood from Fay's arm when he had bound
the wound with his scarf. Lassiter had gotten around with Jane and was
calling Shefford to hurry.

It had been Shefford's idea to halt there and fight. But he did not want
to send Fay on alone, so he hurried ahead with her. The Indian had the
horses going fast on a long level, overhung by bulging wall. Lassiter
and Jane were looking back. Shefford, becoming aware of a steep slope
to his left, looked down to see a narrow chasm and great crevices in the
cliffs, with bunches of cedars here and there.

Presently Nas Ta Bega disappeared with the mustangs. He had evidently
turned off to go down behind the split cliffs. Shefford and Fay caught
up with Lassiter and Jane, and, panting, hurrying, looking backward and
then forward, they kept on, as best they could, in the Indian's course.
Shefford made sure they had lost him, when he appeared down to the left.
Then they all ran to catch up with him. They went around the chasm, and
then through one of the narrow cracks to come out upon the rim, among
cedars. Here the Indian waited for them. He pointed down another
long swell of naked stone to a narrow green split which was evidently
different from all these curved pits and holes and abysses, for this
one had straight walls and wound away out of sight. It was the head of a
cañon.

"Nonnezoshe Boco!" said the Indian.

"Nas Ta Bega, go on!" replied Shefford. "When Shadd comes out on that
slope above he can't see you--where you go down. Hurry on with the
horses and women. Lassiter, you go with them. And if Shadd passes me and
comes up with you--do your best.... I'm going to ambush that Piute and
his gang!"

"Shore you've picked out a good place," replied Lassiter.

In another moment Shefford was alone. He heard the light, soft pat and
slide of the hoofs of the mustangs as they went down. Presently that
sound ceased.

He looked at the red stain on his hands--from the blood of the girl he
loved. And he had to stifle a terrible wrath that shook his frame. In
regard to Shadd's pursuit, it had not been blood that he had feared, but
capture for Fay. He and Nas Ta Bega might have expected a shot if they
resisted, but to wound that unfortunate girl--it made a tiger out of
him. When he had stilled the emotions that weakened and shook him and
reached cold and implacable control of himself, he crawled under the
cedars to the rim and, well hidden, he watched and waited.

Shadd appeared to be slow for the first time since he had been sighted.
With keen eyes Shefford watched the corner where he and the others had
escaped from that murderous volley. But Shadd did not come.

The sun had lost its warmth and was tipping the lofty mesa to his
right. Soon twilight would make travel on those walls more perilous
and darkness would make it impossible. Shadd must hurry or abandon the
pursuit for that day. Shefford found himself grimly hopeful.

Suddenly he heard the click of hoofs. It came, faint yet clear, on the
still air. He glued his sight upon that corner where he expected the
pursuers to appear. More cracks of hoofs pierced his ear, clearer and
sharper this time. Presently he gathered that they could not possibly
come from beyond the corner he was watching. So he looked far to the
left of that place, seeing no one, then far to the right. Out over a
bulge of stone he caught sight of the bobbing head of a horse--then
another--and still another.

He was astounded. Shadd had gone below that place where the attack had
been made and he had come up this steep slope. More horses appeared--to
the number of eight. Shefford easily recognized a low, broad, squat
rider to be Shadd. Assuredly the Piute did not know this country.
Possibly, however, he had feared an ambush. But Shefford grew convinced
that Shadd had not expected an ambush, or at least did not fear it, and
had mistaken the Indian's course. Moreover, if he led his gang a few
rods farther up that slope he would do worse than make a mistake--he
would be facing a double peril.

What fearless horsemen these Indians were! Shadd was mounted, as were
three others of his gang. Evidently the white men, the outlaws, were the
ones on foot. Shefford thrilled and his veins stung when he saw these
pursuers come passing what he considered the danger mark. But manifestly
they could not see their danger. Assuredly they were aware of the chasm;
however, the level upon which they were advancing narrowed gradually,
and they could not tell that very soon they could not go any farther nor
could they turn back. The alternative was to climb the slope, and that
was a desperate chance.

They came up, now about on a level with Shefford, and perhaps three
hundred yards distant. He gripped his rifle with a fatal assurance that
he could kill one of them now. Still he waited. Curiosity consumed
him because every foot they advanced heightened their peril. Shefford
wondered if Shadd would have chosen that course if he had not supposed
the Navajo had chosen it first. It was plain that one of the walking
Piutes stooped now and then to examine the rock. He was looking for some
faint sign of a horse track.

Shadd halted within two hundred yards of where Shefford lay hidden. His
keen eye had caught the significance of the narrowing level before he
had reached the end. He pointed and spoke. Shefford heard his voice.
The others replied. They all looked up at the steep slope, down into
the chasm right below them, and across into the cedars. The Piute in the
rear succeeded in turning his horse, went back, and began to circle
up the slope. The others entered into an argument and they became more
closely grouped upon the narrow bench. Their mustangs were lean, wiry,
wild, vicious, and Shefford calculated grimly upon what a stampede might
mean in that position.

Then Shadd turned his mustang up the slope. Like a goat he climbed.
Another Indian in the rear succeeded in pivoting his steed and started
back, apparently to circle round and up. The others of the gang appeared
uncertain. They yelled hoarsely at Shadd, who halted on the steep slant
some twenty paces above them. He spoke and made motions that evidently
meant the climb was easy enough. It looked easy for him. His dark face
flashed red in the rays of the sun.

At this critical moment Shefford decided to fire. He meant to kill
Shadd, hoping if the leader was gone the others would abandon the
pursuit. The rifle wavered a little as he aimed, then grew still. He
fired. Shadd never flinched. But the fiery mustang, perhaps wounded,
certainly terrified, plunged down with piercing, horrid scream. Shadd
fell under him. Shrill yells rent the air. Like a thunderbolt the
sliding horse was upon men and animals below.

A heavy shock, wild snorts, upflinging heads and hoofs, a terrible
tramping, thudding, shrieking melee, then a brown, twisting, tangled
mass shot down the slant over the rim!

Shefford dazedly thought he saw men running. He did see plunging horses.
One slipped, fell, rolled, and went into the chasm.

Then up from the depths came a crash, a long, slipping roar. In another
instant there was a lighter crash and a lighter sliding roar.

Two horses, shaking, paralyzed with fear, were left upon the narrow
level. Beyond them a couple of men were crawling along the stone. Up
on the level stood the two Indians, holding down frightened horses, and
staring at the fatal slope.

And Shefford lay there under the cedar, in the ghastly grip of the
moment, hardly comprehending that his ill-aimed shot had been a
thunderbolt.

He did not think of shooting at the Piutes; they, however, recovering
from their shock, evidently feared the ambush, for they swiftly drew up
the slope and passed out of sight. The frightened horses below whistled
and tramped along the lower level, finally vanishing. There was nothing
left on the bare wall to prove to Shefford that it had been the scene
of swift and tragic death. He leaned from his covert and peered over the
rim. Hundreds of feet below he saw dark growths of pinyons. There was no
sign of a pile of horses and men, and then he realized that he could not
tell the number that had perished. The swift finale had been as stunning
to him as if lightning had struck near him.

Suddenly it flashed over him what state of suspense and torture Fay and
Jane must be in at that very moment. And, leaping up, he ran out of the
cedars to the slope behind and hurried down at risk of limb. The sun had
set by this time. He hoped he could catch up with the party before dark.
He went straight down, and the end of the slope was a smooth, low wall.
The Indian must have descended with the horses at some other point. The
cañon was about fifty yards wide and it headed under the great slope of
Navajo Mountain. These smooth, rounded walls appeared to end at its low
rim.

Shefford slid down upon a grassy bank, and finding the tracks of the
horses, he followed them. They led along the wall. As soon as he had
assured himself that Nas Ta Bega had gone down the cañon he abandoned
the tracks and pushed ahead swiftly. He heard the soft rush of running
water. In the center of the cañon wound heavy lines of bright-green
foliage, bordering a rocky brook. The air was close, warm, and sweet
with perfume of flowers. The walls were low and shelving, and soon lost
that rounded appearance peculiar to the wind-worn slopes above. Shefford
came to where the horses had plowed down a gravelly bank into the clear,
swift water of the brook. The little pools of water were still muddy.
Shefford drank, finding the water cold and sweet, without the bitter
bite of alkali. He crossed and pushed on, running on the grassy levels.
Flowers were everywhere, but he did not notice them particularly. The
cañon made many leisurely turns, and its size, if it enlarged at all,
was not perceptible to him yet. The rims above him were perhaps fifty
feet high. Cottonwood-trees began to appear along the brook, and
blossoming buck-brush in the corners of wall.

He had traveled perhaps a mile when Nas Ta Bega, appearing to come out
of the thicket, confronted him.

"Hello!" called Shefford. "Where're Fay--and the others?"

The Indian made a gesture that signified the rest of the party were
beyond a little way. Shefford took Nas Ta Bega's arm, and as they
walked, and he panted for breath, he told what had happened back on the
slopes.

The Indian made one of his singular speaking sweeps of hand, and he
scrutinized Shefford's face, but he received the news in silence. They
turned a corner of wall, crossed a wide, shallow, boulder-strewn place
in the brook, and mounted the bank to a thicket. Beyond this, from a
clump of cottonwoods, Lassiter strode out with a gun in each hand. He
had been hiding.

"Shore I'm glad to see you," he said, and the eyes that piercingly fixed
on Shefford were now as keen as formerly they had been mild.

"Gone! Lassiter--they're gone," broke out Shefford. "Where's Fay--and
Jane?"

Lassiter called, and presently the women came out of the thick brake,
and Fay bounded forward with her swift stride, while Jane followed with
eager step and anxious face. Then they all surrounded Shefford.

"It was Shadd--and his gang," panted Shefford. "Eight in all. Three or
four Piutes--the others outlaws. They lost track of us. Went below the
place--where they shot at us. And they came up--on a bad slope."

Shefford described the slope and the deep chasm and how Shadd led up to
the point where he saw his mistake and then how the catastrophe fell.

"I shot--and missed," repeated Shefford, with the sweat in beads on
his pale face. "I missed Shadd. Maybe I hit the horse. He
plunged--reared--fell back--a terrible fall--right upon that bunch of
horses and men below.... In a horrible, wrestling, screaming tangle they
slid over the rim! I don't know how many. I saw some men running along.
I saw three other horses plunging. One slipped and went over. ... I have
no idea how many, but Shadd and some of his gang went to destruction."

"Shore thet's fine!" said Lassiter. "But mebbe I won't get to use them
guns, after all."

"Hardly on that gang," laughed Shefford. "The two Piutes and what others
escaped turned back. Maybe they'll meet a posse of Mormons--for of
course the Mormons will track us, too--and come back to where Shadd
lost his life. That's an awful place. Even the Piute got lost--couldn't
follow Nas Ta Bega. It would take any pursuers some time to find how we
got in here. I believe we need not fear further pursuit. Certainly not
to-night or to-morrow. Then we'll be far down the cañon."

When Shefford concluded his earnest remarks the faces of Fay and Jane
had lost the signs of suppressed dread.

"Nas Ta Bega, make camp here," said Shefford. "Water--wood--grass--why,
this 's something like.... Fay, how's your arm?"

"It hurts," she replied, simply.

"Come with me down to the brook and let me wash and bind it properly."

They went, and she sat upon a stone while he knelt beside her and untied
his scarf from her arm. As the blood had hardened, it was necessary to
slit her sleeve to the shoulder. Using his scarf, he washed the blood
from the wound, and found it to be merely a cut, a groove, on the
surface.

"That's nothing," Shefford said, lightly. "It'll heal in a day. But
there'll always be a scar. And when we--we get back to civilization,
and you wear a pretty gown without sleeves, people will wonder what made
this mark on your beautiful arm."

Fay looked at him with wonderful eyes. "Do women wear gowns without
sleeves?" she asked.

"They do."

"Have I a--beautiful arm?"

She stretched it out, white, blue-veined, the skin fine as satin, the
lines graceful and flowing, a round, firm, strong arm.

"The most beautiful I ever saw," he replied.

But the pleasure his compliment gave her was not communicated to him.
His last impression of that right arm had been of its strength, and
his mind flashed with lightning swiftness to a picture that haunted
him--Waggoner lying dead on the porch with that powerfully driven knife
in his breast. Shefford shuddered through all his being. Would this
phantom come often to him like that? Hurriedly he bound up her arm with
the scarf and did not look at her, and was conscious that she felt a
subtle change in him.

The short twilight ended with the fugitives comfortable in a camp that
for natural features could not have been improved upon. Darkness found
Fay and Jane asleep on a soft mossy bed, a blanket tucked around them,
and their faces still and beautiful in the flickering camp-fire light.
Lassiter did not linger long awake. Nas Ta Bega, seeing Shefford's
excessive fatigue, urged him to sleep. Shefford demurred, insisting that
he share the night-watch. But Nas Ta Bega, by agreeing that Shefford
might have the following night's duty, prevailed upon him.

Shefford seemed to shut his eyes upon darkness and to open them
immediately to the light. The stream of blue sky above, the gold tints
on the western rim, the rosy, brightening colors down in the cañon,
were proofs of the sunrise. This morning Nas Ta Bega proceeded
leisurely, and his manner was comforting. When all was in readiness
for a start he gave the mustang he had ridden to Shefford, and walked,
leading the pack-animal.

The mode of travel here was a selection of the best levels, the best
places to cross the brook, the best banks to climb, and it was a process
of continual repetition. As the Indian picked out the course and the
mustangs followed his lead there was nothing for Shefford to do but take
his choice between reflection that seemed predisposed toward gloom and
an absorption in the beauty, color, wildness, and changing character of
Nonnezoshe Boco.

Assuredly his experience in the desert did not count in it a trip down
into a strange, beautiful, lost cañon such as this. It did not widen,
though the walls grew higher. They began to lean and bulge, and the
narrow strip of sky above resembled a flowing blue river. Huge caverns
had been hollowed out by some work of nature, what, he could not tell,
though he was sure it could not have been wind. And when the brook ran
close under one of these overhanging places the running water made a
singular, indescribable sound. A crack from a hoof on a stone rang like
a hollow bell and echoed from wall to wall. And the croak of a frog--the
only living creature he had so far noted in the cañon--was a weird and
melancholy thing.

Fay rode close to him, and his heart seemed to rejoice when she spoke,
when she showed how she wanted to be near him, yet, try as he might,
he could not respond. His speech to her--what little there was--did
not come spontaneously. And he suffered a remorse that he could not be
honestly natural to her. Then he would drive away the encroaching gloom,
trusting that a little time would dispel it.

"We are deeper down than Surprise Valley," said Fay.

"How do you know?" he asked.

"Here are the pink and yellow sago-lilies. You remember we went once to
find the white ones? I have found white lilies in Surprise Valley, but
never any pink or yellow."

Shefford had seen flowers all along the green banks, but he had not
marked the lilies. Here he dismounted and gathered several. They were
larger than the white ones of higher altitudes, of the same exquisite
beauty and fragility, of such rare pink and yellow hues as he had never
seen. He gave the flowers to Fay.

"They bloom only where it's always summer," she said.

That expressed their nature. They were the orchids of the summer cañon.
They stood up everywhere starlike out of the green. It was impossible
to prevent the mustangs treading them under hoof. And as the cañon
deepened, and many little springs added their tiny volume to the
brook, every grassy bench was dotted with lilies, like a green sky
star-spangled. And this increasing luxuriance manifested itself in the
banks of purple moss and clumps of lavender daisies and great clusters
of yellow violets. The brook was lined by blossoming buck-rush; the
rocky corners showed the crimson and magenta of cactus; ledges were
green with shining moss that sparkled with little white flowers. The hum
of bees filled the air.

But by and by this green and colorful and verdant beauty, the almost
level floor of the cañon, the banks of soft earth, the thickets and
the clumps of cotton-woods, the shelving caverns and the bulging
walls--these features gradually were lost, and Nonnezoshe Boco began to
deepen in bare red and white stone steps, the walls sheered away from
one another, breaking into sections and ledges, and rising higher and
higher, and there began to be manifested a dark and solemn concordance
with the nature that had created this rent in the earth.

There was a stretch of miles where steep steps in hard red rock
alternated with long levels of round boulders. Here one by one the
mustangs went lame. And the fugitives, dismounting to spare the faithful
beasts, slipped and stumbled over these loose and treacherous stones.
Fay was the only one who did not show distress. She was glad to be on
foot again and the rolling boulders were as stable as solid rock for
her.

The hours passed; the toil increased; the progress diminished; one
of the mustangs failed entirely and was left; and all the while the
dimensions of Nonnezoshe Boco magnified and its character changed. It
became a thousand-foot walled cañon, leaning, broken, threatening, with
great yellow slides blocking passage, with huge sections split off from
the main wall, with immense dark and gloomy caverns. Strangely, it had
no intersecting cañon. It jealously guarded its secret. Its unusual
formations of cavern and pillar and half-arch led the mind to expect any
monstrous stone-shape left by an avalanche or cataclysm.

Down and down the fugitives toiled. And now the stream-bed was bare of
boulders, and the banks of earth. The floods that had rolled down that
cañon had here borne away every loose thing. All the floor was bare red
and white stone, polished, glistening, slippery, affording treacherous
foothold. And the time came when Nas Ta Bega abandoned the stream-bed to
take to the rock-strewn and cactus-covered ledges above.

Jane gave out and had to be assisted upon the weary mustang. Fay was
persuaded to mount Nack-yal again. Lassiter plodded along. The Indian
bent tired steps far in front. And Shefford traveled on after him,
footsore and hot.

The cañon widened ahead into a great, ragged, iron-hued amphitheater,
and from there apparently turned abruptly at right angles. Sunset rimmed
the walls. Shefford wondered dully when the Indian would halt to camp.
And he dragged himself onward with eyes down on the rough ground.

When he raised them again the Indian stood on a point of slope with
folded arms, gazing down where the cañon veered. Something in Nas Ta
Bega's pose quickened Shefford's pulse and then his steps. He reached
the Indian and the point where he, too, could see beyond that vast
jutting wall that had obstructed his view.

A mile beyond all was bright with the colors of sunset, and spanning
the cañon in the graceful shape arid beautiful hues of a rainbow was a
magnificent stone bridge.

"Nonnezoshe!" exclaimed the Navajo, with a deep and sonorous roll in his
voice.




XVIII. AT THE FOOT OF THE RAINBOW


The rainbow bridge was the one great natural phenomenon, the one grand
spectacle, which Shefford had ever seen that did not at first give vague
disappointment, a confounding of reality, a disenchantment of contrast
with what the mind had conceived.

But this thing was glorious. It silenced him, yet did not awe or stun.
His body and brain, weary and dull from the toil of travel, received a
singular and revivifying freshness. He had a strange, mystic perception
of this rosy-hued stupendous arch of stone, as if in a former life
it had been a goal he could not reach. This wonder of nature, though
all-satisfying, all-fulfilling to his artist's soul, could not be a
resting-place for him, a destination where something awaited him, a
height he must scale to find peace, the end of his strife. But it seemed
all these. He could not understand his perception or his emotion. Still,
here at last, apparently, was the rainbow of his boyish dreams and of
his manhood--a rainbow magnified even beyond those dreams, no longer
transparent and ethereal, but solidified, a thing of ages, sweeping up
majestically from the red walls, its iris-hued arch against the blue
sky.

Nas Ta Bega led on down the ledge and Shefford plodded thoughtfully
after him. The others followed. A jutting corner of wall again hid the
cañon. The Indian was working round to circle the huge amphitheater. It
was slow, irritating, strenuous toil, for the way was on a steep slant,
rough and loose and dragging. The rocks were as hard and jagged as
lava. And the cactus further hindered progress. When at last the long
half-circle had been accomplished the golden and rosy lights had faded.

Again the cañon opened to view. All the walls were pale and steely and
the stone bridge loomed dark. Nas Ta Bega said camp would be made at
the bridge, which was now close. Just before they reached it the Navajo
halted with one of his singular actions. Then he stood motionless.
Shefford realized that Nas Ta Bega was saying his prayer to this great
stone god. Presently the Indian motioned for Shefford to lead the others
and the horses on under the bridge. Shefford did so, and, upon turning,
was amazed to see the Indian climbing the steep and difficult slope on
the other side. All the party watched him until he disappeared behind
the huge base of cliff that supported the arch. Shefford selected a
level place for camp, some few rods away, and here, with Lassiter,
unsaddled and unpacked the lame, drooping mustangs. When this was done
twilight had fallen. Nas Ta Bega appeared, coming down the steep slope
on this side of the bridge. Then Shefford divined why the Navajo had
made that arduous climb. He would not go under the bridge. Nonnezoshe
was a Navajo god. And Nas Ta Bega, though educated as a white man, was
true to the superstition of his ancestors.

Nas Ta Bega turned the mustangs loose to fare for what scant grass grew
on bench and slope. Firewood was even harder to find than grass. When
the camp duties had been performed and the simple meal eaten there was
gloom gathering in the cañon and the stars had begun to blink in the
pale strip of blue above the lofty walls. The place was oppressive and
the fugitives mostly silent. Shefford spread a bed of blankets for
the women, and Jane at once lay wearily down. Fay stood beside the
flickering fire, and Shefford felt her watching him. He was conscious of
a desire to get away from her haunting gaze. To the gentle good-night he
bade her she made no response.

Shefford moved away into a strange dark shadow cast by the bridge
against the pale starlight. It was a weird, black belt, where he
imagined he was invisible, but out of which he could see. There was a
slab of rock near the foot of the bridge, and here Shefford composed
himself to watch, to feel, to think the unknown thing that seemed to be
inevitably coming to him.

A slight stiffening of his neck made him aware that he had been
continually looking up at the looming arch. And he found that insensibly
it had changed and grown. It had never seemed the same any two moments,
but that was not what he meant. Near at hand it was too vast a thing for
immediate comprehension. He wanted to ponder on what had formed it--to
reflect upon its meaning as to age and force of nature, yet all he could
do at each moment was to see. White stars hung along the dark curved
line. The rim of the arch seemed to shine. The moon must be up there
somewhere. The far side of the cañon was now a blank, black wall. Over
its towering rim showed a pale glow. It brightened. The shades in the
cañon lightened, then a white disk of moon peered over the dark line.
The bridge turned to silver, and the gloomy, shadowy belt it had cast
blanched and vanished.

Shefford became aware of the presence of Nas Ta Bega. Dark, silent,
statuesque, with inscrutable eyes uplifted, with all that was spiritual
of the Indian suggested by a somber and tranquil knowledge of his place
there, he represented the same to Shefford as a solitary figure of
human life brought out the greatness of a great picture. Nonnezoshe Boco
needed life, wild life, life of its millions of years--and here stood
the dark and silent Indian.

There was a surge in Shefford's heart and in his mind a perception of a
moment of incalculable change to his soul. And at that moment Fay Larkin
stole like a phantom to his side and stood there with her uncovered head
shining and her white face lovely in the moonlight.

"May I stay with you--a little?" she asked, wistfully. "I can't sleep."

"Surely you may," he replied. "Does your arm hurt too badly, or are you
too tired to sleep?"

"No--it's this place. I--I--can't tell you how I feel."

But the feeling was there in her eyes for Shefford to read. Had he too
great an emotion--did he read too much--did he add from his soul? For
him the wild, starry, haunted eyes mirrored all that he had seen and
felt under Nonnezoshe. And for herself they shone eloquently of courage
and love.

"I need to talk--and I don't know how," she said.

He was silent, but he took her hands and drew her closer.

"Why are you so--so different?" she asked, bravely.

"Different?" he echoed.

"Yes. You are kind--you speak the same to me as you used to. But since
we started you've been different, somehow."

"Fay, think how hard and dangerous the trip's been! I've been
worried--and sick with dread--with--Oh, you can't imagine the strain I'm
under! How could I be my old self?"

"It isn't worry I mean."

He was too miserable to try to find out what she did mean; besides, he
believed, if he let himself think about it, he would know what troubled
her.

"I--I am almost happy," she said, softly.

"Fay!... Aren't you at all afraid?"

"No. You'll take care of me.... Do--do you love me--like you did
before?"

"Why, child! Of course--I love you," he replied, brokenly, and he drew
her closer. He had never embraced her, never kissed her. But there was
a whiteness about her then--a wraith--a something from her soul, and he
could only gaze at her.

"I love you," she whispered. "I thought I knew it that--that night. But
I'm only finding it out now.... And somehow I had to tell you here."

"Fay, I haven't said much to you," he said, hurriedly, huskily. "I
haven't had a chance. I love you. I--I ask you--will you be my wife?"

"Of course," she said, simply, but the white, moon-blanched face colored
with a dark and leaping blush.

"We'll be married as soon as we get out of the desert," he went on. "And
we'll forget--all--all that's happened. You're so young. You'll forget."

"I'd forgotten already, till this difference came in you. And pretty
soon--when I can say something more to you--I'll forget all except
Surprise Valley--and my evenings in the starlight with you."

"Say it then--quick!"

She was leaning against him, holding his hands in her strong clasp,
soulful, tender, almost passionate.

"You couldn't help it.... I'm to blame.... I remember what I said."

"What?" he queried in amaze.

"'YOU CAN KILL HIM!'... I said that. I made you kill him."

"Kill--whom?" cried Shefford.

"Waggoner. I'm to blame.... That must be what's made you different.
And, oh, I've wanted you to know it's all my fault.... But I wouldn't be
sorry if you weren't.... I'm glad he's dead."

"YOU--THINK--I--" Shefford's gasping whisper failed in the shock of
the revelation that Fay believed he had killed Waggoner. Then with the
inference came the staggering truth--her guiltlessness; and a paralyzing
joy held him stricken.

A powerful hand fell upon Shefford's shoulder, startling him. Nas Ta
Bega stood there, looking down upon him and Fay. Never had the Indian
seemed so dark, inscrutable of face. But in his magnificent bearing, in
the spirit that Shefford sensed in him, there were nobility and power
and a strange pride.

The Indian kept one hand on Shefford's shoulder, and with the other
he struck himself on the breast. The action was that of an Indian,
impressive and stern, significant of an Indian's prowess.

"My God!" breathed Shefford, very low.

"Oh, what does he mean?" cried Fay.

Shefford held her with shaking hands, trying to speak, to fight a way
out of these stultifying emotions.

"Nas Ta Bega--you heard. She thinks--I killed Waggoner!"

All about the Navajo then was dark and solemn disproof of her belief.
He did not need to speak. His repetition of that savage, almost boastful
blow on his breast added only to the dignity, and not to the denial, of
a warrior.

"Fay, he means he killed the Mormon," said Shefford. "He must have, for
_I_ did not!"

"Ah!" murmured Fay, and she leaned to him with passionate, quivering
gladness. It was the woman--the human--the soul born in her that came
uppermost then; now, when there was no direct call to the wild and
elemental in her nature, she showed a heart above revenge, the instinct
of a saving right, of truth as Shefford knew them. He took her into his
arms and never had he loved her so well.

"Nas Ta Bega, you killed the Mormon," declared Shefford, with a voice
that had gained strength. No silent Indian suggestion of a deed would
suffice in that moment. Shefford needed to hear the Navajo speak--to
have Fay hear him speak. "Nas Ta Bega, I know I understand. But tell
her. Speak so she will know. Tell it as a white man would!"

"I heard her cry out," replied the Indian, in his slow English. "I
waited. When he came I killed him."

A poignant why was wrenched from Shefford. Nas Ta Bega stood silent.

"BI NAI!" And when that sonorous Indian name rolled in dignity from his
lips he silently stalked away into the gloom. That was his answer to the
white man.

Shefford bent over Fay, and as the strain on him broke he held her
closer and closer and his tears streamed down and his voice broke in
exclamations of tenderness and thanksgiving. It did not matter what she
had thought, but she must never know what he had thought. He clasped
her as something precious he had lost and regained. He was shaken with
a passion of remorse. How could he have believed Fay Larkin guilty of
murder? Women less wild and less justified than she had been driven to
such a deed, yet how could he have believed it of her, when for two days
he had been with her, had seen her face, and deep into her eyes? There
was mystery in his very blindness. He cast the whole thought from him
for ever. There was no shadow between Fay and him. He had found her.
He had saved her. She was free. She was innocent. And suddenly, as he
seemed delivered from contending tumults within, he became aware that it
was no unresponsive creature he had folded to his breast.

He became suddenly alive to the warm, throbbing contact of her bosom, to
her strong arms clinging round his neck, to her closed eyes, to the rapt
whiteness of her face. And he bent to cold lips that seemed to receive
his first kisses as new and strange; but tremulously changed, at last to
meet his own, and then to burn with sweet and thrilling fire.

"My darling, my dream's come true," he said. "You are my treasure. I
found you here at the foot of the rainbow!... What if it is a stone
rainbow--if all is not as I had dreamed? I followed a gleam. And it's
led me to love and faith!"

. . . . . . . . . . .

Hours afterward Shefford walked alone to and fro under the bridge. His
trouble had given place to serenity. But this night of nights he must
live out wide-eyed to its end.

The moon had long since crossed the streak of star-fired blue above and
the cañon was black in shadow. At times a current of wind, with all the
strangeness of that strange country in its hollow moan, rushed through
the great stone arch. At other times there was silence such as Shefford
imagined dwelt deep under this rocky world. At still other times an owl
hooted, and the sound was nameless. But it had a mocking echo that
never ended. An echo of night, silence, gloom, melancholy death, age,
eternity!

The Indian lay asleep with his dark face upturned, and the other
sleepers lay calm and white in the starlight.

Shefford saw in them the meaning of life and the past--the illimitable
train of faces that had shone the stars. There was a spirit in the
cañon, and whether or not it was what the Navajo embodied in the great
Nonnezoshe, or the life of this present, or the death of the ages, or
the nature so magnificently manifested in those silent, dreaming waiting
walls--the truth for Shefford was that this spirit was God.

Life was eternal. Man's immortality lay in himself. Love of a woman was
hope--happiness. Brotherhood--that mystic and grand "Bi Nai!" of the
Navajo--that was religion.




XIX. THE GRAND CANYON OF THE COLORADO


The night passed, the gloom turned gray, the dawn stole cool and pale
into the cañon. When Nas Ta Bega drove the mustangs into camp the
lofty ramparts of the walls were rimmed with gold and the dark arch of
Nonnezoshe began to lose its steely gray.

The women had rested well and were in better condition to travel. Jane
was cheerful and Fay radiant one moment and in a dream the next. She was
beginning to live in that wonderful future. They talked more than usual
at breakfast, and Lassiter made droll remarks. Shefford, with his great
and haunting trouble ended for ever, with now only danger to face ahead,
was a different man, but thoughtful and quiet.

This morning the Indian leisurely made preparations for the start. For
all the concern he showed he might have known every foot of the cañon
below Nonnezoshe. But, for Shefford, with the dawn had returned anxiety,
a restless feeling of the need of hurry. What obstacles, what impassable
gorges, might lie between this bridge and the river! The Indian's
inscrutable serenity and Fay's trust, her radiance, the exquisite glow
upon her face, sustained Shefford and gave him patience to endure and
conceal his dread.

At length the flight was resumed, with Nas Ta Bega leading on foot, and
Shefford walking in the rear. A quarter of a mile below camp the Indian
led down a declivity into the bottom of the narrow gorge, where the
stream ran. He did not gaze backward for a last glance at Nonnezoshe;
nor did Jane or Lassiter. Fay, however, checked Nack-yal at the rim of
the descent and turned to look behind. Shefford contrasted her tremulous
smile, her half-happy good-by to this place, with the white stillness
of her face when she had bade farewell to Surprise Valley. Then she rode
Nack-yal down into the gorge.

Shefford knew that this would be his last look at the rainbow bridge. As
he gazed the tip of the great arch lost its cold, dark stone color and
began to shine. The sun had just arisen high enough over some low break
in the wall to reach the bridge. Shefford watched. Slowly, in wondrous
transformation, the gold and blue and rose and pink and purple blended
their hues, softly, mistily, cloudily, until once again the arch was a
rainbow.

Ages before life had evolved upon the earth it had spread its grand arch
from wall to wall, black and mystic at night, transparent and rosy in
the sunrise, at sunset a flaming curve limned against the heavens. When
the race of man had passed it would, perhaps, stand there still. It was
not for many eyes to see. Only by toil, sweat, endurance, blood, could
any man ever look at Nonnezoshe. So it would always be alone, grand,
silent, beautiful, unintelligible.

Shefford bade Nonnezoshe a mute, reverent farewell. Then plunging down
the weathered slope of the gorge to the stream below, he hurried forward
to join the others. They had progressed much farther than he imagined
they would have, and this was owing to the fact that the floor of the
gorge afforded easy travel. It was gravel on rock bottom, tortuous, but
open, with infrequent and shallow downward steps. The stream did not now
rush and boil along and tumble over rock-encumbered ledges. In corners
the water collected in round, green, eddying pools. There were patches
of grass and willows and mounds of moss. Shefford's surprise equaled his
relief, for he believed that the violent descent of Nonnezoshe Boco had
been passed. Any turn now, he imagined, might bring the party out upon
the river. When he caught up with them he imparted this conviction,
which was received with cheer. The hopes of all, except the Indian,
seemed mounting; and if he ever hoped or despaired it was never
manifest.

Shefford's anticipation, however, was not soon realized. The fugitives
traveled miles farther down Nonnezoshe Boco, and the only changes were
that the walls of the lower gorge heightened and merged into those above
and that these upper ones towered ever loftier. Shefford had to throw
his head straight back to look up at the rims, and the narrow strip of
sky was now indeed a flowing stream of blue.

Difficult steps were met, too, yet nothing compared to those of the
upper cañon. Shefford calculated that this day's travel had advanced
several hours; and more than ever now he was anticipating the mouth
of Nonnezoshe Boco. Still another hour went by. And then came striking
changes. The cañon narrowed till the walls were scarcely twenty paces
apart; the color of stone grew dark red above and black down low; the
light of day became shadowed, and the floor was a level, gravelly,
winding lane, with the stream meandering slowly and silently.

Suddenly the Indian halted. He turned his ear down the cañon lane. He
had heard something. The others grouped round him, but did not hear a
sound except the soft flow of water and the heave of the mustangs. Then
the Indian went on. Presently he halted again. And again he listened.
This time he threw up his head and upon his dark face shone a light
which might have been pride.

"Tse ko-n-tsa-igi," he said.

The others could not understand, but they were impressed.

"Shore he means somethin' big," drawled Lassiter.

"Oh, what did he say?" queried Fay in eagerness.

"Nas Ta Bega, tell us," said Shefford. "We are full of hope."

"Grand Cañon," replied the Indian.

"How do you know?" asked Shefford.

"I hear the roar of the river."

But Shefford, listen as he might, could not hear it. They traveled on,
winding down the wonderful lane. Every once in a while Shefford lagged
behind, let the others pass out of hearing, and then he listened. At
last he was rewarded. Low and deep, dull and strange, with some quality
to incite dread, came a roar. Thereafter, at intervals, usually at turns
in the cañon, and when a faint stir of warm air fanned his cheeks, he
heard the sound, growing clearer and louder.

He rounded an abrupt corner to have the roar suddenly fill his ears, to
see the lane extend straight to a ragged vent, and beyond that, at some
distance, a dark, ragged, bulging wall, like iron. As he hurried forward
he was surprised to find that the noise did not increase. Here it kept
a strange uniformity of tone and volume. The others of the party passed
out of the mouth of Nonnezoshe Boco in advance of Shefford, and when
he reached it they were grouped upon a bank of sand. A dark-red cañon
yawned before them, and through it slid the strangest river Shefford had
ever seen. At first glance he imagined the strangeness consisted of the
dark-red color of the water, but at the second he was not so sure. All
the others, except Nas Ta Bega, eyed the river blankly, as if they did
not know what to think. The roar came from round a huge bulging wall
downstream. Up the cañon, half a mile, at another turn, there was a
leaping rapid of dirty red-white waves and the sound of this, probably,
was drowned in the unseen but nearer rapid.

"This is the Grand Cañon of the Colorado," said Shefford. "We've come
out at the mouth of Nonnezoshe Boco.... And now to wait for Joe Lake!"

They made camp on a dry, level sand-bar under a shelving wall. Nas Ta
Bega collected a pile of driftwood to be used for fire, and then he took
the mustangs back up the side cañon to find grass for them. Lassiter
appeared unusually quiet, and soon passed from weary rest on the sand
to deep slumber. Fay and Jane succumbed to an exhaustion that manifested
itself the moment relaxation set in, and they, too, fell asleep.
Shefford patrolled the long strip of sand under the wall, and watched
up the river for Joe Lake. The Indian returned and went along the river,
climbed over the jutting, sharp slopes that reached into the water, and
passed out of sight up-stream toward the rapid.

Shefford had a sense that the river and the cañon were too magnificent
to be compared with others. Still, all his emotions and sensations had
been so wrought upon, he seemed not to have any left by which he might
judge of what constituted the difference. He would wait. He had a grim
conviction that before he was safely out of this earth-riven crack
he would know. One thing, however, struck him, and it was that up the
cañon, high over the lower walls, hazy and blue, stood other walls,
and beyond and above them, dim in purple distance, upreared still other
walls. The haze and the blue and the purple meant great distance, and,
likewise, the height seemed incomparable.

The red river attracted him most. Since this was the medium by which he
must escape with his party, it was natural that it absorbed him, to
the neglect of the gigantic cliffs. And the more he watched the
river, studied it, listened to it, imagined its nature, its power, its
restlessness, the more he dreaded it. As the hours of the afternoon
wore away, and he strolled along and rested on the banks, his first
impressions, and what he realized might be his truest ones, were
gradually lost. He could not bring them back. The river was changing,
deceitful. It worked upon his mind. The low, hollow roar filled his ears
and seemed to mock him. Then he endeavored to stop thinking about it,
to confine his attention to the gap up-stream where sooner or later
he prayed that Joe Lake and his boat would appear. But, though he
controlled his gaze, he could not his thought, and his strange,
impondering dread of the river augmented.

The afternoon waned. Nas Ta Bega came back to camp and said any
likelihood of Joe's arrival was past for that day. Shefford could not
get over an impression of strangeness--of the impossibility of the
reality presented to his naked eyes. These lonely fugitives in the
huge-walled cañon waiting for a boatman to come down that river!
Strange and wild--those were the words which, inadequately at best,
suited this country and the situations it produced.

After supper he and Fay walked along the bars of smooth, red sand. There
were a few moments when the distant peaks and domes and turrets were
glorified in changing sunset hues. But the beauty was fleeting. Fay
still showed lassitude. She was quiet, yet cheerful, and the sweetness
of her smile, her absolute trust in him, stirred and strengthened anew
his spirit. Yet he suffered torture when he thought of trusting Fay's
life, her soul, and her beauty to this strange red river.

Night brought him relief. He could not see the river; only the low roar
made its presence known out there in the shadows. And, there being no
need to stay awake, he dropped at once into heavy slumber. He was
roused by hands dragging at him. Nas Ta Bega bent over him. It was
broad daylight. The yellow wall high above was glistening. A fire
was crackling and pleasant odors were wafted to him. Fay and Jane and
Lassiter sat around the tarpaulin at breakfast. After the meal suspense
and strain were manifested in all the fugitives, even the imperturbable
Indian being more than usually watchful. His eyes scarcely ever left
the black gap where the river slid round the turn above. Soon, as on the
preceding day, he disappeared up the ragged, iron-bound shore. There was
scarcely an attempt at conversation. A controlling thought bound that
group into silence--if Joe Lake was ever going to come he would come
to-day.

Shefford asked himself a hundred times if it were possible, and his
answer seemed to be in the low, sullen, muffled roar of the river. And
as the morning wore on toward noon his dread deepened until all chance
appeared hopeless. Already he had begun to have vague and unformed
and disquieting ideas of the only avenue of escape left--to return up
Nonnezoshe Boco--and that would be to enter a trap.

Suddenly a piercing cry pealed down the cañon. It was followed by
echoes, weird and strange, that clapped from wall to wall in mocking
concatenation. Nas Ta Bega appeared high on the ragged slope. The cry
had been the Indian's. He swept an arm out, pointing up-stream, and
stood like a statue on the iron rocks.

Shefford's keen gaze sighted a moving something in the bend of the
river. It was long, low, dark, and flat, with a lighter object upright
in the middle. A boat and a man!

"Joe! It's Joe!" yelled Shefford, madly. "There!... Look!"

Jane and Fay were on their knees in the sand, clasping each other, pale
faces toward that bend in the river.

Shefford ran up the shore toward the Indian. He climbed the jutting
slant of rock. The boat was now full in the turn--it moved faster--it
was nearing the smooth incline above the rapid. There! it glided
down--heaved darkly up--settled back--and disappeared in the frothy,
muddy roughness of water. Shefford held his breath and watched. A dark,
bobbing object showed, vanished, showed again to enlarge--to take the
shape of a big flatboat--and then it rode the swift, choppy current out
of the lower end of the rapid.

Nas Ta Bega began to make violent motions, and Shefford, taking his cue,
frantically waved his red scarf. There was a five-mile-an-hour current
right before them, and Joe must needs see them so that he might sheer
the huge and clumsy craft into the shore before it drifted too far down.

Presently Joe did see them. He appeared to be half-naked; he raised
aloft both arms, and bellowed down the cañon. The echoes boomed from
wall to wall, every one stronger with the deep, hoarse triumph in the
Mormon's voice, till they passed on, growing weaker, to die away in the
roar of the river below. Then Joe bent to a long oar that appeared to
be fastened to the stern of the boat, and the craft drifted out of the
swifter current toward the shore. It reached a point opposite to where
Shefford and the Indian waited, and, though Joe made prodigious efforts,
it slid on. Still, it also drifted shoreward, and half-way down to the
mouth of Nonnezoshe Boco Joe threw the end of a rope to the Indian.

"Ho! Ho!" yelled the Mormon, again setting into motion the fiendish
echoes. He was naked to the waist; he had lost flesh; he was haggard,
worn, dirty, wet. While he pulled on a shirt Nas Ta Bega made the rope
fast to a snag of a log of driftwood embedded in the sand, and the boat
swung to shore. It was perhaps thirty feet long by half as many wide,
crudely built of rough-hewn boards. The steering-gear was a long pole
with a plank nailed to the end. The craft was empty save for another
pole and plank, Joe's coat, and a broken-handled shovel. There were
water and sand on the flooring. Joe stepped ashore and he was gripped
first by Shefford and then by the Indian. He was an unkempt and gaunt
giant, yet how steadfast and reliable, how grimly strong to inspire
hope!

"Reckon most of me's here," he said in reply to greetings. "I've had
water aplenty. My God! I've had WATER!" He rolled out a grim laugh. "But
no grub for three days.... Forgot to fetch some!"

How practical he was! He told Fay she looked good for sore eyes, but
he needed a biscuit most of all. There was just a second of singular
hesitation when he faced Lassiter, and then the big, strong hand of the
young Mormon went out to meet the old gunman's. While they fed him and
he ate like a starved man Shefford told of the flight from the village,
the rescuing of Jane and Lassiter from Surprise Valley, the descent from
the plateau, the catastrophe to Shadd's gang--and, concluding, Shefford,
without any explanation, told that Nas Ta Bega had killed the Mormon
Waggoner.

"Reckon I had that figured," replied Joe. "First off. I didn't think
so.... So Shadd went over the cliff. That's good riddance. It beats me,
though. Never knew that Piute's like with a horse. And he had some grand
horses in his outfit. Pity about them."

Later when Joe had a moment alone with Shefford he explained that during
his ride to Kayenta he had realized Fay's innocence and who had been
responsible for the tragedy. He took Withers, the trader, into his
confidence, and they planned a story, which Withers was to carry to
Stonebridge, that would exculpate Fay and Shefford of anything more
serious than flight. If Shefford got Fay safely out of the country at
once that would end the matter for all concerned.

"Reckon I'm some ferry-boatman, too--a FAIRY boatman. Haw! Haw!" he
added. "And we're going through.... Now I want you to help me rig this
tarpaulin up over the bow of the boat. If we can fix it up strong it'll
keep the waves from curling over. They filled her four times for me."

They folded the tarpaulin three times, and with stout pieces of split
plank and horseshoe nails from Shefford's saddle-bags and pieces of rope
they rigged up a screen around bow and front corners.

Nas Ta Bega put the saddles in the boat. The mustangs were far up
Nonnezoshe Boco and would work their way back to green and luxuriant
canyons. The Indian said they would soon become wild and would never
be found. Shefford regretted Nack-yal, but was glad the faithful little
mustang would be free in one of those beautiful canyons.

"Reckon we'd better be off," called Joe. "All aboard!" He placed Fay
and Jane in a corner of the bow, where they would be spared sight of the
rapids. Shefford loosed the rope and sprang aboard. "Pard," said Joe,
"it's one hell of a river! And now with the snow melting up in the
mountains it's twenty feet above normal and rising fast. But that's well
for us. It covers the stones in the rapids. If it hadn't been in flood
Joe would be an angel now!"

The boat cleared the sand, lazily wheeled in the eddying water, and
suddenly seemed caught by some powerful gliding force. When it swept
out beyond the jutting wall Shefford saw a quarter of a mile of sliding
water that appeared to end abruptly. Beyond lengthened out the gigantic
gap between the black and frowning cliffs.

"Wow!" ejaculated Joe. "Drops out of sight there. But that one
ain't much. I can tell by the roar. When you see my hair stand up
straight--then watch out!... Lassiter, you look after the women.
Shefford, you stand ready to bail out with the shovel, for we'll sure
ship water. Nas Ta Bega, you help here with the oar."

The roar became a heavy, continuous rumble; the current quickened;
little streaks and ridges seemed to race along the boat; strange
gurglings rose from under the bow. Shefford stood on tiptoe to see the
break in the river below. Swiftly it came into sight--a wonderful, long,
smooth, red slant of water, a swelling mound, a huge back-curling wave,
another and another, a sea of frothy, uplifting crests, leaping and
tumbling and diminishing down to the narrowing apex of the rapid. It was
a frightful sight, yet it thrilled Shefford. Joe worked the steering-oar
back and forth and headed the boat straight for the middle of the
incline. The boat reached the round rim, gracefully dipped with a heavy
sop, and went shooting down. The wind blew wet in Shefford's face. He
stood erect, thrilling, fascinated, frightened. Then he seemed to feel
himself lifted; the curling wave leaped at the boat; there was a shock
that laid him flat; and when he rose to his knees all about him was roar
and spray and leaping, muddy waves. Shock after shock jarred the boat.
Splashes of water stung his face. And then the jar and the motion, the
confusion and roar, gradually lessened until presently Shefford rose to
see smooth water ahead and the long, trembling rapid behind.

"Get busy, bailer," yelled Joe. "Pretty soon you'll be glad you have to
bail--so you can't see!"

There were several inches of water in the bottom of the boat and
Shefford learned for the first time the expediency of a shovel in the
art of bailing.

"That tarpaulin worked powerful good," went on Joe. "And it saves the
women. Now if it just don't bust on a big wave! That one back there was
little."

When Shefford had scooped out all the water he went forward to see how
Fay and Jane and Lassiter had fared. The women were pale, but composed.
They had covered their heads.

"But the dreadful roar!" exclaimed Fay.

Lassiter looked shaken for once.

"Shore I'd rather taken a chance meetin' them Mormons on the way out,"
he said.

Shefford spoke with an encouraging assurance which he did not himself
feel. Almost at the moment he marked a silence that had fallen into the
cañon; then it broke to a low, dull, strange roar.

"Aha! Hear that?" The Mormon shook his shaggy head. "Reckon we're in
Cataract Cañon. We'll be standing on end from now on. Hang on to her,
boys!"

Danger of this unusual kind had brought out a peculiar levity in the
somber Mormon--a kind of wild, gay excitement. His eyes rolled as he
watched the river ahead and he puffed out his cheek with his tongue.

The rugged, overhanging walls of the cañon grew sinister in Shefford's
sight. They were jaws. And the river--that made him shudder to look down
into it. The little whirling pits were eyes peering into his, and they
raced on with the boat, disappeared, and came again, always with the
little, hollow gurgles.

The craft drifted swiftly and the roar increased. Another rapid seemed
to move up into view. It came at a bend in the cañon. When the breeze
struck Shefford's cheeks he did not this time experience exhilaration.
The current accelerated its sliding motion and bore the flatboat
straight for the middle of the curve. Shefford saw the bend, a long,
dark, narrow, gloomy cañon, and a stretch of contending waters,
then, crouching low, he waited for the dip, the race, the shock.
They came--the last stopping the boat--throwing it aloft--letting
it drop--and crests of angry waves curled over the side. Shefford,
kneeling, felt the water slap around him, and in his ears was a
deafening roar. There were endless moments of strife and hell and flying
darkness of spray all about him, and under him the rocking boat. When
they lessened--ceased in violence--he stood ankle-deep in water, and
then madly he began to bail.

Another roar deadened his ears, but he did not look up from his toil.
And when he had to get down to avoid the pitch he closed his eyes. That
rapid passed and with more water to bail, he resumed his share in the
manning of the crude craft. It was more than a share--a tremendous
responsibility to which he bent with all his might. He heard Joe
yell--and again--and again. He heard the increasing roars one after
another till they seemed one continuous bellow. He felt the shock, the
pitch, the beating waves, and then the lessening power of sound and
current. That set him to his task. Always in these long intervals of
toil he seemed to see, without looking up, the growing proportions
of the cañon. And the river had become a living, terrible thing. The
intervals of his tireless effort when he scooped the water overboard
were fleeting, and the rides through rapid after rapid were endless
periods of waiting terror. His spirit and his hope were overwhelmed by
the rush and roar and fury.

Then, as he worked, there came a change--a rest to deafened ears--a
stretch of river that seemed quiet after chaos--and here for the first
time he bailed the boat clear of water.

Jane and Fay were huddled in a corner, with the flapping tarpaulin now
half fallen over them. They were wet and muddy. Lassiter crouched like
a man dazed by a bad dream, and his white hair hung, stained and
bedraggled, over his face. The Indian and the Mormon, grim, hard, worn,
stood silent at the oar.

The afternoon was far advanced and the sun had already descended below
the western ramparts. A cool breeze blew up the cañon, laden with a
sound that was the same, yet not the same, as those low, dull roars
which Shefford dreaded more and more.

Joe Lake turned his ear to the breeze. A stronger puff brought a heavy,
quivering rumble. This time he did not vent his gay and wild defiance to
the river. He bent lower--listened. Then as the rumble became a strange,
deep, reverberating roll, as if the monstrous river were rolling huge
stones down a subterranean cañon, Shefford saw with dilating eyes that
the Mormon's hair was rising stiff upon his head.

"Hear that!" said Joe, turning an ashen face to Shefford. "We'll
drop off the earth now. Hang on to the girl, so if we go you can go
together.... And, pard, if you've a God--pray!"

Nas Ta Bega faced the bend from whence that rumble came, and he was the
same dark, inscrutable, impassive Indian as of old. What was death to
him?

Shefford felt the strong, rushing love of life surge in him, and it was
not for himself he thought, but for Fay and the happiness she merited.
He went to her, patted the covered head, and tried with words choking in
his throat to give hope. And he leaned with hands gripping the gunwale,
with eyes wide open, ready for the unknown.

The river made a quick turn and from round the bend rumbled a terrible
uproar. The current racing that way was divided or uncertain, and it
gave strange motion to the boat. Joe and Nas Ta Bega shoved desperately
upon the oar, all to no purpose. The currents had their will. The bow of
the boat took the place of the stern. Then swift at the head of a curved
incline it shot beyond the bulging wall.

And Shefford saw an awful place before them. The cañon had narrowed to
half its width, and turned almost at right angles. The huge clamor of
appalling sound came from under the cliff where the swollen river had to
pass and where there was not space. The rapid rushed in gigantic swells
right upon the wall, boomed against it, climbed and spread and fell
away, to recede and gather new impetus, to leap madly on down the
cañon.

Shefford went to his knees, clasped Fay, and Jane, too. But facing this
appalling thing he had to look. Courage and despair came to him at the
last. This must be the end. With long, buoyant swing the boat sailed
down, shot over the first waves, was caught and lifted upon the great
swell and impelled straight toward the cliff. Huge whirlpools raced
alongside, and from them came a horrible, engulfing roar. Monstrous
bulges rose on the other side. All the stupendous power of that mighty
river of downward-rushing silt swung the boat aloft, up and up, as the
swell climbed the wall. Shefford, with transfixed eyes and harrowed
soul, watched the wet black wall. It loomed down upon him. The stern of
the boat went high. Then when the crash that meant doom seemed imminent
the swell spread and fell back from the wall and the boat never struck
at all. By some miraculous chance it had been favored by a strange
and momentary receding of the huge spent swell. Then it slid back, was
caught and whirled by the current into a red, frothy, up-flung rapids
below. Shefford bowed his head over Fay and saw no more, nor felt nor
heard. What seemed a long time after that the broken voice of the Mormon
recalled him to his labors.

The boat was half full of water. Nas Ta Bega scooped out great sheets
of it with his hands. Shefford sprang to aid him, found the shovel, and
plunged into the task. Slowly but surely they emptied the boat. And then
Shefford saw that twilight had fallen. Joe was working the craft toward
a narrow bank of sand, to which, presently, they came, and the Indian
sprang out to moor to a rock.

The fugitives went ashore and, weary and silent and drenched, they
dropped in the warm sand.

But Shefford could not sleep. The river kept him awake. In the distance
it rumbled, low, deep, reverberating, and near at hand it was a thing of
mutable mood. It moaned, whined, mocked, and laughed. It had the soul of
a devil. It was a river that had cut its way to the bowels of the earth,
and its nature was destructive. It harbored no life. Fighting its way
through those dead walls, cutting and tearing and wearing, its heavy
burden of silt was death, destruction, and decay. A silent river, a
murmuring, strange, fierce, terrible, thundering river of the desert!
Even in the dark it seemed to wear the hue of blood.

All night long Shefford heard it, and toward the dark hours before dawn,
when a restless, broken sleep came to him, his dreams were dreams of a
river of sounds.

All the beautiful sounds he knew and loved he heard--the sigh of the
wind in the pines, the mourn of the wolf, the cry of the laughing-gull,
the murmur of running brooks, the song of a child, the whisper of a
woman. And there were the boom of the surf, the roar of the north wind
in the forest, the roll of thunder. And there were the sounds not of
earth--a river of the universe rolling the planets, engulfing the stars,
pouring the sea of blue into infinite space.

Night with its fitful dreams passed. Dawn lifted the ebony gloom out
of the cañon and sunlight far up on the ramparts renewed Shefford's
spirit. He rose and awoke the others. Fay's wistful smile still held its
faith. They ate of the gritty, water-soaked food. Then they embarked.
The current carried them swiftly down and out of hearing of the last
rapid. The character of the river and the cañon changed. The current
lessened to a slow, smooth, silent, eddying flow. The walls grew
straight, sheer, gloomy, and vast. Shefford noted these features, but
he was listening so hard for the roar of the next rapid that he scarcely
appreciated them. All the fugitives were listening. Every bend in the
cañon--and now the turns were numerous--might hold a rapid. Shefford
strained his ears. He imagined the low, dull, strange rumble. He had it
in his ears, yet there was the growing sensation of silence.

"Shore this 's a dead place," muttered Lassiter.

"She's only slowed up for a bigger plunge," replied Joe. "Listen! Hear
that?"

But there was no true sound, Joe only imagined what he expected and
hated and dreaded to hear.

Mile after mile they drifted through the silent gloom between those
vast and magnificent walls. After the speed, the turmoil, the whirling,
shrieking, thundering, the never-ceasing sound and change and motion
of the rapids above, this slow, quiet drifting, this utter, absolute
silence, these eddying stretches of still water below, worked strangely
upon Shefford's mind and he feared he was going mad.

There was no change to the silence, no help for the slow drift, no
lessening of the strain. And the hours of the day passed as moments,
the sun crossed the blue gap above, the golden lights hung on the upper
walls, the gloom returned, and still there was only the dead, vast,
insupportable silence.

There came bends where the current quickened, ripples widened, long
lanes of little waves roughened the surface, but they made no sound.

And then the fugitives turned through a V-shaped vent in the cañon.
The ponderous walls sheered away from the river. There was space and
sunshine, and far beyond this league-wide open rose vermilion-colored
cliffs. A mile below the river disappeared in a dark, boxlike passage
from which came a rumble that made Shefford's flesh creep.

The Mormon flung high his arms and let out the stentorian yell that had
rolled down to the fugitives as they waited at the mouth of Nonnezoshe
Boco. But now it had a wilder, more exultant note. Strange how he
shifted his gaze to Fay Larkin!

"Girl! Get up and look!" he called. "The Ferry! The Ferry!"

Then he bent his brawny back over the steering-oar, and the clumsy craft
slowly turned toward the left-hand shore, where a long, low bank of
green willows and cottonwoods gave welcome relief to the eyes. Upon the
opposite side of the river Shefford saw a boat, similar to the one he
was in, moored to the bank.

"Shore, if I ain't losin' my eyes, I seen an Injun with a red blanket,"
said Lassiter.

"Yes, Lassiter," cried Shefford. "Look, Fay! Look, Jane! See!
Indians--hogans--mustangs--there above the green bank!"

The boat glided slowly shoreward. And the deep, hungry, terrible rumble
of the remorseless river became something no more to dread.




XX. WILLOW SPRINGS


Two days' travel from the river, along the saw-toothed range of Echo
Cliffs, stood Presbrey's trading-post, a little red-stone square house
in a green and pretty valley called Willow Springs.

It was nearing the time of sunset--that gorgeous hour of color in the
Painted Desert--when Shefford and his party rode down upon the post.

The scene lacked the wildness characteristic of Kayenta or Red Lake.
There were wagons and teams, white men and Indians, burros, sheep,
lambs, mustangs saddled and unsaddled, dogs, and chickens. A young,
sweet-faced woman stood in the door of the post and she it was who first
sighted the fugitives. Presbrey was weighing bags of wool on a scale,
and when she called he lazily turned, as if to wonder at her eagerness.

Then he flung up his head, with its shock of heavy hair, in a start of
surprise, and his florid face lost its lazy indolence to become wreathed
in a huge smile.

"Haven't seen a white person in six months!" was his extraordinary
greeting.

An hour later Shefford, clean-shaven, comfortably clothed once more,
found himself a different man; and when he saw Fay in white again, with
a new and indefinable light shining through that old, haunting shadow in
her eyes, then the world changed and he embraced perfect happiness.

There was a dinner such as Shefford had not seen for many a day, and
such as Fay had never seen, and that brought to Jane Withersteen's eyes
the dreamy memory of the bountiful feasts which, long years ago, had
been her pride. And there was a story told to the curious trader and
his kind wife--a story with its beginning back in those past years, of
riders of the purple sage, of Fay Larkin as a child and then as a wild
girl in Surprise Valley, of the flight down Nonnezoshe Boco an the
cañon, of a great Mormon and a noble Indian.

Presbrey stared with his deep-set eyes and wagged his tousled head and
stared again; then with the quick perception of the practical desert man
he said:

"I'm sending teamsters in to Flagstaff to-morrow. Wife and I will go
along with you. We've light wagons. Three days, maybe--or four--and
we'll be there.... Shefford, I'm going to see you marry Fay Larkin!"

Fay and Jane and Lassiter showed strangely against this background
of approaching civilization. And Shefford realized more than ever the
loneliness and isolation and wildness of so many years for them.

When the women had retired Shefford and the men talked a while. Then Joe
Lake rose to stretch his big frame.

"Friends, reckon I'm all in," he said. "Good night." In passing he laid
a heavy hand on Shefford's shoulder. "Well, you got out. I've only a
queer notion how. But SOME ONE besides an Indian and a Mormon guided you
out!... Be good to the girl.... Good-by, pard!"

Shefford grasped the big hand and in the emotion of the moment did not
catch the significance of Joe's last words.

Later Shefford stepped outside into the starlight for a few moments'
quiet walk and thought before he went to bed. It was a white night. The
coyotes were yelping. The stars shone steadfast, bright, cold. Nas Ta
Bega stalked out of the shadow of the house and joined Shefford. They
walked in silence. Shefford's heart was too full for utterance and the
Indian seldom spoke at any time. When Shefford was ready to go in Nas Ta
Bega extended his hand.

"Good-by--Bi Nai!" he said, strangely, using English and Navajo in what
Shefford supposed to be merely good night. The starlight shone full upon
the dark, inscrutable face of the Indian. Shefford bade him good night
and then watched him stride away in the silver gloom.

But next morning Shefford understood. Nas Ta Bega and Joe Lake were
gone. It was a shock to Shefford. Yet what could he have said to either?
Joe had shirked saying good-by to him and Fay. And the Indian had gone
out of Shefford's life as he had come into it.

What these two men represented in Shefford's uplift was too great for
the present to define, but they and the desert that had developed them
had taught him the meaning of life. He might fail often, since failure
was the lot of his kind, but could he ever fail again in faith in man or
God while he had mind to remember the Indian and the Mormon?

Still, though he placed them on a noble height and loved them well,
there would always abide with him a sorrow for the Mormon and a
sleepless and eternal regret for that Indian on his lonely cedar slope
with the spirits of his vanishing race calling him.

. . . . . . . . . . .

Willow Springs appeared to be a lively place that morning. Presbrey was
gay and his sweet-faced wife was excited. The teamsters were a jolly,
whistling lot. And the lean mustangs kicked and bit at one another. The
trader had brought out two light wagons for the trip, and, after the
manner of desert men, desired to start at sunrise.

Far across the Painted Desert towered the San Francisco peaks,
black-timbered, blue-canyoned, purple-hazed, with white snow, like the
clouds, around their summits.

Jane Withersteen looked at the radiant Fay and lived again in her
happiness. And at last excitement had been communicated to the old
gun-man.

"Shore we're goin' to live with Fay an' John, an' be near Venters an'
Bess, an' see the blacks again, Jane.... An' Venters will tell you, as
he did me, how Wrangle run Black Star off his legs!"

All connected with that early start was sweet, sad, hopeful.

And so they rode away from Willow Springs, through the green fields of
alfalfa and cotton wood, down the valley with its smoking hogans and
whistling mustangs and scarlet-blanketed Indians, and out upon the bare,
ridgy, colorful desert toward the rosy sunrise.




EPILOGUE


On the outskirts of a little town in Illinois there was a farm of
rolling pasture-land. And here a beautiful meadow, green and red in
clover, merged upon an orchard in the midst of which a brown-tiled roof
showed above the trees.

One afternoon in May a group of people, strangely agitated, walked down
a shady lane toward the meadow.

"Wal, Jane, I always knew we'd get a look at them hosses again--I shore
knew," Lassiter was saying in the same old, cool, careless drawl. But
his clawlike hands shook a little.

"Oh! will they know me?" asked Jane Withersteen, turning to a stalwart
man--no other than the dark-faced Venters, her rider of other days.

"Know you? I'll bet they will," replied Venters. "What do you say,
Bess?"

The shadow brightened in Bess's somber blue eyes, as if his words had
recalled her from a sad and memorable past.

"Black Star will know her, surely," replied Bess. "Sometimes he points
his nose toward the west and watches as if he saw the purple slopes and
smelt the sage of Utah! He has never forgotten. But Night has grown deaf
and partly blind of late. I doubt if he'd remember."

Shefford and Fay walked arm in arm in the background.

Out in the meadow two horses were grazing. They were sleek, shiny,
long-maned, long-tailed, black as coal, and, though old, still splendid
in every line.

"Do you remember them?" whispered Shefford.

"Oh, I only needed to see Black Star," murmured Fay, her voice
quivering. "I can remember being lifted on his back.... How strange! It
seems so long ago.... Look! Mother Jane is going out to them."

Jane Withersteen advanced alone through the clover, and it was with
unsteady steps. Presently she halted. What glorious and bitter memories
were expressed in her strange, poignant call!

Black Star started and swept up his noble head and looked. But Night
went on calmly grazing. Then Jane called again--the same strange call,
only louder, and this time broken. Black Star raised his head higher
and he whistled a piercing blast. He saw Jane; he knew her as he had
remembered the call; and he came pounding toward her. She met him,
encircled his neck with her arms, and buried her face in his mane.

"Shore I reckon I'd better never say any more about Wrangle runnin' the
blacks off their legs thet time," muttered Lassiter, as if to himself.

"Lassiter, you only dreamed that race," replied Venters, with a smile.

"Oh, Bern, isn't it good that Black Star remembered her--that she'll
have him--something left of her old home?" asked Bess, wistfully.

"Indeed it is good. But, Bess, Jane Withersteen will find a new spirit
and new happiness here."

Jane came toward them, leading both horses. "Dear friends, I am happy.
To-day I bury all regrets. Of the past I shall remember only--my riders
of the purple sage."

Venters smiled his gladness. "And you--Lassiter--what shall you
remember?" he queried.

The old gun-man looked at Jane and then at his clawlike hands and then
at Fay. His eyes lost their shadow and began to twinkle.

"Wal, I rolled a stone once, but I reckon now thet time Wrangle--"

"Lassiter, I said you dreamed that race. Wrangle never beat the blacks,"
interrupted Venters.... "And you, Fay, what shall you remember?"

"Surprise Valley," replied Fay, dreamily.

"And you--Shefford?"

Shefford shook his head. For him there could never be one memory only.
In his heart there would never change or die memories of the wild
uplands, of the great towers and walls, of the golden sunsets on the
cañon ramparts, of the silent, fragrant valleys where the cedars and
the sago-lilies grew, of those starlit nights when his love and faith
awoke, of grand and lonely Nonnezoshe, of that red, sullen, thundering,
mysterious Colorado River, of a wonderful Indian and a noble Mormon--of
all that was embodied for him in the meaning of the rainbow trail.


THE END



