
THE SPIRIT OF THE BORDER
A ROMANCE OF THE EARLY SETTLERS IN THE OHIO VALLEY

BY ZANE GREY

1906



To my brother

With many fond recollections of days spent in the solitude of the
forests where only can be satisfied that wild fever of freedom of
which this book tells; where to hear the whirr of a wild duck in his
rapid flight is joy; where the quiet of an autumn afternoon swells
the heart, and where one may watch the fragrant wood-smoke curl from
the campfire, and see the stars peep over dark, wooded hills as
twilight deepens, and know a happiness that dwells in the wilderness
alone.



Introduction

The author does not intend to apologize for what many readers may
call the "brutality" of the story; but rather to explain that its
wild spirit is true to the life of the Western border as it was
known only a little more than one hundred years ago.

The writer is the fortunate possessor of historical material of
undoubted truth and interest. It is the long-lost journal of Colonel
Ebenezer Zane, one of the most prominent of the hunter-pioneer, who
labored in the settlement of the Western country.

The story of that tragic period deserves a higher place in
historical literature than it has thus far been given, and this
unquestionably because of a lack of authentic data regarding the
conquering of the wilderness. Considering how many years the
pioneers struggled on the border of this country, the history of
their efforts is meager and obscure.

If the years at the close of the eighteenth and the beginning of the
nineteenth century were full of stirring adventure on the part of
the colonists along the Atlantic coast, how crowded must they have
been for the almost forgotten pioneers who daringly invaded the
trackless wilds! None there was to chronicle the fight of these
sturdy, travelers toward the setting sun. The story of their stormy
lives, of their heroism, and of their sacrifice for the benefit of
future generations is too little known.

It is to a better understanding of those days that the author has
labored to draw from his ancestor's notes a new and striking
portrayal of the frontier; one which shall paint the fever of
freedom, that powerful impulse which lured so many to unmarked
graves; one which shall show his work, his love, the effect of the
causes which rendered his life so hard, and surely one which does
not forget the wronged Indian.

The frontier in 1777 produced white men so savage as to be men in
name only. These outcasts and renegades lived among the savages, and
during thirty years harassed the border, perpetrating all manner of
fiendish cruelties upon the settlers. They were no less cruel to the
redmen whom they ruled, and at the height of their bloody careers
made futile the Moravian missionaries' long labors, and destroyed
the beautiful hamlet of the Christian Indians, called Gnaddenhutten,
or Village of Peace.

And while the border produced such outlaws so did it produce hunters
Eke Boone, the Zanes, the McCollochs, and Wetzel, that strange,
silent man whose deeds are still whispered in the country where he
once roamed in his insatiate pursuit of savages and renegades, and
who was purely a product of the times. Civilization could not have
brought forth a man like Wetzel. Great revolutions, great crises,
great moments come, and produce the men to deal with them.

The border needed Wetzel. The settlers would have needed many more
years in which to make permanent homes had it not been for him. He
was never a pioneer; but always a hunter after Indians. When not on
the track of the savage foe, he was in the settlement, with his keen
eye and ear ever alert for signs of the enemy. To the superstitious
Indians he was a shadow; a spirit of the border, which breathed
menace from the dark forests. To the settlers he was the right arm
of defense, a fitting leader for those few implacable and unerring
frontiersmen who made the settlement of the West a possibility.

And if this story of one of his relentless pursuits shows the man as
he truly was, loved by pioneers, respected and feared by redmen, and
hated by renegades; if it softens a little the ruthless name history
accords him, the writer will have been well repaid.

Z. G.



The Spirit of the Border



Chapter I.

"Nell, I'm growing powerful fond of you."

"So you must be, Master Joe, if often telling makes it true."

The girl spoke simply, and with an absence of that roguishness which
was characteristic of her. Playful words, arch smiles, and a touch
of coquetry had seemed natural to Nell; but now her grave tone and
her almost wistful glance disconcerted Joe.

During all the long journey over the mountains she had been gay and
bright, while now, when they were about to part, perhaps never to
meet again, she showed him the deeper and more earnest side of her
character. It checked his boldness as nothing else had done.
Suddenly there came to him the real meaning of a woman's love when
she bestows it without reservation. Silenced by the thought that he
had not understood her at all, and the knowledge that he had been
half in sport, he gazed out over the wild country before them.

The scene impressed its quietness upon the young couple and brought
more forcibly to their minds the fact that they were at the gateway
of the unknown West; that somewhere beyond this rude frontier
settlement, out there in those unbroken forests stretching dark and
silent before them, was to be their future home.

From the high bank where they stood the land sloped and narrowed
gradually until it ended in a sharp point which marked the last bit
of land between the Allegheny and Monongahela rivers. Here these
swift streams merged and formed the broad Ohio. The new-born river,
even here at its beginning proud and swelling as if already certain
of its far-away grandeur, swept majestically round a wide curve and
apparently lost itself in the forest foliage.

On the narrow point of land commanding a view of the rivers stood a
long, low structure enclosed by a stockade fence, on the four
corners of which were little box-shaped houses that bulged out as if
trying to see what was going on beneath. The massive timbers used in
the construction of this fort, the square, compact form, and the
small, dark holes cut into the walls, gave the structure a
threatening, impregnable aspect.

Below Nell and Joe, on the bank, were many log cabins. The yellow
clay which filled the chinks between the logs gave these a peculiar
striped appearance. There was life and bustle in the vicinity of
these dwellings, in sharp contrast with the still grandeur of the
neighboring forests. There were canvas-covered wagons around which
curly-headed youngsters were playing. Several horses were grazing on
the short grass, and six red and white oxen munched at the hay that
had been thrown to them. The smoke of many fires curled upward, and
near the blaze hovered ruddy-faced women who stirred the contents of
steaming kettles. One man swung an axe with a vigorous sweep, and
the clean, sharp strokes rang on the air; another hammered stakes
into the ground on which to hang a kettle. Before a large cabin a
fur-trader was exhibiting his wares to three Indians. A second
redskin was carrying a pack of pelts from a canoe drawn up on the
river bank. A small group of persons stood near; some were
indifferent, and others gazed curiously at the savages. Two children
peeped from behind their mother's skirts as if half-curious,
half-frightened.

From this scene, the significance of which had just dawned on him,
Joe turned his eyes again to his companion. It was a sweet face he
saw; one that was sedate, but had a promise of innumerable smiles.
The blue eyes could not long hide flashes of merriment. The girl
turned, and the two young people looked at each other. Her eyes
softened with a woman's gentleness as they rested upon him, for,
broad of shoulder, and lithe and strong as a deer stalker, he was
good to look at.

"Listen," she said. "We have known each other only three weeks.
Since you joined our wagon-train, and have been so kind to me and so
helpful to make that long, rough ride endurable, you have won my
regard. I--I cannot say more, even if I would. You told me you ran
away from your Virginian home to seek adventure on the frontier, and
that you knew no one in all this wild country. You even said you
could not, or would not, work at farming. Perhaps my sister and I
are as unfitted as you for this life; but we must cling to our uncle
because he is the only relative we have. He has come out here to
join the Moravians, and to preach the gospel to these Indians. We
shall share his life, and help him all we can. You have been telling
me you--you cared for me, and now that we are about to part I--I
don't know what to say to you--unless it is: Give up this intention
of yours to seek adventure, and come with us. It seems to me you
need not hunt for excitement here; it will come unsought."

"I wish I were Jim," said he, suddenly.

"Who is Jim?"

"My brother."

"Tell me of him."

"There's nothing much to tell. He and I are all that are left of our
people, as are you and Kate of yours. Jim's a preacher, and the best
fellow--oh! I cared a lot for Jim."

"Then, why did you leave him?"

"I was tired of Williamsburg--I quarreled with a fellow, and hurt
him. Besides, I wanted to see the West; I'd like to hunt deer and
bear and fight Indians. Oh, I'm not much good."

"Was Jim the only one you cared for?" asked Nell, smiling. She was
surprised to find him grave.

"Yes, except my horse and dog, and I had to leave them behind,"
answered Joe, bowing his head a little.

"You'd like to be Jim because he's a preacher, and could help uncle
convert the Indians?"

"Yes, partly that, but mostly because--somehow--something you've
said or done has made me care for you in a different way, and I'd
like to be worthy of you."

"I don't think I can believe it, when you say you are 'no good,'"
she replied.

"Nell," he cried, and suddenly grasped her hand.

She wrenched herself free, and leaped away from him. Her face was
bright now, and the promise of smiles was made good.

"Behave yourself, sir." She tossed her head with a familiar backward
motion to throw the chestnut hair from her face, and looked at him
with eyes veiled slightly under their lashes. "You will go with Kate
and me?"

Before he could answer, a cry from some one on the plain below
attracted their attention. They turned and saw another wagon-train
pulling into the settlement. The children were shooting and running
alongside the weary oxen; men and women went forward expectantly.

"That must be the train uncle expected. Let us go down," said Nell.

Joe did not answer; but followed her down the path. When they gained
a clump of willows near the cabins he bent forward and took her
hand. She saw the reckless gleam in his eyes.

"Don't. They'll see," she whispered.

"If that's the only reason you have, I reckon I don't care," said
Joe.

"What do you mean? I didn't say--I didn't tell--oh! let me go!"
implored Nell.

She tried to release the hand Joe had grasped in his broad palm, but
in vain; the more she struggled the firmer was his hold. A frown
wrinkled her brow and her eyes sparkled with spirit. She saw the
fur-trader's wife looking out of the window, and remembered laughing
and telling the good woman she did not like this young man; it was,
perhaps, because she feared those sharp eyes that she resented his
audacity. She opened her mouth to rebuke him; but no words came. Joe
had bent his head and softly closed her lips with his own.

For the single instant during which Nell stood transfixed, as if
with surprise, and looking up at Joe, she was dumb. Usually the girl
was ready with sharp or saucy words and impulsive in her movements;
but now the bewilderment of being kissed, particularly within view
of the trader's wife, confused her. Then she heard voices, and as
Joe turned away with a smile on his face, the unusual warmth in her
heart was followed by an angry throbbing.

Joe's tall figure stood out distinctly as he leisurely strolled
toward the incoming wagon-train without looking backward. Flashing
after him a glance that boded wordy trouble in the future, she ran
into the cabin.

As she entered the door it seemed certain the grizzled frontiersman
sitting on the bench outside had grinned knowingly at her, and
winked as if to say he would keep her secret. Mrs. Wentz, the
fur-trader's wife, was seated by the open window which faced the
fort; she was a large woman, strong of feature, and with that calm
placidity of expression common to people who have lived long in
sparsely populated districts. Nell glanced furtively at her and
thought she detected the shadow of a smile in the gray eyes.

"I saw you and your sweetheart makin' love behind the willow," Mrs.
Wentz said in a matter-of-fact voice. "I don't see why you need hide
to do it. We folks out here like to see the young people sparkin'.
Your young man is a fine-appearin' chap. I felt certain you was
sweethearts, for all you allowed you'd known him only a few days.
Lize Davis said she saw he was sweet on you. I like his face. Jake,
my man, says as how he'll make a good husband for you, and he'll
take to the frontier like a duck does to water. I'm sorry you'll not
tarry here awhile. We don't see many lasses, especially any as
pretty as you, and you'll find it more quiet and lonesome the
farther West you get. Jake knows all about Fort Henry, and Jeff
Lynn, the hunter outside, he knows Eb and Jack Zane, and Wetzel, and
all those Fort Henry men. You'll be gettin' married out there, won't
you?"

"You are--quite wrong," said Nell, who all the while Mrs. Wentz was
speaking grew rosier and rosier. "We're not anything---"

Then Nell hesitated and finally ceased speaking. She saw that
denials or explanations were futile; the simple woman had seen the
kiss, and formed her own conclusions. During the few days Nell had
spent at Fort Pitt, she had come to understand that the dwellers on
the frontier took everything as a matter of course. She had seen
them manifest a certain pleasure; but neither surprise, concern, nor
any of the quick impulses so common among other people. And this was
another lesson Nell took to heart. She realized that she was
entering upon a life absolutely different from her former one, and
the thought caused her to shrink from the ordeal. Yet all the
suggestions regarding her future home; the stories told about
Indians, renegades, and of the wild border-life, fascinated her.
These people who had settled in this wild region were simple, honest
and brave; they accepted what came as facts not to be questioned,
and believed what looked true. Evidently the fur-trader's wife and
her female neighbors had settled in their minds the relation in
which the girl stood to Joe.

This latter reflection heightened Nell's resentment toward her
lover. She stood with her face turned away from Mrs. Wentz; the
little frown deepened, and she nervously tapped her foot on the
floor.

"Where is my sister?" she presently asked.

"She went to see the wagon-train come in. Everybody's out there."

Nell deliberated a moment and then went into the open air. She saw a
number of canvas-covered wagons drawn up in front of the cabins; the
vehicles were dusty and the wheels encrusted with yellow mud. The
grizzled frontiersman who had smiled at Nell stood leaning on his
gun, talking to three men, whose travel-stained and worn homespun
clothes suggested a long and toilsome journey. There was the bustle
of excitement incident to the arrival of strangers; to the quick
exchange of greetings, the unloading of wagons and unharnessing of
horses and oxen.

Nell looked here and there for her sister. Finally she saw her
standing near her uncle while he conversed with one of the
teamsters. The girl did not approach them; but glanced quickly
around in search of some one else. At length she saw Joe unloading
goods from one of the wagons; his back was turned toward her, but
she at once recognized the challenge conveyed by the broad
shoulders. She saw no other person; gave heed to nothing save what
was to her, righteous indignation.

Hearing her footsteps, the young man turned, glancing at her
admiringly, said:

"Good evening, Miss."

Nell had not expected such a matter-of-fact greeting from Joe. There
was not the slightest trace of repentance in his calm face, and he
placidly continued his labor.

"Aren't you sorry you--you treated me so?" burst out Nell.

His coolness was exasperating. Instead of the contrition and apology
she had expected, and which was her due, he evidently intended to
tease her, as he had done so often.

The young man dropped a blanket and stared.

"I don't understand," he said, gravely. "I never saw you before."

This was too much for quick-tempered Nell. She had had some vague
idea of forgiving him, after he had sued sufficiently for pardon;
but now, forgetting her good intentions in the belief that he was
making sport of her when he should have pleaded for forgiveness, she
swiftly raised her hand and slapped him smartly.

The red blood flamed to the young man's face; as he staggered
backward with his hand to his cheek, she heard a smothered
exclamation behind her, and then the quick, joyous barking of a dog.

When Nell turned she was amazed to see Joe standing beside the
wagon, while a big white dog was leaping upon him. Suddenly she felt
faint. Bewildered, she looked from Joe to the man she had just
struck; but could not say which was the man who professed to love
her.

"Jim! So you followed me!" cried Joe, starting forward and flinging
his arms around the other.

"Yes, Joe, and right glad I am to find you," answered the young man,
while a peculiar expression of pleasure came over his face.

"It's good to see you again! And here's my old dog Mose! But how on
earth did you know? Where did you strike my trail? What are you
going to do out here on the frontier? Tell me all. What happened
after I left---"

Then Joe saw Nell standing nearby, pale and distressed, and he felt
something was amiss. He glanced quickly from her to his brother; she
seemed to be dazed, and Jim looked grave.

"What the deuce--? Nell, this is my brother Jim, the one I told you
about. Jim, this is my friend, Miss Wells."

"I am happy to meet Miss Wells," said Jim, with a smile, "even
though she did slap my face for nothing."

"Slapped you? What for?" Then the truth dawned on Joe, and he
laughed until the tears came into his eyes. "She took you for me!
Ha, ha, ha! Oh, this is great!"

Nell's face was now rosy red and moisture glistened in her eyes; but
she tried bravely to stand her ground. Humiliation had taken the
place of anger.

"I--I--am sorry, Mr. Downs. I did take you for him. He--he has
insulted me." Then she turned and ran into the cabin.



Chapter II.

Joe and Jim were singularly alike. They were nearly the same size,
very tall, but so heavily built as to appear of medium height, while
their grey eyes and, indeed, every feature of their clean-cut faces
corresponded so exactly as to proclaim them brothers.

"Already up to your old tricks?" asked Jim, with his hand on Joe's
shoulder, as they both watched Nell's flight.

"I'm really fond of her, Jim, and didn't mean to hurt her feelings.
But tell me about yourself; what made you come West?"

"To teach the Indians, and I was, no doubt, strongly influenced by
your being here."

"You're going to do as you ever have--make some sacrifice. You are
always devoting yourself; if not to me, to some other. Now it's your
life you're giving up. To try to convert the redskins and influence
me for good is in both cases impossible. How often have I said there
wasn't any good in me! My desire is to kill Indians, not preach to
them, Jim. I'm glad to see you; but I wish you hadn't come. This
wild frontier is no place for a preacher."

"I think it is," said Jim, quietly.

"What of Rose--the girl you were to marry?"

Joe glanced quickly at his brother. Jim's face paled slightly as he
turned away.

"I'll speak once more of her, and then, never again," he answered.
"You knew Rose better than I did. Once you tried to tell me she was
too fond of admiration, and I rebuked you; but now I see that your
wider experience of women had taught you things I could not then
understand. She was untrue. When you left Williamsburg, apparently
because you had gambled with Jewett and afterward fought him, I was
not misled. You made the game of cards a pretense; you sought it
simply as an opportunity to wreak your vengeance on him for his
villainy toward me. Well, it's all over now. Though you cruelly beat
and left him disfigured for life, he will live, and you are saved
from murder, thank God! When I learned of your departure I yearned
to follow. Then I met a preacher who spoke of having intended to go
West with a Mr. Wells, of the Moravian Mission. I immediately said I
would go in his place, and here I am. I'm fortunate in that I have
found both him and you."

"I'm sorry I didn't kill Jewett; I certainly meant to. Anyway,
there's some comfort in knowing I left my mark on him. He was a
sneaking, cold-blooded fellow, with his white hair and pale face,
and always fawning round the girls. I hated him, and gave it to him
good." Joe spoke musingly and complacently as though it was a
trivial thing to compass the killing of a man.

"Well, Jim, you're here now, and there's no help for it. We'll go
along with this Moravian preacher and his nieces. If you haven't any
great regrets for the past, why, all may be well yet. I can see that
the border is the place for me. But now, Jim, for once in your life
take a word of advice from me. We're out on the frontier, where
every man looks after himself. Your being a minister won't protect
you here where every man wears a knife and a tomahawk, and where
most of them are desperadoes. Cut out that soft voice and most of
your gentle ways, and be a little more like your brother. Be as kind
as you like, and preach all you want to; but when some of these
buckskin-legged frontiermen try to walk all over you, as they will,
take your own part in a way you have never taken it before. I had my
lesson the first few days out with that wagon-train. It was a case
of four fights; but I'm all right now."

"Joe, I won't run, if that's what you mean," answered Jim, with a
laugh. "Yes, I understand that a new life begins here, and I am
content. If I can find my work in it, and remain with you, I shall
be happy."

"Ah! old Mose! I'm glad to see you," Joe cried to the big dog who
came nosing round him. "You've brought this old fellow; did you
bring the horses?"

"Look behind the wagon."

With the dog bounding before him, Joe did as he was directed, and
there found two horses tethered side by side. Little wonder that his
eyes gleamed with delight. One was jet-black; the other iron-gray
and in every line the clean-limbed animals showed the thoroughbred.
The black threw up his slim head and whinnied, with affection
clearly shining in his soft, dark eyes as he recognized his master.

"Lance, old fellow, how did I ever leave you!" murmured Joe, as he
threw his arm over the arched neck. Mose stood by looking up, and
wagging his tail in token of happiness at the reunion of the three
old friends. There were tears in Joe's eyes when, with a last
affectionate caress, he turned away from his pet.

"Come, Jim, I'll take you to Mr. Wells."

They stated across the little square, while Mose went back under the
wagon; but at a word from Joe he bounded after them, trotting
contentedly at their heels. Half way to the cabins a big, raw-boned
teamster, singing in a drunken voice, came staggering toward them.
Evidently he had just left the group of people who had gathered near
the Indians.

"I didn't expect to see drunkenness out here," said Jim, in a low
tone.

"There's lots of it. I saw that fellow yesterday when he couldn't
walk. Wentz told me he was a bad customer."

The teamster, his red face bathed in perspiration, and his sleeves
rolled up, showing brown, knotty arms, lurched toward them. As they
met he aimed a kick at the dog; but Mose leaped nimbly aside,
avoiding the heavy boot. He did not growl, nor show his teeth; but
the great white head sank forward a little, and the lithe body
crouched for a spring.

"Don't touch that dog; he'll tear your leg off!" Joe cried sharply.

"Say, pard, cum an' hev' a drink," replied the teamster, with a
friendly leer.

"I don't drink," answered Joe, curtly, and moved on.

The teamster growled something of which only the word "parson" was
intelligible to the brothers. Joe stopped and looked back. His gray
eyes seemed to contract; they did not flash, but shaded and lost
their warmth. Jim saw the change, and, knowing what it signified,
took Joe's arm as he gently urged him away. The teamster's shrill
voice could be heard until they entered the fur-trader's cabin.

An old man with long, white hair flowing from beneath his
wide-brimmed hat, sat near the door holding one of Mrs. Wentz's
children on his knee. His face was deep-lined and serious; but
kindness shone from his mild blue eyes.

"Mr. Wells, this is my brother James. He is a preacher, and has come
in place of the man you expected from Williamsburg."

The old minister arose, and extended his hand, gazing earnestly at
the new-comer meanwhile. Evidently he approved of what he saw in his
quick scrutiny of the other's face, for his lips were wreathed with
a smile of welcome.

"Mr. Downs, I am glad to meet you, and to know you will go with me.
I thank God I shall take into the wilderness one who is young enough
to carry on the work when my days are done."

"I will make it my duty to help you in whatsoever way lies in my
power," answered Jim, earnestly.

"We have a great work before us. I have heard many scoffers who
claim that it is worse than folly to try to teach these fierce
savages Christianity; but I know it can be done, and my heart is in
the work. I have no fear; yet I would not conceal from you, young
man, that the danger of going among these hostile Indians must be
great."

"I will not hesitate because of that. My sympathy is with the
redman. I have had an opportunity of studying Indian nature and
believe the race inherently noble. He has been driven to make war,
and I want to help him into other paths."

Joe left the two ministers talking earnestly and turned toward Mrs.
Wentz. The fur-trader's wife was glowing with pleasure. She held in
her hand several rude trinkets, and was explaining to her listener,
a young woman, that the toys were for the children, having been
brought all the way from Williamsburg.

"Kate, where's Nell?" Joe asked of the girl.

"She went on an errand for Mrs. Wentz."

Kate Wells was the opposite of her sister. Her motions were slow,
easy and consistent with her large, full, form. Her brown eyes and
hair contrasted sharply with Nell's. The greatest difference in the
sisters lay in that Nell's face was sparkling and full of the fire
of her eager young life, while Kate's was calm, like the unruffled
surface of a deep lake.

"That's Jim, my brother. We're going with you," said Joe.

"Are you? I'm glad," answered the girl, looking at the handsome
earnest face of the young minister.

"Your brother's like you for all the world," whispered Mrs. Wentz.

"He does look like you," said Kate, with her slow smile.

"Which means you think, or hope, that that is all," retorted Joe
laughingly. "Well, Kate, there the resemblance ends, thank God for
Jim!"

He spoke in a sad, bitter tone which caused both women to look at
him wonderingly. Joe had to them ever been full of surprises; never
until then had they seen evidences of sadness in his face. A
moment's silence ensued. Mrs. Wentz gazed lovingly at the children
who were playing with the trinkets; while Kate mused over the young
man's remark, and began studying his, half-averted face. She felt
warmly drawn to him by the strange expression in the glance he had
given his brother. The tenderness in his eyes did not harmonize with
much of this wild and reckless boy's behavior. To Kate he had always
seemed so bold, so cold, so different from other men, and yet here
was proof that Master Joe loved his brother.

The murmured conversation of the two ministers was interrupted by a
low cry from outside the cabin. A loud, coarse laugh followed, and
then a husky voice:

"Hol' on, my purty lass."'

Joe took two long strides, and was on the door-step. He saw Nell
struggling violently in the grasp of the half-drunken teamster.

"I'll jes' hev' to kiss this lassie fer luck," he said in a tone of
good humor.

At the same instant Joe saw three loungers laughing, and a fourth,
the grizzled frontiersman, starting forward with a yell.

"Let me go!" cried Nell.

Just when the teamster had pulled her close to him, and was bending
his red, moist face to hers, two brown, sinewy hands grasped his
neck with an angry clutch. Deprived thus of breath, his mouth
opened, his tongue protruded; his eyes seemed starting from their
sockets, and his arms beat the air. Then he was lifted and flung
with a crash against the cabin wall. Falling, he lay in a heap on
the grass, while the blood flowed from a cut on his temple.

"What's this?" cried a man, authoritatively. He had come swiftly up,
and arrived at the scene where stood the grizzled frontiersman.

"It was purty handy, Wentz. I couldn't hev' did better myself, and I
was comin' for that purpose," said the frontiersman. "Leffler was
tryin' to kiss the lass. He's been drunk fer two days. That little
girl's sweetheart kin handle himself some, now you take my word on
it."

"I'll agree Leff's bad when he's drinkin'," answered the fur-trader,
and to Joe he added, "He's liable to look you up when he comes
around."

"Tell him if I am here when he gets sober, I'll kill him," Joe cried
in a sharp voice. His gaze rested once more on the fallen teamster,
and again an odd contraction of his eyes was noticeable. The glance
was cutting, as if with the flash of cold gray steel. "Nell, I'm
sorry I wasn't round sooner," he said, apologetically, as if it was
owing to his neglect the affair had happened.

As they entered the cabin Nell stole a glance at him. This was the
third time he had injured a man because of her. She had on several
occasions seen that cold, steely glare in his eyes, and it had
always frightened her. It was gone, however, before they were inside
the building. He said something which she did not hear distinctly,
and his calm voice allayed her excitement. She had been angry with
him; but now she realized that her resentment had disappeared. He
had spoken so kindly after the outburst. Had he not shown that he
considered himself her protector and lover? A strange emotion, sweet
and subtle as the taste of wine, thrilled her, while a sense of fear
because of his strength was mingled with her pride in it. Any other
girl would have been only too glad to have such a champion; she
would, too, hereafter, for he was a man of whom to be proud.

"Look here, Nell, you haven't spoken to me," Joe cried suddenly,
seeming to understand that she had not even heard what he said, so
engrossed had she been with her reflections. "Are you mad with me
yet?" he continued. "Why, Nell, I'm in--I love you!"

Evidently Joe thought such fact a sufficient reason for any act on
his part. His tender tone conquered Nell, and she turned to him with
flushed cheeks and glad eyes.

"I wasn't angry at all," she whispered, and then, eluding the arm he
extended, she ran into the other room.



Chapter III.

Joe lounged in the doorway of the cabin, thoughtfully contemplating
two quiet figures that were lying in the shade of a maple tree. One
he recognized as the Indian with whom Jim had spent an earnest hour
that morning; the red son of the woods was wrapped in slumber. He
had placed under his head a many-hued homespun shirt which the young
preacher had given him; but while asleep his head had rolled off
this improvised pillow, and the bright garment lay free, attracting
the eye. Certainly it had led to the train of thought which had
found lodgment in Joe's fertile brain.

The other sleeper was a short, stout man whom Joe had seen several
times before. This last fellow did not appear to be well-balanced in
his mind, and was the butt of the settlers' jokes, while the
children called him "Loorey." He, like the Indian, was sleeping off
the effects of the previous night's dissipation.

During a few moments Joe regarded the recumbent figures with an
expression on his face which told that he thought in them were great
possibilities for sport. With one quick glance around he disappeared
within the cabin, and when he showed himself at the door, surveying
the village square with mirthful eyes, he held in his hand a small
basket of Indian design. It was made of twisted grass, and simply
contained several bits of soft, chalky stone such as the Indians
used for painting, which collection Joe had discovered among the
fur-trader's wares.

He glanced around once more, and saw that all those in sight were
busy with their work. He gave the short man a push, and chuckled
when there was no response other than a lazy grunt. Joe took the
Indians' gaudy shirt, and, lifting Loorey, slipped it around him,
shoved the latter's arms through the sleeves, and buttoned it in
front. He streaked the round face with red and white paint, and
then, dexterously extracting the eagle plume from the Indian's
head-dress, stuck it in Loorey's thick shock of hair. It was all
done in a moment, after which Joe replaced the basket, and went down
to the river.

Several times that morning he had visited the rude wharf where Jeff
Lynn, the grizzled old frontiersman, busied himself with
preparations for the raft-journey down the Ohio. Lynn had been
employed to guide the missionary's party to Fort Henry, and, as the
brothers had acquainted him with their intention of accompanying the
travelers, he had constructed a raft for them and their horses.

Joe laughed when he saw the dozen two-foot logs fastened together,
upon which a rude shack had been erected for shelter. This slight
protection from sun and storm was all the brothers would have on
their long journey.

Joe noted, however, that the larger raft had been prepared with some
thought for the comfort of the girls. The floor of the little hut
was raised so that the waves which broke over the logs could not
reach it. Taking a peep into the structure, Joe was pleased to see
that Nell and Kate would be comfortable, even during a storm. A
buffalo robe and two red blankets gave to the interior a cozy, warm
look. He observed that some of the girls' luggage was already on
board.

"When'll we be off?" he inquired.

"Sun-up," answered Lynn, briefly.

"I'm glad of that. I like to be on the go in the early morning,"
said Joe, cheerfully.

"Most folks from over Eastways ain't in a hurry to tackle the
river," replied Lynn, eyeing Joe sharply.

"It's a beautiful river, and I'd like to sail on it from here to
where it ends, and then come back to go again," Joe replied, warmly.

"In a hurry to be a-goin'? I'll allow you'll see some slim red
devils, with feathers in their hair, slipping among the trees along
the bank, and mebbe you'll hear the ping which's made when whistlin'
lead hits. Perhaps you'll want to be back here by termorrer
sundown."

"Not I," said Joe, with his short, cool laugh.

The old frontiersman slowly finished his task of coiling up a rope
of wet cowhide, and then, producing a dirty pipe, he took a live
ember from the fire and placed it on the bowl. He sucked slowly at
the pipe-stem, and soon puffed out a great cloud of smoke. Sitting
on a log, he deliberately surveyed the robust shoulders and long,
heavy limbs of the young man, with a keen appreciation of their
symmetry and strength. Agility, endurance and courage were more to a
borderman than all else; a new-comer on the frontier was always
"sized-up" with reference to these "points," and respected in
proportion to the measure in which he possessed them.

Old Jeff Lynn, riverman, hunter, frontiersman, puffed slowly at his
pipe while he mused thus to himself: "Mebbe I'm wrong in takin' a
likin' to this youngster so sudden. Mebbe it's because I'm fond of
his sunny-haired lass, an' ag'in mebbe it's because I'm gettin' old
an' likes young folks better'n I onct did. Anyway, I'm kinder
thinkin, if this young feller gits worked out, say fer about twenty
pounds less, he'll lick a whole raft-load of wild-cats."

Joe walked to and fro on the logs, ascertained how the raft was put
together, and took a pull on the long, clumsy steering-oar. At
length he seated himself beside Lynn. He was eager to ask questions;
to know about the rafts, the river, the forest, the
Indians--everything in connection with this wild life; but already
he had learned that questioning these frontiersmen is a sure means
of closing their lips.

"Ever handle the long rifle?" asked Lynn, after a silence.

"Yes," answered Joe, simply.

"Ever shoot anythin'?" the frontiersman questioned, when he had
taken four or five puffs at his pipe.

"Squirrels."

"Good practice, shootin' squirrels," observed Jeff, after another
silence, long enough to allow Joe to talk if he was so inclined.
"Kin ye hit one--say, a hundred yards?"

"Yes, but not every time in the head," returned Joe. There was an
apologetic tone in his answer.

Another interval followed in which neither spoke. Jeff was slowly
pursuing his line of thought. After Joe's last remark he returned
his pipe to his pocket and brought out a tobacco-pouch. He tore off
a large portion of the weed and thrust it into his mouth. Then he
held out the little buckskin sack to Joe.

"Hev' a chaw," he said.

To offer tobacco to anyone was absolutely a borderman's guarantee of
friendliness toward that person.

Jeff expectorated half a dozen times, each time coming a little
nearer the stone he was aiming at, some five yards distant. Possibly
this was the borderman's way of oiling up his conversational
machinery. At all events, he commenced to talk.

"Yer brother's goin' to preach out here, ain't he? Preachin' is all
right, I'll allow; but I'm kinder doubtful about preachin' to
redskins. Howsumever, I've knowed Injuns who are good fellows, and
there's no tellin'. What are ye goin' in fer--farmin'?"

"No, I wouldn't make a good farmer."

"Jest cum out kinder wild like, eh?" rejoined Jeff, knowingly.

"I wanted to come West because I was tired of tame life. I love the
forest; I want to fish and hunt; and I think I'd like to--to see
Indians."

"I kinder thought so," said the old frontiersman, nodding his head
as though he perfectly understood Joe's case. "Well, lad, where
you're goin' seein' Injuns ain't a matter of choice. You has to see
'em, and fight 'em, too. We've had bad times for years out here on
the border, and I'm thinkin' wuss is comin'. Did ye ever hear the
name Girty?"

"Yes; he's a renegade."

"He's a traitor, and Jim and George Girty, his brothers, are p'isin
rattlesnake Injuns. Simon Girty's bad enough; but Jim's the wust.
He's now wusser'n a full-blooded Delaware. He's all the time on the
lookout to capture white wimen to take to his Injun teepee. Simon
Girty and his pals, McKee and Elliott, deserted from that thar fort
right afore yer eyes. They're now livin' among the redskins down
Fort Henry way, raisin' as much hell fer the settlers as they kin."

"Is Fort Henry near the Indian towns?" asked Joe.

"There's Delawares, Shawnees and Hurons all along the Ohio below
Fort Henry."

"Where is the Moravian Mission located?"

"Why, lad, the Village of Peace, as the Injuns call it, is right in
the midst of that Injun country. I 'spect it's a matter of a hundred
miles below and cross-country a little from Fort Henry."

"The fort must be an important point, is it not?"

"Wal, I guess so. It's the last place on the river," answered Lynn,
with a grim smile. "There's only a stockade there, an' a handful of
men. The Injuns hev swarmed down on it time and ag'in, but they hev
never burned it. Only such men as Colonel Zane, his brother Jack,
and Wetzel could hev kept that fort standin' all these bloody years.
Eb Zane's got but a few men, yet he kin handle 'em some, an' with
such scouts as Jack Zane and Wetzel, he allus knows what's goin' on
among the Injuns."

"I've heard of Colonel Zane. He was an officer under Lord Dunmore.
The hunters here speak often of Jack Zane and Wetzel. What are
they?"

"Jack Zane is a hunter an' guide. I knowed him well a few years
back. He's a quiet, mild chap; but a streak of chain-lightnin' when
he's riled. Wetzel is an Injun-killer. Some people say as how he's
crazy over scalp-huntin'; but I reckon that's not so. I've seen him
a few times. He don't hang round the settlement 'cept when the
Injuns are up, an' nobody sees him much. At home he sets round
silent-like, an' then mebbe next mornin' he'll be gone, an' won't
show up fer days or weeks. But all the frontier knows of his deeds.
Fer instance, I've hearn of settlers gettin' up in the mornin' an'
findin' a couple of dead and scalped Injuns right in front of their
cabins. No one knowed who killed 'em, but everybody says 'Wetzel.'
He's allus warnin' the settlers when they need to flee to the fort,
and sure he's right every time, because when these men go back to
their cabins they find nothin' but ashes. There couldn't be any
farmin' done out there but fer Wetzel."

"What does he look like?" questioned Joe, much interested.

"Wetzel stands straight as the oak over thar. He'd hev' to go
sideways to git his shoulders in that door, but he's as light of
foot an' fast as a deer. An' his eyes--why, lad, ye kin hardly look
into 'em. If you ever see Wetzel you'll know him to onct."

"I want to see him," Joe spoke quickly, his eyes lighting with an
eager flash. "He must be a great fighter."

"Is he? Lew Wetzel is the heftiest of 'em all, an' we hev some as
kin fight out here. I was down the river a few years ago and joined
a party to go out an' hunt up some redskins as had been reported.
Wetzel was with us. We soon struck Injun sign, and then come on to a
lot of the pesky varmints. We was all fer goin' home, because we had
a small force. When we started to go we finds Wetzel sittin'
calm-like on a log. We said: 'Ain't ye goin' home?' and he replied,
'I cum out to find redskins, an' now as we've found 'em, I'm not
goin' to run away.' An' we left him settin' thar. Oh, Wetzel is a
fighter!"

"I hope I shall see him," said Joe once more, the warm light, which
made him look so boyish, still glowing in his face.

"Mebbe ye'll git to; and sure ye'll see redskins, an' not tame ones,
nuther."

At this moment the sound of excited voices near the cabins broke in
on the conversation. Joe saw several persons run toward the large
cabin and disappear behind it. He smiled as he thought perhaps the
commotion had been caused by the awakening of the Indian brave.

Rising to his feet, Joe went toward the cabin, and soon saw the
cause of the excitement. A small crowd of men and women, all
laughing and talking, surrounded the Indian brave and the little
stout fellow. Joe heard some one groan, and then a deep, guttural
voice:

"Paleface--big steal--ugh! Injun mad--heap mad--kill paleface."

After elbowing his way into the group, Joe saw the Indian holding
Loorey with one hand, while he poked him on the ribs with the other.
The captive's face was the picture of dismay; even the streaks of
paint did not hide his look of fear and bewilderment. The poor
half-witted fellow was so badly frightened that he could only groan.

"Silvertip scalp paleface. Ugh!" growled the savage, giving Loorey
another blow on the side. This time he bent over in pain. The
bystanders were divided in feeling; the men laughed, while the women
murmured sympathetically.

"This's not a bit funny," muttered Joe, as he pushed his way nearly
to the middle of the crowd. Then he stretched out a long arm that,
bare and brawny, looked as though it might have been a blacksmith's,
and grasped the Indian's sinewy wrist with a force that made him
loosen his hold on Loorey instantly.

"I stole the shirt--fun--joke," said Joe. "Scalp me if you want to
scalp anyone."

The Indian looked quickly at the powerful form before him. With a
twist he slipped his arm from Joe's grasp.

"Big paleface heap fun--all squaw play," he said, scornfully. There
was a menace in his somber eyes as he turned abruptly and left the
group.

"I'm afraid you've made an enemy," said Jake Wentz to Joe. "An
Indian never forgets an insult, and that's how he regarded your
joke. Silvertip has been friendly here because he sells us his
pelts. He's a Shawnee chief. There he goes through the willows!"

By this time Jim and Mr. Wells, Mrs. Wentz and the girls had joined
the group. They all watched Silvertip get into his canoe and paddle
away.

"A bad sign," said Wentz, and then, turning to Jeff Lynn, who joined
the party at that moment, he briefly explained the circumstances.

"Never did like Silver. He's a crafty redskin, an' not to be
trusted," replied Jeff.

"He has turned round and is looking back," Nell said quickly.

"So he has," observed the fur-trader.

The Indian was now several hundred yards down the swift river, and
for an instant had ceased paddling. The sun shone brightly on his
eagle plumes. He remained motionless for a moment, and even at such
a distance the dark, changeless face could be discerned. He lifted
his hand and shook it menacingly.

"If ye don't hear from that redskin ag'in Jeff Lynn don't know
nothin'," calmly said the old frontiersman.



Chapter IV.

As the rafts drifted with the current the voyagers saw the settlers
on the landing-place diminish until they had faded from indistinct
figures to mere black specks against the green background. Then came
the last wave of a white scarf, faintly in the distance, and at
length the dark outline of the fort was all that remained to their
regretful gaze. Quickly that, too, disappeared behind the green
hill, which, with its bold front, forces the river to take a wide
turn.

The Ohio, winding in its course between high, wooded bluffs, rolled
on and on into the wilderness.

Beautiful as was the ever-changing scenery, rugged gray-faced cliffs
on one side contrasting with green-clad hills on the other, there
hovered over land and water something more striking than beauty.
Above all hung a still atmosphere of calmness--of loneliness.

And this penetrating solitude marred somewhat the pleasure which
might have been found in the picturesque scenery, and caused the
voyagers, to whom this country was new, to take less interest in the
gaily-feathered birds and stealthy animals that were to be seen on
the way. By the forms of wild life along the banks of the river,
this strange intruder on their peace was regarded with attention.
The birds and beasts evinced little fear of the floating rafts. The
sandhill crane, stalking along the shore, lifted his long neck as
the unfamiliar thing came floating by, and then stood still and
silent as a statue until the rafts disappeared from view.
Blue-herons feeding along the bars, saw the unusual spectacle, and,
uttering surprised "booms," they spread wide wings and lumbered away
along the shore. The crows circled above the voyagers, cawing in not
unfriendly excitement. Smaller birds alighted on the raised poles,
and several--a robin, a catbird and a little brown wren--ventured
with hesitating boldness to peck at the crumbs the girls threw to
them. Deer waded knee-deep in the shallow water, and, lifting their
heads, instantly became motionless and absorbed. Occasionally a
buffalo appeared on a level stretch of bank, and, tossing his huge
head, seemed inclined to resent the coming of this stranger into his
domain.

All day the rafts drifted steadily and swiftly down the river,
presenting to the little party ever-varying pictures of densely
wooded hills, of jutting, broken cliffs with scant evergreen growth;
of long reaches of sandy bar that glistened golden in the sunlight,
and over all the flight and call of wildfowl, the flitting of
woodland songsters, and now and then the whistle and bellow of the
horned watchers in the forest.

The intense blue of the vault above began to pale, and low down in
the west a few fleecy clouds, gorgeously golden for a fleeting
instant, then crimson-crowned for another, shaded and darkened as
the setting sun sank behind the hills. Presently the red rays
disappeared, a pink glow suffused the heavens, and at last, as gray
twilight stole down over the hill-tops, the crescent moon peeped
above the wooded fringe of the western bluffs.

"Hard an' fast she is," sang out Jeff Lynn, as he fastened the rope
to a tree at the head of a small island. "All off now, and' we'll
hev' supper. Thar's a fine spring under yon curly birch, an' I
fetched along a leg of deer-meat. Hungry, little 'un?"

He had worked hard all day steering the rafts, yet Nell had seen him
smiling at her many times during the journey, and he had found time
before the early start to arrange for her a comfortable seat. There
was now a solicitude in the frontiersman's voice that touched her.

"I am famished," she replied, with her bright smile. "I am afraid I
could eat a whole deer."

They all climbed the sandy slope, and found themselves on the summit
of an oval island, with a pretty glade in the middle surrounded by
birches. Bill, the second raftsman, a stolid, silent man, at once
swung his axe upon a log of driftwood. Mr. Wells and Jim walked to
and fro under the birches, and Kate and Nell sat on the grass
watching with great interest the old helmsman as he came up from the
river, his brown hands and face shining from the scrubbing he had
given them. Soon he had a fire cheerfully blazing, and after laying
out the few utensils, he addressed himself to Joe:

"I'll tell ye right here, lad, good venison kin be spoiled by bad
cuttin' and cookin'. You're slicin' it too thick. See--thar! Now
salt good, an' keep outen the flame; on the red coals is best."

With a sharpened stick Jeff held the thin slices over the fire for a
few moments. Then he laid them aside on some clean white-oak chips
Bill's axe had provided. The simple meal of meat, bread, and
afterward a drink of the cold spring water, was keenly relished by
the hungry voyagers. When it had been eaten, Jeff threw a log on the
fire and remarked:

"Seein' as how we won't be in redskin territory fer awhile yit, we
kin hev a fire. I'll allow ye'll all be chilly and damp from
river-mist afore long, so toast yerselves good."

"How far have we come to-day?" inquired Mr. Wells, his mind always
intent on reaching the scene of his cherished undertaking.

"'Bout thirty-odd mile, I reckon. Not much on a trip, thet's sartin,
but we'll pick up termorrer. We've some quicker water, an' the rafts
hev to go separate."

"How quiet!" exclaimed Kate, suddenly breaking the silence that
followed the frontiersman's answer.

"Beautiful!" impetuously said Nell, looking up at Joe. A quick flash
from his gray eyes answered her; he did not speak; indeed he had
said little to her since the start, but his glance showed her how
glad he was that she felt the sweetness and content of this wild
land.

"I was never in a wilderness before," broke in the earnest voice of
the young minister. "I feel an almost overpowering sense of
loneliness. I want to get near to you all; I feel lost. Yet it is
grand, sublime!"

"Here is the promised land--the fruitful life--Nature as it was
created by God," replied the old minister, impressively.

"Tell us a story," said Nell to the old frontiersman, as he once
more joined the circle round the fire.

"So, little 'un, ye want a story?" queried Jeff, taking up a live
coal and placing it in the bowl of his pipe. He took off his
coon-skin cap and carefully laid it aside. His weather-beaten face
beamed in answer to the girl's request. He drew a long and audible
pull at his black pipe, and send forth slowly a cloud of white
smoke. Deliberately poking the fire with a stick, as if stirring
into life dead embers of the past, he sucked again at his pipe, and
emitted a great puff of smoke that completely enveloped the grizzled
head. From out that white cloud came his drawling voice.

"Ye've seen thet big curly birch over thar--thet 'un as bends kind
of sorrowful like. Wal, it used to stand straight an' proud. I've
knowed thet tree all the years I've navigated this river, an' it
seems natural like to me thet it now droops dyin', fer it shades the
grave of as young, an' sweet, an' purty a lass as yerself, Miss
Nell. Rivermen called this island George's Island, 'cause Washington
onct camped here; but of late years the name's got changed, an' the
men say suthin' like this: 'We'll try an' make Milly's birch afore
sundown,' jest as Bill and me hev done to-day. Some years agone I
was comin' up from Fort Henry, an' had on board my slow old scow a
lass named Milly--we never learned her other name. She come to me at
the fort, an' tells as how her folks hed been killed by Injuns, an'
she wanted to git back to Pitt to meet her sweetheart. I was ag'in
her comin' all along, an' fust off I said 'No.' But when I seen
tears in her blue eyes, an' she puts her little hand on mine, I jest
wilted, an' says to Jim Blair, 'She goes.' Wal, jest as might hev
been expected--an' fact is I looked fer it--we wus tackled by
redskins. Somehow, Jim Girty got wind of us hevin' a lass aboard,
an' he ketched up with us jest below here. It's a bad place, called
Shawnee Rock, an' I'll show it to ye termorrer. The renegade, with
his red devils, attacked us thar, an' we had a time gittin' away.
Milly wus shot. She lived fer awhile, a couple of days, an' all the
time wus so patient, an' sweet, an' brave with thet renegade's
bullet in her--fer he shot her when he seen he couldn't capture
her--thet thar wusn't a blame man of us who wouldn't hev died to
grant her prayer, which wus that she could live to onct more see her
lover."

There was a long silence, during which the old frontiersman sat
gazing into the fire with sad eyes.

"We couldn't do nuthin', an' we buried her thar under thet birch,
where she smiled her last sad, sweet smile, an' died. Ever since
then the river has been eatn' away at this island. It's only half as
big as it wus onct, an' another flood will take away this sand-bar,
these few birches--an' Milly's grave."

The old frontiersman's story affected all his listeners. The elder
minister bowed his head and prayed that no such fate might overtake
his nieces. The young minister looked again, as he had many times
that day, at Nell's winsome face. The girls cast grave glances at
the drooping birch, and their bright tears glistened in the
fire-glow. Once more Joe's eyes glinted with that steely flash, and
as he gazed out over the wide, darkening expanse of water his face
grew cold and rigid.

"I'll allow I might hev told a more cheerful story, an' I'll do so
next time; but I wanted ye all, particular the lasses, to know
somethin' of the kind of country ye're goin' into. The frontier
needs women; but jist yit it deals hard with them. An' Jim Girty,
with more of his kind, ain't dead yit."

"Why don't some one kill him?" was Joe's sharp question.

"Easier said than done, lad. Jim Girty is a white traitor, but he's
a cunnin' an' fierce redskin in his ways an' life. He knows the
woods as a crow does, an' keeps outer sight 'cept when he's least
expected. Then ag'in, he's got Simon Girty, his brother, an' almost
the whole redskin tribe behind him. Injuns stick close to a white
man that has turned ag'inst his own people, an' Jim Girty hain't
ever been ketched. Howsumever, I heard last trip thet he'd been
tryin' some of his tricks round Fort Henry, an' thet Wetzel is on
his trail. Wal, if it's so thet Lew Wetzel is arter him, I wouldn't
give a pinch o' powder fer the white-redskin's chances of a long
life."

No one spoke, and Jeff, after knocking the ashes from his pipe, went
down to the raft, returning shortly afterward with his blanket. This
he laid down and rolled himself in it. Presently from under his
coon-skin cap came the words:

"Wal, I've turned in, an' I advise ye all to do the same."

All save Joe and Nell acted on Jeff's suggestion. For a long time
the young couple sat close together on the bank, gazing at the
moonlight on the river.

The night was perfect. A cool wind fanned the dying embers of the
fire and softly stirred the leaves. Earlier in the evening a single
frog had voiced his protest against the loneliness; but now his
dismal croak was no longer heard. A snipe, belated in his feeding,
ran along the sandy shore uttering his tweet-tweet, and his little
cry, breaking in so softly on the silence, seemed only to make more
deeply felt the great vast stillness of the night.

Joe's arm was around Nell. She had demurred at first, but he gave no
heed to her slight resistance, and finally her head rested against
his shoulder. There was no need of words.

Joe had a pleasurable sense of her nearness, and there was a delight
in the fragrance of her hair as it waved against his cheek; but just
then love was not uppermost in his mind. All day he had been silent
under the force of an emotion which he could not analyze. Some
power, some feeling in which the thought of Nell had no share, was
drawing him with irresistible strength. Nell had just begun to
surrender to him in the sweetness of her passion; and yet even with
that knowledge knocking reproachfully at his heart, he could not
help being absorbed in the shimmering water, in the dark reflection
of the trees, the gloom and shadow of the forest.

Presently he felt her form relax in his arms; then her soft regular
breathing told him she had fallen asleep and he laughed low to
himself. How she would pout on the morrow when he teased her about
it! Then, realizing that she was tired with her long day's journey,
he reproached himself for keeping her from the needed rest, and
instantly decided to carry her to the raft. Yet such was the novelty
of the situation that he yielded to its charm, and did not go at
once. The moonlight found bright threads in her wavy hair; it shone
caressingly on her quiet face, and tried to steal under the downcast
lashes.

Joe made a movement to rise with her, when she muttered indistinctly
as if speaking to some one. He remembered then she had once told him
that she talked in her sleep, and how greatly it annoyed her. He
might hear something more with which to tease her; so he listened.

"Yes--uncle--I will go--Kate, we must--go. . ."

Another interval of silence, then more murmurings. He distinguished
his own name, and presently she called clearly, as if answering some
inward questioner.

"I--love him--yes--I love Joe--he has mastered me. Yet I wish he
were--like Jim--Jim who looked at me--so--with his deep eyes--and
I. . . ."

Joe lifted her as if she were a baby, and carrying her down to the
raft, gently laid her by her sleeping sister.

The innocent words which he should not have heard were like a blow.
What she would never have acknowledged in her waking hours had been
revealed in her dreams. He recalled the glance of Jim's eyes as it
had rested on Nell many times that day, and now these things were
most significant.

He found at the end of the island a great, mossy stone. On this he
climbed, and sat where the moonlight streamed upon him. Gradually
that cold bitterness died out from his face, as it passed from his
heart, and once more he became engrossed in the silver sheen on the
water, the lapping of the waves on the pebbly beach, and in that
speaking, mysterious silence of the woods.

                *       *       *

When the first faint rays of red streaked over the eastern
hill-tops, and the river mist arose from the water in a vapory
cloud, Jeff Lynn rolled out of his blanket, stretched his long
limbs, and gave a hearty call to the morning. His cheerful welcome
awakened all the voyagers except Joe, who had spent the night in
watching and the early morning in fishing.

"Wal, I'll be darned," ejaculated Jeff as he saw Joe. "Up afore me,
an' ketched a string of fish."

"What are they?" asked Joe, holding up several bronze-backed fish.

"Bass--black bass, an' thet big feller is a lammin' hefty 'un. How'd
ye ketch 'em?"

"I fished for them."

"Wal, so it 'pears," growled Jeff, once more reluctantly yielding to
his admiration for the lad. "How'd ye wake up so early?"

"I stayed up all night. I saw three deer swim from the mainland, but
nothing else came around."

"Try yer hand at cleanin' 'em fer breakfast," continued Jeff,
beginning to busy himself with preparations for that meal. "Wal,
wal, if he ain't surprisin'! He'll do somethin' out here on the
frontier, sure as I'm a born sinner," he muttered to himself,
wagging his head in his quaint manner.

Breakfast over, Jeff transferred the horses to the smaller raft,
which he had cut loose from his own, and, giving a few directions to
Bill, started down-stream with Mr. Wells and the girls.

The rafts remained close together for a while, but as the current
quickened and was more skillfully taken advantage of by Jeff, the
larger raft gained considerable headway, gradually widening the gap
between the two.

All day they drifted. From time to time Joe and Jim waved their
hands to the girls; but the greater portion of their attention was
given to quieting the horses. Mose, Joe's big white dog, retired in
disgust to the hut, where he watched and dozed by turns. He did not
fancy this kind of voyaging. Bill strained his sturdy arms all day
on the steering-oar.

About the middle of the afternoon Joe observed that the hills grew
more rugged and precipitous, and the river ran faster. He kept a
constant lookout for the wall of rock which marked the point of
danger. When the sun had disappeared behind the hills, he saw ahead
a gray rock protruding from the green foliage. It was ponderous,
overhanging, and seemed to frown down on the river. This was Shawnee
Rock. Joe looked long at the cliff, and wondered if there was now an
Indian scout hidden behind the pines that skirted the edge.
Prominent on the top of the bluff a large, dead tree projected its
hoary, twisted branches.

Bill evidently saw the landmark, for he stopped in his monotonous
walk to and fro across the raft, and pushing his oar amidships he
looked ahead for the other raft. The figure of the tall frontiersman
could be plainly seen as he labored at the helm.

The raft disappeared round a bend, and as it did so Joe saw a white
scarf waved by Nell.

Bill worked the clumsy craft over toward the right shore where the
current was more rapid. He pushed with all his strength, and when
the oar had reached its widest sweep, he lifted it and ran back
across the raft for another push. Joe scanned the river ahead. He
saw no rapids; only rougher water whirling over some rocks. They
were where the channel narrowed and ran close to the right-hand
bank. Under a willow-flanked ledge was a sand-bar. To Joe there
seemed nothing hazardous in drifting through this pass.

"Bad place ahead," said Bill, observing Joe's survey of the river.

"It doesn't look so," replied Joe.

"A raft ain't a boat. We could pole a boat. You has to hev water to
float logs, an' the river's run out considerable. I'm only afeerd
fer the horses. If we hit or drag, they might plunge around a bit."

When the raft passed into the head of the bend it struck the rocks
several times, but finally gained the channel safely, and everything
seemed propitious for an easy passage.

But, greatly to Bill's surprise, the wide craft was caught directly
in the channel, and swung round so that the steering-oar pointed
toward the opposite shore. The water roared a foot deep over the
logs.

"Hold hard on the horses!" yelled Bill. "Somethin's wrong. I never
seen a snag here."

The straining mass of logs, insecurely fastened together, rolled and
then pitched loose again, but the short delay had been fatal to the
steering apparatus.

Joe would have found keen enjoyment in the situation, had it not
been for his horse, Lance. The thoroughbred was difficult to hold.
As Bill was making strenuous efforts to get in a lucky stroke of the
oar, he failed to see a long length of grapevine floating like a
brown snake of the water below. In the excitement they heeded not
the barking of Mose. Nor did they see the grapevine straighten and
become taut just as they drifted upon it; but they felt the raft
strike and hold on some submerged object. It creaked and groaned and
the foamy water surged, gurgling, between the logs.

Jim's mare snorted with terror, and rearing high, pulled her halter
loose and plunged into the river. But Jim still held her, at risk of
being drawn overboard.

"Let go! She'll drag you in!" yelled Joe, grasping him with his free
hand. Lance trembled violently and strained at the rope, which his
master held with a strong grip.

CRACK!

The stinging report of a rifle rang out above the splashing of the
water.

Without a cry, Bill's grasp on the oar loosened; he fell over it
limply, his head striking the almost submerged log. A dark-red fluid
colored the water; then his body slipped over the oar and into the
river, where it sank.

"My God! Shot!" cried Jim, in horrified tones.

He saw a puff of white smoke rising above the willows. Then the
branches parted, revealing the dark forms of several Indian
warriors. From the rifle in the foremost savage's hand a slight veil
of smoke rose. With the leap of a panther the redskin sprang from
the strip of sand to the raft.

"Hold, Jim! Drop that ax! We're caught!" cried Joe.

"It's that Indian from the fort!" gasped Jim.

The stalwart warrior was indeed Silvertip. But how changed! Stripped
of the blanket he had worn at the settlement, now standing naked but
for his buckskin breech-cloth, with his perfectly proportioned form
disclosed in all its sinewy beauty, and on his swarthy, evil face an
expression of savage scorn, he surely looked a warrior and a chief.

He drew his tomahawk and flashed a dark glance at Joe. For a moment
he steadily regarded the young man; but if he expected to see fear
in the latter's face he was mistaken, for the look was returned
coolly.

"Paleface steal shirt," he said in his deep voice. "Fool paleface
play--Silvertip no forget."



Chapter V.

Silvertip turned to his braves, and giving a brief command, sprang
from the raft. The warriors closed in around the brothers; two
grasping each by the arms, and the remaining Indian taking care of
the horse. The captives were then led ashore, where Silvertip
awaited them.

When the horse was clear of the raft, which task necessitated
considerable labor on the part of the Indians, the chief seized the
grapevine, that was now plainly in sight, and severed it with one
blow of his tomahawk. The raft dashed forward with a lurch and
drifted downstream.

In the clear water Joe could see the cunning trap which had caused
the death of Bill, and insured the captivity of himself and his
brother. The crafty savages had trimmed a six-inch sapling and
anchored it under the water. They weighted the heavy end, leaving
the other pointing upstream. To this last had been tied the
grapevine. When the drifting raft reached the sapling, the Indians
concealed in the willows pulled hard on the improvised rope; the end
of the sapling stuck up like a hook, and the aft was caught and
held. The killing of the helmsman showed the Indians' foresight;
even had the raft drifted on downstream the brothers would have been
helpless on a craft they could not manage. After all, Joe thought,
he had not been so far wrong when he half fancied that an Indian lay
behind Shawnee Rock, and he marveled at this clever trick which had
so easily effected their capture.

But he had little time to look around at the scene of action. There
was a moment only in which to study the river to learn if the
unfortunate raftsman's body had appeared. It was not to be seen. The
river ran swiftly and hid all evidence of the tragedy under its
smooth surface. When the brave who had gone back to the raft for the
goods joined his companion the two hurried Joe up the bank after the
others.

Once upon level ground Joe saw before him an open forest. On the
border of this the Indians stopped long enough to bind the
prisoners' wrists with thongs of deerhide. While two of the braves
performed this office, Silvertip leaned against a tree and took no
notice of the brothers. When they were thus securely tied one of
their captors addressed the chief, who at once led the way westward
through the forest. The savages followed in single file, with Joe
and Jim in the middle of the line. The last Indian tried to mount
Lance; but the thoroughbred would have none of him, and after
several efforts the savage was compelled to desist. Mose trotted
reluctantly along behind the horse.

Although the chief preserved a dignified mien, his braves were
disposed to be gay. They were in high glee over their feat of
capturing the palefaces, and kept up an incessant jabbering. One
Indian, who walked directly behind Joe, continually prodded him with
the stock of a rifle; and whenever Joe turned, the brawny redskin
grinned as he grunted, "Ugh!" Joe observed that this huge savage had
a broad face of rather a lighter shade of red than his companions.
Perhaps he intended those rifle-prods in friendliness, for although
they certainly amused him, he would allow no one else to touch Joe;
but it would have been more pleasing had he shown his friendship in
a gentle manner. This Indian carried Joe's pack, much to his own
delight, especially as his companions evinced an envious curiosity.
The big fellow would not, however, allow them to touch it.

"He's a cheerful brute," remarked Joe to Jim.

"Ugh!" grunted the big Indian, jamming Joe with his rifle-stock.

Joe took heed to the warning and spoke no more. He gave all his
attention to the course over which he was being taken. Here was his
first opportunity to learn something of Indians and their woodcraft.
It occurred to him that his captors would not have been so gay and
careless had they not believed themselves safe from pursuit, and he
concluded they were leisurely conducting him to one of the Indian
towns. He watched the supple figure before him, wondering at the
quick step, light as the fall of a leaf, and tried to walk as
softly. He found, however, that where the Indian readily avoided the
sticks and brush, he was unable to move without snapping twigs. Now
and then he would look up and study the lay of the land ahead; and
as he came nearer to certain rocks and trees he scrutinized them
closely, in order to remember their shape and general appearance. He
believed he was blazing out in his mind this woodland trail, so that
should fortune favor him and he contrive to escape, he would be able
to find his way back to the river. Also, he was enjoying the wild
scenery.

This forest would have appeared beautiful, even to one indifferent
to such charms, and Joe was far from that. Every moment he felt
steal stronger over him a subtle influence which he could not
define. Half unconsciously he tried to analyze it, but it baffled
him. He could no more explain what fascinated him than he could
understand what caused the melancholy quiet which hung over the
glades and hollows. He had pictured a real forest so differently
from this. Here was a long lane paved with springy moss and fenced
by bright-green sassafras; there a secluded dale, dotted with
pale-blue blossoms, over which the giant cottonwoods leaned their
heads, jealously guarding the delicate flowers from the sun. Beech
trees, growing close in clanny groups, spread their straight limbs
gracefully; the white birches gleamed like silver wherever a stray
sunbeam stole through the foliage, and the oaks, monarchs of the
forest, rose over all, dark, rugged, and kingly.

Joe soon understood why the party traveled through such open forest.
The chief, seeming hardly to deviate from his direct course, kept
clear of broken ground, matted thickets and tangled windfalls. Joe
got a glimpse of dark ravines and heard the music of tumbling
waters; he saw gray cliffs grown over with vines, and full of holes
and crevices; steep ridges, covered with dense patches of briar and
hazel, rising in the way. Yet the Shawnee always found an easy path.

The sun went down behind the foliage in the west, and shadows
appeared low in the glens; then the trees faded into an indistinct
mass; a purple shade settled down over the forest, and night brought
the party to a halt.

The Indians selected a sheltered spot under the lee of a knoll, at
the base of which ran a little brook. Here in this inclosed space
were the remains of a camp-fire. Evidently the Indians had halted
there that same day, for the logs still smouldered. While one brave
fanned the embers, another took from a neighboring branch a haunch
of deer meat. A blaze was soon coaxed from the dull coals, more fuel
was added, and presently a cheerful fire shone on the circle of
dusky forms.

It was a picture which Joe had seen in many a boyish dream; now that
he was a part of it he did not dwell on the hopelessness of the
situation, nor of the hostile chief whose enmity he had incurred.
Almost, it seemed, he was glad of this chance to watch the Indians
and listen to them. He had been kept apart from Jim, and it appeared
to Joe that their captors treated his brother with a contempt which
they did not show him. Silvertip had, no doubt, informed them that
Jim had been on his way to teach the Indians of the white man's God.

Jim sat with drooping head; his face was sad, and evidently he took
the most disheartening view of his capture. When he had eaten the
slice of venison given him he lay down with his back to the fire.

Silvertip, in these surroundings, showed his real character. He had
appeared friendly in the settlement; but now he was the relentless
savage, a son of the wilds, free as an eagle. His dignity as a chief
kept him aloof from his braves. He had taken no notice of the
prisoners since the capture. He remained silent, steadily regarding
the fire with his somber eyes. At length, glancing at the big
Indian, he motioned toward the prisoners and with a single word
stretched himself on the leaves.

Joe noted the same changelessness of expression in the other dark
faces as he had seen in Silvertip's. It struck him forcibly. When
they spoke in their soft, guttural tones, or burst into a low, not
unmusical laughter, or sat gazing stolidly into the fire, their
faces seemed always the same, inscrutable, like the depths of the
forest now hidden in night. One thing Joe felt rather than
saw--these savages were fierce and untamable. He was sorry for Jim,
because, as he believed, it would be as easy to teach the panther
gentleness toward his prey as to instill into one of these wild
creatures a belief in Christ.

The braves manifested keen pleasure in anticipation as to what they
would get out of the pack, which the Indian now opened. Time and
again the big brave placed his broad hand on the shoulder of a
comrade Indian and pushed him backward.

Finally the pack was opened. It contained a few articles of wearing
apparel, a pair of boots, and a pipe and pouch of tobacco. The big
Indian kept the latter articles, grunting with satisfaction, and
threw the boots and clothes to the others. Immediately there was a
scramble. One brave, after a struggle with another, got possession
of both boots. He at once slipped off his moccasins and drew on the
white man's foot-coverings. He strutted around in them a few
moments, but his proud manner soon changed to disgust.

Cowhide had none of the soft, yielding qualities of buckskin, and
hurt the Indian's feet. Sitting down, he pulled one off, not without
difficulty, for the boots were wet; but he could not remove the
other. He hesitated a moment, being aware of the subdued merriment
of his comrades, and then held up his foot to the nearest one. This
chanced to be the big Indian, who evidently had a keen sense of
humor. Taking hold of the boot with both hands, he dragged the
luckless brave entirely around the camp-fire. The fun, however, was
not to be all one-sided. The big Indian gave a more strenuous pull,
and the boot came off suddenly. Unprepared for this, he lost his
balance and fell down the bank almost into the creek. He held on to
the boot, nevertheless, and getting up, threw it into the fire.

The braves quieted down after that, and soon lapsed into slumber,
leaving the big fellow, to whom the chief had addressed his brief
command, acting, as guard. Observing Joe watching him as he puffed
on his new pipe, he grinned, and spoke in broken English that was
intelligible, and much of a surprise to the young man.

"Paleface--tobac'--heap good."

Then, seeing that Joe made no effort to follow his brother's
initiative, for Jim was fast asleep, he pointed to the recumbent
figures and spoke again.

"Ugh! Paleface sleep--Injun wigwams--near setting sun."

On the following morning Joe was awakened by the pain in his legs,
which had been bound all night. He was glad when the bonds were cut
and the party took up its westward march.

The Indians, though somewhat quieter, displayed the same
carelessness: they did not hurry, nor use particular caution, but
selected the most open paths through the forest. They even halted
while one of their number crept up on a herd of browsing deer. About
noon the leader stopped to drink from a spring; his braves followed
suit and permitted the white prisoners to quench their thirst.

When they were about to start again the single note of a bird far
away in the woods sounded clearly on the quiet air. Joe would not
have given heed to it had he been less attentive. He instantly
associated this peculiar bird-note with the sudden stiffening of
Silvertip's body and his attitude of intense listening. Low
exclamations came from the braves as they bent to catch the lightest
sound. Presently, above the murmur of the gentle fall of water over
the stones, rose that musical note once more. It was made by a bird,
Joe thought, and yet, judged by the actions of the Indians, how
potent with meaning beyond that of the simple melody of the woodland
songster! He turned, half expecting to see somewhere in the
tree-tops the bird which had wrought so sudden a change in his
captors. As he did so from close at hand came the same call, now
louder, but identical with the one that had deceived him. It was an
answering signal, and had been given by Silvertip.

It flashed into Joe's mind that other savages were in the forest;
they had run across the Shawnees' trail, and were thus communicating
with them. Soon dark figures could be discerned against the patches
of green thicket; they came nearer and nearer, and now entered the
open glade where Silvertip stood with his warriors.

Joe counted twelve, and noted that they differed from his captors.
He had only time to see that this difference consisted in the
head-dress, and in the color and quantity of paint on their bodies,
when his gaze was attracted and riveted to the foremost figures.

The first was that of a very tall and stately chief, toward whom
Silvertip now advanced with every show of respect. In this Indian's
commanding stature, in his reddish-bronze face, stern and powerful,
there were readable the characteristics of a king. In his deep-set
eyes, gleaming from under a ponderous brow; in his mastiff-like jaw;
in every feature of his haughty face were visible all the high
intelligence, the consciousness of past valor, and the power and
authority that denote a great chieftain.

The second figure was equally striking for the remarkable contrast
it afforded to the chief's. Despite the gaudy garments, the paint,
the fringed and beaded buckskin leggins--all the Indian
accouterments and garments which bedecked this person, he would have
been known anywhere as a white man. His skin was burned to a dark
bronze, but it had not the red tinge which characterizes the Indian.
This white man had, indeed, a strange physiognomy. The forehead was
narrow and sloped backward from the brow, denoting animal instincts.
The eyes were close together, yellowish-brown in color, and had a
peculiar vibrating movement, as though they were hung on a pivot,
like a compass-needle. The nose was long and hooked, and the mouth
set in a thin, cruel line. There was in the man's aspect an
extraordinary combination of ignorance, vanity, cunning and
ferocity.

While the two chiefs held a short consultation, this
savage-appearing white man addressed the brothers.

"Who're you, an' where you goin'?" he asked gruffly, confronting
Jim.

"My name is Downs. I am a preacher, and was on my way to the
Moravian Mission to preach to the Indians. You are a white man; will
you help us?"

If Jim expected the information would please his interrogator, he
was mistaken.

"So you're one of 'em? Yes, I'll do suthin' fer you when I git back
from this hunt. I'll cut your heart out, chop it up, an' feed it to
the buzzards," he said fiercely, concluding his threat by striking
Jim a cruel blow on the head.

Joe paled deathly white at this cowardly action, and his eyes, as
they met the gaze of the ruffian, contracted with their
characteristic steely glow, as if some powerful force within the
depths of his being were at white heat and only this pale flash came
to the surface.

"You ain't a preacher?" questioned the man, meeting something in
Joe's glance that had been absent from Jim's.

Joe made no answer, and regarded questioner steadily.

"Ever see me afore? Ever hear of Jim Girty?" he asked boastfully.

"Before you spoke I knew you were Girty," answered Joe quietly.

"How d'you know? Ain't you afeared?"

"Of what?"

"Me--me?"

Joe laughed in the renegades face.

"How'd you knew me?" growled Girty. "I'll see thet you hev cause to
remember me after this."

"I figured there was only one so-called white man in these woods who
is coward enough to strike a man whose hands are tied."

"Boy, ye're too free with your tongue. I'll shet off your wind."
Girty's hand was raised, but it never reached Joe's neck.

The big Indian had an hour or more previous cut Joe's bonds, but he
still retained the thong which was left attached to Joe's left
wrist. This allowed the young man free use of his right arm, which,
badly swollen or not, he brought into quick action.

When the renegade reached toward him Joe knocked up the hand, and,
instead of striking, he grasped the hooked nose with all the
powerful grip of his fingers. Girty uttered a frightful curse; he
writhed with pain, but could not free himself from the vise-like
clutch. He drew his tomahawk and with a scream aimed a vicious blow
at Joe. He missed his aim, however, for Silvertip had intervened and
turned the course of the keen hatchet. But the weapon struck Joe a
glancing blow, inflicting a painful, though not dangerous wound.

The renegade's nose was skinned and bleeding profusely. He was
frantic with fury, and tried to get at Joe; but Silvertip remained
in front of his captive until some of the braves led Girty into the
forest, where the tall chief had already disappeared.

The nose-pulling incident added to the gayety of the Shawnees, who
evidently were pleased with Girty's discomfiture. They jabbered
among themselves and nodded approvingly at Joe, until a few words
spoken by Silvertip produced a sudden change.

What the words were Joe could not understand, but to him they
sounded like French. He smiled at the absurdity of imagining he had
heard a savage speak a foreign language. At any rate, whatever had
been said was trenchant with meaning. The Indians changed from gay
to grave; they picked up their weapons and looked keenly on every
side; the big Indian at once retied Joe, and then all crowded round
the chief.

"Did you hear what Silvertip said, and did you notice the effect it
had?" whispered Jim, taking advantage of the moment.

"It sounded like French, but of course it wasn't," replied Joe.

"It was French. 'Le Vent de la Mort.'"

"By Jove, that's it. What does it mean?" asked Joe, who was not a
scholar.

"The Wind of Death."

"That's English, but I can't apply it here. Can you?"

"No doubt it is some Indian omen."

The hurried consultation over, Silvertip tied Joe's horse and dog to
the trees, and once more led the way; this time he avoided the open
forest and kept on low ground. For a long time he traveled in the
bed of the brook, wading when the water was shallow, and always
stepping where there was the least possibility of leaving a
footprint. Not a word was spoken. If either of the brothers made the
lightest splash in the water, or tumbled a stone into the brook, the
Indian behind rapped him on the head with a tomahawk handle.

At certain places, indicated by the care which Silvertip exercised
in walking, the Indian in front of the captives turned and pointed
where they were to step. They were hiding the trail. Silvertip
hurried them over the stony places; went more slowly through the
water, and picked his way carefully over the soft ground it became
necessary to cross. At times he stopped, remaining motionless many
seconds.

This vigilance continued all the afternoon. The sun sank; twilight
spread its gray mantle, and soon black night enveloped the forest.
The Indians halted, but made no fire; they sat close together on a
stony ridge, silent and watchful.

Joe pondered deeply over this behavior. Did the Shawnees fear
pursuit? What had that Indian chief told Silvertip? To Joe it seemed
that they acted as if believing foes were on all sides. Though they
hid their tracks, it was, apparently, not the fear of pursuit alone
which made them cautious.

Joe reviewed the afternoon's march and dwelt upon the possible
meaning of the cat-like steps, the careful brushing aside of
branches, the roving eyes, suspicious and gloomy, the eager
watchfulness of the advance as well as to the rear, and always the
strained effort to listen, all of which gave him the impression of
some grave, unseen danger.

And now as he lay on the hard ground, nearly exhausted by the long
march and suffering from the throbbing wound, his courage lessened
somewhat, and he shivered with dread. The quiet and gloom of the
forest; these fierce, wild creatures, free in the heart of their own
wilderness yet menaced by a foe, and that strange French phrase
which kept recurring in his mind--all had the effect of conjuring up
giant shadows in Joe's fanciful mind. During all his life, until
this moment, he had never feared anything; now he was afraid of the
darkness. The spectral trees spread long arms overhead, and phantom
forms stalked abroad; somewhere out in that dense gloom stirred this
mysterious foe--the "Wind of Death."

Nevertheless, he finally slept. In the dull-gray light of early
morning the Indians once more took up the line of march toward the
west. They marched all that day, and at dark halted to eat and rest.
Silvertip and another Indian stood watch.

Some time before morning Joe suddenly awoke. The night was dark, yet
it was lighter than when he had fallen asleep. A pale, crescent moon
shown dimly through the murky clouds. There was neither movement of
the air nor the chirp of an insect. Absolute silence prevailed.

Joe saw the Indian guard leaning against a tree, asleep. Silvertip
was gone. The captive raised his head and looked around for the
chief. There were only four Indians left, three on the ground and
one against the tree.

He saw something shining near him. He looked more closely, and made
out the object to be an eagle plume Silvertip had worn, in his
head-dress. It lay on the ground near the tree. Joe made some slight
noise which awakened the guard. The Indian never moved a muscle; but
his eyes roved everywhere. He, too, noticed the absence of the
chief.

At this moment from out of the depths of the woods came a swelling
sigh, like the moan of the night wind. It rose and died away,
leaving the silence apparently all the deeper.

A shudder ran over Joe's frame. Fascinated, he watched the guard.
The Indian uttered a low gasp; his eyes started and glared wildly;
he rose very slowly to his full height and stood waiting, listening.
The dark hand which held the tomahawk trembled so that little glints
of moonlight glanced from the bright steel.

From far back in the forest-deeps came that same low moaning:

"Um-m-mm-woo-o-o-o!"

It rose from a faint murmur and swelled to a deep moan, soft but
clear, and ended in a wail like that of a lost soul.

The break it made in that dead silence was awful. Joe's blood seemed
to have curdled and frozen; a cold sweat oozed from his skin, and it
was as if a clammy hand clutched at his heart. He tried to persuade
himself that the fear displayed by the savage was only superstition,
and that that moan was but the sigh of the night wind.

The Indian sentinel stood as if paralyzed an instant after that
weird cry, and then, swift as a flash, and as noiseless, he was gone
into the gloomy forest. He had fled without awakening his
companions.

Once more the moaning cry arose and swelled mournfully on the still
night air. It was close at hand!

"The Wind of Death," whispered Joe.

He was shaken and unnerved by the events of the past two days, and
dazed from his wound. His strength deserted him, and he lost
consciousness.



Chapter VI.

One evening, several day previous to the capture of the brothers, a
solitary hunter stopped before a deserted log cabin which stood on
the bank of a stream fifty miles or more inland from the Ohio River.
It was rapidly growing dark; a fine, drizzling rain had set in, and
a rising wind gave promise of a stormy night.

Although the hunter seemed familiar with his surroundings, he moved
cautiously, and hesitated as if debating whether he should seek the
protection of this lonely hut, or remain all night under dripping
trees. Feeling of his hunting frock, he found that it was damp and
slippery. This fact evidently decided him in favor of the cabin, for
he stooped his tall figure and went in. It was pitch dark inside;
but having been there before, the absence of a light did not trouble
him. He readily found the ladder leading to the loft, ascended it,
and lay down to sleep.

During the night a noise awakened him. For a moment he heard nothing
except the fall of the rain. Then came the hum of voices, followed
by the soft tread of moccasined feet. He knew there was an Indian
town ten miles across the country, and believed some warriors,
belated on a hunting trip, had sought the cabin for shelter.

The hunter lay perfectly quiet, awaiting developments. If the
Indians had flint and steel, and struck a light, he was almost
certain to be discovered. He listened to their low conversation, and
understood from the language that they were Delawares.

A moment later he heard the rustling of leaves and twigs,
accompanied by the metallic click of steel against some hard
substance. The noise was repeated, and then followed by a hissing
sound, which he knew to be the burning of a powder on a piece of dry
wood, after which rays of light filtered through cracks of the
unstable floor of the loft.

The man placed his eye to one of these crevices, and counted eleven
Indians, all young braves, with the exception of the chief. The
Indians had been hunting; they had haunches of deer and buffalo
tongues, together with several packs of hides. Some of them busied
themselves drying their weapons; others sat down listlessly, plainly
showing their weariness, and two worked over the smouldering fire.
The damp leaves and twigs burned faintly, yet there was enough to
cause the hunter fear that he might be discovered. He believed he
had not much to worry about from the young braves, but the hawk-eyed
chief was dangerous.

And he was right. Presently the stalwart chief heard, or saw, a drop
of water fall from the loft. It came from the hunter's wet coat.
Almost any one save an Indian scout would have fancied this came
from the roof. As the chief's gaze roamed everywhere over the
interior of the cabin his expression was plainly distrustful. His
eye searched the wet clay floor, but hardly could have discovered
anything there, because the hunter's moccasined tracks had been
obliterated by the footprints of the Indians. The chief's suspicions
seemed to be allayed.

But in truth this chief, with the wonderful sagacity natural to
Indians, had observed matters which totally escaped the young
braves, and, like a wily old fox, he waited to see which cub would
prove the keenest. Not one of them, however, noted anything unusual.
They sat around the fire, ate their meat and parched corn, and
chatted volubly.

The chief arose and, walking to the ladder, ran his hand along one
of the rungs.

"Ugh!" he exclaimed.

Instantly he was surrounded by ten eager, bright-eyed braves. He
extended his open palm; it was smeared with wet clay like that under
his feet. Simultaneously with their muttered exclamations the braves
grasped their weapons. They knew there was a foe above them. It was
a paleface, for an Indian would have revealed himself.

The hunter, seeing he was discovered, acted with the unerring
judgment and lightning-like rapidity of one long accustomed to
perilous situations. Drawing his tomahawk and noiselessly stepping
to the hole in the loft, he leaped into the midst of the astounded
Indians.

Rising from the floor like the rebound of a rubber ball, his long
arm with the glittering hatchet made a wide sweep, and the young
braves scattered like frightened sheep.

He made a dash for the door and, incredible as it may seem, his
movements were so quick he would have escaped from their very midst
without a scratch but for one unforeseen circumstance. The clay
floor was wet and slippery; his feet were hardly in motion before
they slipped from under him and he fell headlong.

With loud yells of triumph the band jumped upon him. There was a
convulsive, heaving motion of the struggling mass, one frightful cry
of agony, and then hoarse commands. Three of the braves ran to their
packs, from which they took cords of buckskin. So exceedingly
powerful was the hunter that six Indians were required to hold him
while the others tied his hands and feet. Then, with grunts and
chuckles of satisfaction, they threw him into a corner of the cabin.

Two of the braves had been hurt in the brief struggle, one having a
badly wrenched shoulder and the other a broken arm. So much for the
hunter's power in that single moment of action.

The loft was searched, and found to be empty. Then the excitement
died away, and the braves settled themselves down for the night. The
injured ones bore their hurts with characteristic stoicism; if they
did not sleep, both remained quiet and not a sigh escaped them.

The wind changed during the night, the storm abated, and when
daylight came the sky was cloudless. The first rays of the sun shone
in the open door, lighting up the interior of the cabin.

A sleepy Indian who had acted as guard stretched his limbs and
yawned. He looked for the prisoner, and saw him sitting up in the
corner. One arm was free, and the other nearly so. He had almost
untied the thongs which bound him; a few moments more and he would
have been free.

"Ugh!" exclaimed the young brave, awakening his chief and pointing
to the hunter.

The chief glanced at his prisoner; then looked more closely, and
with one spring was on his feet, a drawn tomahawk in his hand. A
short, shrill yell issued from his lips. Roused by that clarion
call, the young braves jumped up, trembling in eager excitement. The
chief's summons had been the sharp war-cry of the Delawares.

He manifested as intense emotion as could possibly have been
betrayed by a matured, experienced chieftain, and pointing to the
hunter, he spoke a single word.

                *       *       *

At noonday the Indians entered the fields of corn which marked the
outskirts of the Delaware encampment.

"Kol-loo--kol-loo--kol-loo."

The long signal, heralding the return of the party with important
news, pealed throughout the quiet valley; and scarcely had the
echoes died away when from the village came answering shouts.

Once beyond the aisles of waving corn the hunter saw over the
shoulders of his captors the home of the redmen. A grassy plain,
sloping gradually from the woody hill to a winding stream, was
brightly beautiful with chestnut trees and long, well-formed lines
of lodges. Many-hued blankets hung fluttering in the sun, and rising
lazily were curling columns of blue smoke. The scene was picturesque
and reposeful; the vivid hues suggesting the Indians love of color
and ornament; the absence of life and stir, his languorous habit of
sleeping away the hot noonday hours.

The loud whoops, however, changed the quiet encampment into a scene
of animation. Children ran from the wigwams, maidens and braves
dashed here and there, squaws awakened from their slumber, and many
a doughty warrior rose from his rest in the shade. French fur
traders came curiously from their lodges, and renegades hurriedly
left their blankets, roused to instant action by the well-known
summons.

The hunter, led down the lane toward the approaching crowd,
presented a calm and fearless demeanor. When the Indians surrounded
him one prolonged, furious yell rent the air, and then followed an
extraordinary demonstration of fierce delight. The young brave's
staccato yell, the maiden's scream, the old squaw's screech, and the
deep war-cry of the warriors intermingled in a fearful discordance.

Often had this hunter heard the name which the Indian called him; he
had been there before, a prisoner; he had run the gauntlet down the
lane; he had been bound to a stake in front of the lodge where his
captors were now leading him. He knew the chief, Wingenund, sachem
of the Delawares. Since that time, now five years ago, when
Wingenund had tortured him, they had been bitterest foes.

If the hunter heard the hoarse cries, or the words hissed into his
ears; if he saw the fiery glances of hatred, and sudden giving way
to ungovernable rage, unusual to the Indian nature; if he felt in
their fierce exultation the hopelessness of succor or mercy, he gave
not the slightest sign.

"Atelang! Atelang! Atelang!" rang out the strange Indian name.

The French traders, like real savages, ran along with the
procession, their feathers waving, their paint shining, their faces
expressive of as much excitement as the Indians' as they cried aloud
in their native tongue:

"Le Vent de la Mort! Le Vent de la Mort! La Vent de la Mort!"

The hunter, while yet some paces distant, saw the lofty figure of
the chieftain standing in front of his principal men. Well he knew
them all. There were the crafty Pipe, and his savage comrade, the
Half King; there was Shingiss, who wore on his forehead a scar--the
mark of the hunter's bullet; there were Kotoxen, the Lynx, and
Misseppa, the Source, and Winstonah, the War-cloud, chiefs of
sagacity and renown. Three renegades completed the circle; and these
three traitors represented a power which had for ten years left an
awful, bloody trail over the country. Simon Girty, the so-called
White Indian, with his keen, authoritative face turned expectantly;
Elliott, the Tory deserter, from Fort Pitt, a wiry, spider-like
little man; and last, the gaunt and gaudily arrayed form of the
demon of the frontier--Jim Girty.

The procession halted before this group, and two brawny braves
pushed the hunter forward. Simon Girty's face betrayed satisfaction;
Elliott's shifty eyes snapped, and the dark, repulsive face of the
other Girty exhibited an exultant joy. These desperadoes had feared
this hunter.

Wingenund, with a majestic wave of his arm, silenced the yelling
horde of frenzied savages and stepped before the captive.

The deadly foes were once again face to face. The chieftain's lofty
figure and dark, sleek head, now bare of plumes, towered over the
other Indians, but he was not obliged to lower his gaze in order to
look straight into the hunter's eyes.

Verily this hunter merited the respect which shone in the great
chieftain's glance. Like a mountain-ash he stood, straight and
strong, his magnificent frame tapering wedge-like from his broad
shoulders. The bulging line of his thick neck, the deep chest, the
knotty contour of his bared forearm, and the full curves of his
legs--all denoted a wonderful muscular development.

The power expressed in this man's body seemed intensified in his
features. His face was white and cold, his jaw square and set; his
coal-black eyes glittered with almost a superhuman fire. And his
hair, darker than the wing of a crow, fell far below his shoulders;
matted and tangled as it was, still it hung to his waist, and had it
been combed out, must have reached his knees.

One long moment Wingenund stood facing his foe, and then over the
multitude and through the valley rolled his sonorous voice:

"Deathwind dies at dawn!"

The hunter was tied to a tree and left in view of the Indian
populace. The children ran fearfully by; the braves gazed long at
the great foe of their race; the warriors passed in gloomy silence.
The savages' tricks of torture, all their diabolical ingenuity of
inflicting pain was suppressed, awaiting the hour of sunrise when
this hated Long Knife was to die.

Only one person offered an insult to the prisoner; he was a man of
his own color. Jim Girty stopped before him, his yellowish eyes
lighted by a tigerish glare, his lips curled in a snarl, and from
between them issuing the odor of the fir traders' vile rum.

"You'll soon be feed fer the buzzards," he croaked, in his hoarse
voice. He had so often strewed the plains with human flesh for the
carrion birds that the thought had a deep fascination for him. "D'ye
hear, scalp-hunter? Feed for buzzards!" He deliberately spat in the
hunter's face. "D'ye hear?" he repeated.

There was no answer save that which glittered in the hunter's eye.
But the renegade could not read it because he did not meet that
flaming glance. Wild horses could not have dragged him to face this
man had he been free. Even now a chill crept over Girty. For a
moment he was enthralled by a mysterious fear, half paralyzed by a
foreshadowing of what would be this hunter's vengeance. Then he
shook off his craven fear. He was free; the hunter's doom was sure.
His sharp face was again wreathed in a savage leer, and he spat once
more on the prisoner.

His fierce impetuosity took him a step too far. The hunter's arms
and waist were fastened, but his feet were free. His powerful leg
was raised suddenly; his foot struck Girty in the pit of the
stomach. The renegade dropped limp and gasping. The braves carried
him away, his gaudy feathers trailing, his long arms hanging
inertly, and his face distorted with agony.

The maidens of the tribe, however, showed for the prisoner an
interest that had in it something of veiled sympathy. Indian girls
were always fascinated by white men. Many records of Indian maidens'
kindness, of love, of heroism for white prisoners brighten the dark
pages of frontier history. These girls walked past the hunter,
averting their eyes when within his range of vision, but stealing
many a sidelong glance at his impressive face and noble proportions.
One of them, particularly, attracted the hunter's eye.

This was because, as she came by with her companions, while they all
turned away, she looked at him with her soft, dark eyes. She was a
young girl, whose delicate beauty bloomed fresh and sweet as that of
a wild rose. Her costume, fringed, beaded, and exquisitely wrought
with fanciful design, betrayed her rank, she was Wingenund's
daughter. The hunter had seen her when she was a child, and he
recognized her now. He knew that the beauty of Aola, of Whispering
Winds Among the Leaves, had been sung from the Ohio to the Great
Lakes.

Often she passed him that afternoon. At sunset, as the braves untied
him and led him away, he once more caught the full, intense gaze of
her lovely eyes.

That night as he lay securely bound in the corner of a lodge, and
the long hours wore slowly away, he strained at his stout bonds, and
in his mind revolved different plans of escape. It was not in this
man's nature to despair; while he had life he would fight. From time
to time he expanded his muscles, striving to loosen the wet buckskin
thongs.

The dark hours slowly passed, no sound coming to him save the
distant bark of a dog and the monotonous tread of his guard; a dim
grayness pervaded the lodge. Dawn was close at hand--his hour was
nearly come.

Suddenly his hearing, trained to a most acute sensibility, caught a
faint sound, almost inaudible. It came from without on the other
side of the lodge. There it was again, a slight tearing sound, such
as is caused by a knife when it cuts through soft material.

Some one was slitting the wall of the lodge.

The hunter rolled noiselessly over and over until he lay against the
skins. In the dim grayness he saw a bright blade moving carefully
upward through the deer-hide. Then a long knife was pushed into the
opening; a small, brown hand grasped the hilt. Another little hand
followed and felt of the wall and floor, reaching out with groping
fingers.

The, hunter rolled again so that his back was against the wall and
his wrists in front of the opening. He felt the little hand on his
arm; then it slipped down to his wrists. The contact of cold steel
set a tremor of joy through his heart. The pressure of his bonds
relaxed, ceased; his arms were free. He turned to find the
long-bladed knife on the ground. The little hands were gone.

In a tinkling he rose unbound, armed, desperate. In another second
an Indian warrior lay upon the ground in his death-throes, while a
fleeing form vanished in the gray morning mist.



Chapter VII.

Joe felt the heavy lethargy rise from him like the removal of a
blanket; his eyes became clear, and he saw the trees and the forest
gloom; slowly he realized his actual position.

He was a prisoner, lying helpless among his sleeping captors.
Silvertip and the guard had fled into the woods, frightened by the
appalling moan which they believed sounded their death-knell. And
Joe believed he might have fled himself had he been free. What could
have caused that sound? He fought off the numbing chill that once
again began to creep over him. He was wide-awake now; his head was
clear, and he resolved to retain his senses. He told himself there
could be nothing supernatural in that wind, or wail, or whatever it
was, which had risen murmuring from out the forest-depths.

Yet, despite his reasoning, Joe could not allay his fears. That
thrilling cry haunted him. The frantic flight of an Indian
brave--nay, of a cunning, experienced chief--was not to be lightly
considered. The savages were at home in these untracked wilds.
Trained from infancy to scent danger and to fight when they had an
equal chance they surely would not run without good cause.

Joe knew that something moved under those dark trees. He had no idea
what. It might be the fretting night wind, or a stealthy, prowling,
soft-footed beast, or a savage alien to these wild Indians, and
wilder than they by far. The chirp of a bird awoke the stillness.
Night had given way to morning. Welcoming the light that was chasing
away the gloom, Joe raised his head with a deep sigh of relief. As
he did so he saw a bush move; then a shadow seemed to sink into the
ground. He had seen an object lighter than the trees, darker than
the gray background. Again, that strange sense of the nearness of
something thrilled him.

Moments, passed--to him long as hours. He saw a tall fern waver and
tremble. A rabbit, or perhaps a snake, had brushed it. Other ferns
moved, their tops agitated, perhaps, by a faint breeze. No; that
wavering line came straight toward him; it could not be the wind; it
marked the course of a creeping, noiseless thing. It must be a
panther crawling nearer and nearer.

Joe opened his lips to awaken his captors, but could not speak; it
was as if his heart had stopped beating. Twenty feet away the ferns
were parted to disclose a white, gleaming face, with eyes that
seemingly glittered. Brawny shoulders were upraised, and then a
tall, powerful man stood revealed. Lightly he stepped over the
leaves into the little glade. He bent over the sleeping Indians.
Once, twice, three times a long blade swung high. One brave
shuddered another gave a sobbing gasp, and the third moved two
fingers--thus they passed from life to death.

"Wetzel!" cried Joe.

"I reckon so," said the deliverer, his deep, calm voice contrasting
strangely with what might have been expected from his aspect. Then,
seeing Joe's head covered with blood, he continued: "Able to get
up?"

"I'm not hurt," answered Joe, rising when his bonds had been cut.

"Brothers, I reckon?" Wetzel said, bending over Jim.

"Yes, we're brothers. Wake up, Jim, wake up! We're saved!"

"What? Who's that?" cried Jim, sitting up and staring at Wetzel.

"This man has saved our lives! See, Jim, the Indians are dead! And,
Jim, it's Wetzel, the hunter. You remember, Jeff Lynn said I'd know
him if I ever saw him and---"

"What happened to Jeff?" inquired Wetzel, interrupting. He had
turned from Jim's grateful face.

"Jeff was on the first raft, and for all we know he is now safe at
Fort Henry. Our steersman was shot, and we were captured."

"Has the Shawnee anythin' ag'inst you boys?"

"Why, yes, I guess so. I played a joke on him--took his shirt and
put it on another fellow."

"Might jes' as well kick an' Injun. What has he ag'in you?"

"I don't know. Perhaps he did not like my talk to him," answered
Jim. "I am a preacher, and have come west to teach the gospel to the
Indians."

"They're good Injuns now," said Wetzel, pointing to the prostrate
figures.

"How did you find us?" eagerly asked Joe.

"Run acrost yer trail two days back."

"And you've been following us?"

The hunter nodded.

"Did you see anything of another band of Indians? A tall chief and
Jim Girty were among them."

"They've been arter me fer two days. I was followin' you when
Silvertip got wind of Girty an' his Delawares. The big chief was
Wingenund. I seen you pull Girty's nose. Arter the Delawares went I
turned loose yer dog an' horse an' lit out on yer trail.''

"Where are the Delawares now?"

"I reckon there nosin' my back trail. We must be gittin'.
Silvertip'll soon hev a lot of Injuns here."

Joe intended to ask the hunter about what had frightened the
Indians, but despite his eager desire for information, he refrained
from doing so.

"Girty nigh did fer you," remarked Wetzel, examining Joe's wound.
"He's in a bad humor. He got kicked a few days back, and then hed
the skin pulled offen his nose. Somebody'll hev to suffer. Wal, you
fellers grab yer rifles, an' we'll be startin' fer the fort."

Joe shuddered as he leaned over one of the dusky forms to detach
powder and bullet horn. He had never seen a dead Indian, and the
tense face, the sightless, vacant eyes made him shrink. He shuddered
again when he saw the hunter scalp his victims. He shuddered the
third time when he saw Wetzel pick up Silvertip's beautiful white
eagle plume, dabble it in a pool of blood, and stick it in the bark
of a tree. Bereft of its graceful beauty, drooping with its gory
burden, the long leather was a deadly message. It had been
Silvertip's pride; it was now a challenge, a menace to the Shawnee
chief.

"Come," said Wetzel, leading the way into the forest.

                *       *       *

Shortly after daylight on the second day following the release of
the Downs brothers the hunter brushed through a thicket of alder and
said: "Thar's Fort Henry."

The boys were on the summit of a mountain from which the land sloped
in a long incline of rolling ridges and gentle valleys like a green,
billowy sea, until it rose again abruptly into a peak higher still
than the one upon which they stood. The broad Ohio, glistening in
the sun, lay at the base of the mountain.

Upon the bluff overlooking the river, and under the brow of the
mountain, lay the frontier fort. In the clear atmosphere it stood
out in bold relief. A small, low structure surrounded by a high
stockade fence was all, and yet it did not seem unworthy of its
fame. Those watchful, forbidding loopholes, the blackened walls and
timbers, told the history of ten long, bloody years. The whole
effect was one of menace, as if the fort sent out a defiance to the
wilderness, and meant to protect the few dozen log cabins clustered
on the hillside.

"How will we ever get across that big river?" asked Jim,
practically.

"Wade--swim," answered the hunter, laconically, and began the
descent of the ridge. An hour's rapid walking brought the three to
the river. Depositing his rifle in a clump of willows, and directing
the boys to do the same with their guns, the hunter splashed into
the water. His companions followed him into the shallow water, and
waded a hundred yards, which brought them near the island that they
now perceived hid the fort. The hunter swam the remaining distance,
and, climbing the bank, looked back for the boys. They were close
behind him. Then he strode across the island, perhaps a quarter of a
mile wide.

"We've a long swim here," said Wetzel, waving his hand toward the
main channel of the river. "Good fer it?" he inquired of Joe, since
Jim had not received any injuries during the short captivity and
consequently showed more endurance.

"Good for anything," answered Joe, with that coolness Wetzel had
been quick to observe in him.

The hunter cast a sharp glance at the lad's haggard face, his
bruised temple, and his hair matted with blood. In that look he read
Joe thoroughly. Had the young man known the result of that scrutiny,
he would have been pleased as well as puzzled, for the hunter had
said to himself: "A brave lad, an' the border fever's on him."

"Swim close to me," said Wetzel, and he plunged into the river. The
task was accomplished without accident.

"See the big cabin, thar, on the hillside? Thar's Colonel Zane in
the door," said Wetzel.

As they neared the building several men joined the one who had been
pointed out as the colonel. It was evident the boys were the subject
of their conversation. Presently Zane left the group and came toward
them. The brothers saw a handsome, stalwart man, in the prime of
life.

"Well, Lew, what luck?" he said to Wetzel.

"Not much. I treed five Injuns, an' two got away," answered the
hunter as he walked toward the fort.

"Lads, welcome to Fort Henry," said Colonel Zane, a smile lighting
his dark face. "The others of your party arrived safely. They
certainly will be overjoyed to see you."

"Colonel Zane, I had a letter from my uncle to you," replied Jim;
"but the Indians took that and everything else we had with us."

"Never mind the letter. I knew your uncle, and your father, too.
Come into the house and change those wet clothes. And you, my lad,
have got an ugly knock on the head. Who gave you that?"

"Jim Girty."

"What?" exclaimed the colonel.

"Jim Girty did that. He was with a party of Delawares who ran across
us. They were searching for Wetzel."

"Girty with the Delawares! The devil's to pay now. And you say
hunting Wetzel? I must learn more about this. It looks bad. But tell
me, how did Girty come to strike you?"

"I pulled his nose."

"You did? Good! Good!" cried Colonel Zane, heartily. "By George,
that's great! Tell me--but wait until you are more comfortable. Your
packs came safely on Jeff's raft, and you will find them inside."

As Joe followed the colonel he heard one of the other men say:

"Like as two peas in a pod."

Farther on he saw an Indian standing a little apart from the others.
Hearing Joe's slight exclamation of surprise, he turned, disclosing
a fine, manly countenance, characterized by calm dignity. The Indian
read the boy's thought.

"Ugh! Me friend," he said in English.

"That's my Shawnee guide, Tomepomehala. He's a good fellow, although
Jonathan and Wetzel declare the only good Indian is a dead one. Come
right in here. There are your packs, and you'll find water outside
the door."

Thus saying, Colonel Zane led the brothers into a small room,
brought out their packs, and left them. He came back presently with
a couple of soft towels.

"Now you lads fix up a bit; then come out and meet my family and
tell us all about your adventure. By that time dinner will be
ready."

"Geminy! Don't that towel remind you of home?" said Joe, when the
colonel had gone. "From the looks of things, Colonel Zane means to
have comfort here in the wilderness. He struck me as being a fine
man."

The boys were indeed glad to change the few articles of clothing the
Indians had left them, and when they were shaved and dressed they
presented an entirely different appearance. Once more they were twin
brothers, in costume and feature. Joe contrived, by brushing his
hair down on his forehead, to conceal the discolored bump.

"I think I saw a charming girl," observed Joe.

"Suppose you did--what then?" asked Jim, severely.

"Why--nothing--see here, mayn't I admire a pretty girl if I want?"

"No, you may not. Joe, will nothing ever cure you? I should think
the thought of Miss Wells---"

"Look here, Jim; she don't care--at least, it's very little she
cares. And I'm--I'm not worthy of her."

"Turn around here and face me," said the young minister sharply.

Joe turned and looked in his brother's eyes.

"Have you trifled with her, as you have with so many others? Tell
me. I know you don't lie."

"No."

"Then what do you mean?"

"Nothing much, Jim, except I'm really not worthy of her. I'm no
good, you know, and she ought to get a fellow like--like you."

"Absurd! You ought to be ashamed of yourself."

"Never mind me. See here; don't you admire her?"

"Why--why, yes," stammered Jim, flushing a dark, guilty red at the
direct question. "Who could help admiring her?"

"That's what I thought. And I know she admires you for qualities
which I lack. Nell's like a tender vine just beginning to creep
around and cling to something strong. She cares for me; but her love
is like the vine. It may hurt her a little to tear that love away,
but it won't kill her; and in the end it will be best for her. You
need a good wife. What could I do with a woman? Go in and win her,
Jim."

"Joe, you're sacrificing yourself again for me," cried Jim, white to
the lips. "It's wrong to yourself and wrong to her. I tell you---"

"Enough!" Joe's voice cut in cold and sharp. "Usually you influence
me; but sometimes you can't; I say this: Nell will drift into your
arms as surely as the leaf falls. It will not hurt her--will be best
for her. Remember, she is yours for the winning."

"You do not say whether that will hurt you," whispered Jim.

"Come--we'll find Colonel Zane," said Joe, opening the door.

They went out in the hallway which opened into the yard as well as
the larger room through which the colonel had first conducted them.
As Jim, who was in advance, passed into this apartment a trim figure
entered from the yard. It was Nell, and she ran directly against
him. Her face was flushed, her eyes were beaming with gladness, and
she seemed the incarnation of girlish joy.

"Oh, Joe," was all she whispered. But the happiness and welcome in
that whisper could never have been better expressed in longer
speech. Then slightly, ever so slightly, she tilted her sweet face
up to his.

It all happened with the quickness of thought. In a single instant
Jim saw the radiant face, the outstretched hands, and heard the glad
whisper. He knew that she had a again mistaken him for Joe; but for
his life he could not draw back his head. He had kissed her, and
even as his lips thrilled with her tremulous caress he flushed with
the shame of his deceit.

"You're mistaken again--I'm Jim," he whispered.

For a moment they stood staring into each other's eyes, slowly
awakening to what had really happened, slowly conscious of a sweet,
alluring power. Then Colonel Zane's cheery voice rang in their ears.

"Ah, here's Nellie and your brother! Now, lads, tell me which is
which?'

"That's Jim, and I'm Joe," answered the latter. He appeared not to
notice his brother, and his greeting to Nell was natural and hearty.
For the moment she drew the attention of the others from them.

Joe found himself listening to the congratulations of a number of
people. Among the many names he remembered were those of Mrs. Zane,
Silas Zane, and Major McColloch. Then he found himself gazing at the
most beautiful girl he had ever seen in his life.

"My only sister, Mrs. Alfred Clarke--once Betty Zane, and the
heroine of Fort Henry," said Colonel Zane proudly, with his arm
around the slender, dark-eyed girl.

"I would brave the Indians and the wilderness again for this
pleasure," replied Joe gallantly, as he bowed low over the little
hand she cordially extended.

"Bess, is dinner ready?" inquired Colonel Zane of his comely wife.
She nodded her head, and the colonel led the way into the adjoining
room. "I know you boys must be hungry as bears."

During the meal Colonel Zane questioned his guests about their
journey, and as to the treatment they had received at the hands of
the Indians. He smiled at the young minister's earnestness in regard
to the conversion of the redmen, and he laughed outright when Joe
said "he guessed he came to the frontier because it was too slow at
home."

"I am sure your desire for excitement will soon be satisfied, if
indeed it be not so already," remarked the colonel. "But as to the
realization of your brother's hopes I am not so sanguine.
Undoubtedly the Moravian missionaries have accomplished wonders with
the Indians. Not long ago I visited the Village of Peace--the Indian
name for the mission--and was struck by the friendliness and
industry which prevailed there. Truly it was a village of peace. Yet
it is almost to early to be certain of permanent success of this
work. The Indian's nature is one hard to understand. He is naturally
roving and restless, which, however, may be owing to his habit of
moving from place to place in search of good hunting grounds. I
believe--though I must confess I haven't seen any pioneers who share
my belief--that the savage has a beautiful side to his character. I
know of many noble deeds done by them, and I believe, if they are
honestly dealt with, they will return good for good. There are bad
ones, of course; but the French traders, and men like the Girtys,
have caused most of this long war. Jonathan and Wetzel tell me the
Shawnees and Chippewas have taken the warpath again. Then the fact
that the Girtys are with the Delawares is reason for alarm. We have
been comparatively quiet here of late. Did you boys learn to what
tribe your captors belong? Did Wetzel say?"

"He did not; he spoke little, but I will say he was exceedingly
active," answered Joe, with a smile.

"To have seen Wetzel fight Indians is something you are not likely
to forget," said Colonel Zane grimly. "Now, tell me, how did those
Indians wear their scalp-lock?"

"Their heads were shaved closely, with the exception of a little
place on top. The remaining hair was twisted into a tuft, tied
tightly, and into this had been thrust a couple of painted pins.
When Wetzel scalped the Indians the pins fell out. I picked one up,
and found it to be bone."

"You will make a woodsman, that's certain," replied Colonel Zane.
"The Indians were Shawnee on the warpath. Well, we will not borrow
trouble, for when it comes in the shape of redskins it usually comes
quickly. Mr. Wells seemed anxious to resume the journey down the
river; but I shall try to persuade him to remain with us awhile.
Indeed, I am sorry I cannot keep you all here at Fort Henry, and
more especially the girls. On the border we need young people, and,
while I do not want to frighten the women, I fear there will be more
than Indians fighting for them."

"I hope not; but we have come prepared for anything," said Kate,
with a quiet smile. "Our home was with uncle, and when he announced
his intention of going west we decided our duty was to go with him."

"You were right, and I hope you will find a happy home," rejoined
Colonel Zane. "If life among the Indians, proves to be too hard, we
shall welcome you here. Betty, show the girls your pets and Indian
trinkets. I am going to take the boys to Silas' cabin to see Mr.
Wells, and then show them over the fort."

As they went out Joe saw the Indian guide standing in exactly the
same position as when they entered the building.

"Can't that Indian move?" he asked curiously.

"He can cover one hundred miles in a day, when he wants to," replied
Colonel Zane. "He is resting now. An Indian will often stand or sit
in one position for many hours."

"He's a fine-looking chap," remarked Joe, and then to himself: "but
I don't like him. I guess I'm prejudiced."

"You'll learn to like Tome, as we call him."

"Colonel Zane, I want a light for my pipe. I haven't had a smoke
since the day we were captured. That blamed redskin took my tobacco.
It's lucky I had some in my other pack. I'd like to meet him again;
also Silvertip and that brute Girty."

"My lad, don't make such wishes," said Colonel Zane, earnestly. "You
were indeed fortunate to escape, and I can well understand your
feelings. There is nothing I should like better than to see Girty
over the sights of my rifle; but I never hunt after danger, and to
look for Girty is to court death."

"But Wetzel---"

"Ah, my lad, I know Wetzel goes alone in the woods; but then, he is
different from other men. Before you leave I will tell you all about
him."

Colonel Zane went around the corner of the cabin and returned with a
live coal on a chip of wood, which Joe placed in the bowl of his
pipe, and because of the strong breeze stepped close to the cabin
wall. Being a keen observer, he noticed many small, round holes in
the logs. They were so near together that the timbers had an odd,
speckled appearance, and there was hardly a place where he could
have put his thumb without covering a hole. At first he thought they
were made by a worm or bird peculiar to that region; but finally lie
concluded that they were bullet-holes. He thrust his knife blade
into one, and out rolled a leaden ball.

"I'd like to have been here when these were made," he said.

"Well, at the time I wished I was back on the Potomac," replied
Colonel Zane.

They found the old missionary on the doorstep of the adjacent cabin.
He appeared discouraged when Colonel Zane interrogated him, and said
that he was impatient because of the delay.

"Mr. Wells, is it not possible that you underrate the danger of your
enterprise?"

"I fear naught but the Lord," answered the old man.

"Do you not fear for those with you?" went on the colonel earnestly.
"I am heart and soul with you in your work, but want to impress upon
you that the time is not propitious. It is a long journey to the
village, and the way is beset with dangers of which you have no
idea. Will you not remain here with me for a few weeks, or, at
least, until my scouts report?"

"I thank you; but go I will."

"Then let me entreat you to remain here a few days, so that I may
send my brother Jonathan and Wetzel with you. If any can guide you
safely to the Village of Peace it will be they."

At this moment Joe saw two men approaching from the fort, and
recognized one of them as Wetzel. He doubted not that the other was
Lord Dunmore's famous guide and hunter, Jonathan Zane. In features
he resembled the colonel, and was as tall as Wetzel, although not so
muscular or wide of chest.

Joe felt the same thrill he had experienced while watching the
frontiersmen at Fort Pitt. Wetzel and Jonathan spoke a word to
Colonel Zane and then stepped aside. The hunters stood lithe and
erect, with the easy, graceful poise of Indians.

"We'll take two canoes, day after to-morrow," said Jonathan,
decisively, to Colonel Zane. "Have you a rifle for Wetzel? The
Delawares got his."

Colonel Zane pondered over the question; rifles were not scarce at
the fort, but a weapon that Wetzel would use was hard to find.

"The hunter may have my rifle," said the old missionary. "I have no
use for a weapon with which to destroy God's creatures. My brother
was a frontiersman; he left this rifle to me. I remember hearing him
say once that if a man knew exactly the weight of lead and powder
needed, it would shoot absolutely true."

He went into the cabin, and presently came out with a long object
wrapped in linsey cloths. Unwinding the coverings, he brought to
view a rifle, the proportions of which caused Jonathan's eyes to
glisten, and brought an exclamation from Colonel Zane. Wetzel
balanced the gun in his hands. It was fully six feet long; the
barrel was large, and the dark steel finely polished; the stock was
black walnut, ornamented with silver trimmings. Using Jonathan's
powder-flask and bullet-pouch, Wetzel proceeded to load the weapon.
He poured out a quantity of powder into the palm of his hand,
performing the action quickly and dexterously, but was so slow while
measuring it that Joe wondered if he were counting the grains. Next
he selected a bullet out of a dozen which Jonathan held toward him.
He examined it carefully and tried it in the muzzle of the rifle.
Evidently it did not please him, for he took another. Finally he
scraped a bullet with his knife, and placing it in the center of a
small linsey rag, deftly forced it down. He adjusted the flint,
dropped a few grains of powder in the pan, and then looked around
for a mark at which to shoot.

Joe observed that the hunters and Colonel Zane were as serious
regarding the work as if at that moment some important issue
depended upon the accuracy of the rifle.

"There, Lew; there's a good shot. It's pretty far, even for you,
when you don't know the gun," said Colonel Zane, pointing toward the
river.

Joe saw the end of a log, about the size of a man's head, sticking
out of the water, perhaps an hundred and fifty yards distant. He
thought to hit it would be a fine shot; but was amazed when he heard
Colonel Zane say to several men who had joined the group that Wetzel
intended to shoot at a turtle on the log. By straining his eyes Joe
succeeded in distinguishing a small lump, which he concluded was the
turtle.

Wetzel took a step forward; the long, black rifle was raised with a
stately sweep. The instant it reached a level a thread of flame
burst forth, followed by a peculiarly clear, ringing report.

"Did he hit?" asked Colonel Zane, eagerly as a boy.

"I allow he did," answered Jonathan.

"I'll go and see," said Joe. He ran down the bank, along the beach,
and stepped on the log. He saw a turtle about the size of an
ordinary saucer. Picking it up, he saw a bullet-hole in the shell
near the middle. The bullet had gone through the turtle, and it was
quite dead. Joe carried it to the waiting group.

"I allowed so," declared Jonathan.

Wetzel examined the turtle, and turning to the old missionary, said:

"Your brother spoke the truth, an' I thank you fer the rifle."



Chapter VIII.

"So you want to know all about Wetzel?" inquired Colonel Zane of
Joe, when, having left Jim and Mr. Wells, they returned to the
cabin.

"I am immensely interested in him," replied Joe.

"Well, I don't think there's anything singular in that. I know
Wetzel better, perhaps, than any man living; but have seldom talked
about him. He doesn't like it. He is by birth a Virginian; I should
say, forty years old. We were boys together, and and I am a little
beyond that age. He was like any of the lads, except that he
excelled us all in strength and agility. When he was nearly eighteen
years old a band if Indians--Delawares, I think--crossed the border
on a marauding expedition far into Virginia. They burned the old
Wetzel homestead and murdered the father, mother, two sisters, and a
baby brother. The terrible shock nearly killed Lewis, who for a time
was very ill. When he recovered he went in search of his brothers,
Martin and John Wetzel, who were hunting, and brought them back to
their desolated home. Over the ashes of the home and the graves of
the loved ones the brothers swore sleepless and eternal vengeance.
The elder brothers have been devoted all these twenty years and more
to the killing of Indians; but Lewis has been the great foe of the
redman. You have already seen an example of his deeds, and will hear
of more. His name is a household word on the border. Scores of times
he has saved, actually saved, this fort and settlement. His
knowledge of savage ways surpasses by far Boone's, Major
McColloch's, Jonathan's, or any of the hunters'."

"Then hunting Indians is his sole occupation?"

"He lives for that purpose alone. He is very seldom in the
settlement. Sometimes he stays here a few days, especially if he is
needed; but usually he roams the forests."

"What did Jeff Lynn mean when he said that some people think Wetzel
is crazy?"

"There are many who think the man mad; but I do not. When the
passion for Indian hunting comes upon him he is fierce, almost
frenzied, yet perfectly sane. While here he is quiet, seldom speaks
except when spoken to, and is taciturn with strangers. He often
comes to my cabin and sits beside the fire for hours. I think he
finds pleasure in the conversation and laughter of friends. He is
fond of the children, and would do anything for my sister Betty."

"His life must be lonely and sad," remarked Joe.

"The life of any borderman is that; but Wetzel's is particularly
so."

"What is he called by the Indians?"

"They call him Atelang, or, in English, Deathwind."

"By George! That's what Silvertip said in French--'Le Vent de la
Mort.'"

"Yes; you have it right. A French fur trader gave Wetzel that name
years ago, and it has clung to him. The Indians say the Deathwind
blows through the forest whenever Wetzel stalks on their trail."

"Colonel Zane, don't you think me superstitious," whispered Joe,
leaning toward the colonel, "but I heard that wind blow through the
forest."

"What!" ejaculated Colonel Zane. He saw that Joe was in earnest, for
the remembrance of the moan had more than once paled his cheek and
caused beads of perspiration to collect on his brow.

Joe related the circumstances of that night, and at the end of his
narrative Colonel Zane sat silent and thoughtful.

"You don't really think it was Wetzel who moaned?" he asked, at
length.

"No, I don't," replied Joe quickly; "but, Colonel Zane, I heard that
moan as plainly as I can hear your voice. I heard it twice. Now,
what was it?"

"Jonathan said the same thing to me once. He had been out hunting
with Wetzel; they separated, and during the night Jonathan heard the
wind. The next day he ran across a dead Indian. He believes Wetzel
makes the noise, and so do the hunters; but I think it is simply the
moan of the night wind through the trees. I have heard it at times,
when my very blood seemingly ran cold."

"I tried to think it was the wind soughing through the pines, but am
afraid I didn't succeed very well. Anyhow, I knew Wetzel instantly,
just as Jeff Lynn said I would. He killed those Indians in an
instant, and he must have an iron arm."

"Wetzel excels in strength and speed any man, red or white, on the
frontier. He can run away from Jonathan, who is as swift as an
Indian. He's stronger than any of the other men. I remember one day
old Hugh Bennet's wagon wheels stuck in a bog down by the creek.
Hugh tried, as several others did, to move the wheels; but they
couldn't be made to budge. Along came Wetzel, pushed away the men,
and lifted the wagon unaided. It would take hours to tell you about
him. In brief, among all the border scouts and hunters Wetzel stands
alone. No wonder the Indians fear him. He is as swift as an eagle,
strong as mountain-ash, keen as a fox, and absolutely tireless and
implacable."

"How long have you been here, Colonel Zane?"

"More than twelve years, and it has been one long fight."

"I'm afraid I'm too late for the fun," said Joe, with his quiet
laugh.

"Not by about twelve more years," answered Colonel Zane, studying
the expression on Joe's face. "When I came out here years ago I had
the same adventurous spirit which I see in you. It has been
considerably quelled, however. I have seen many a daring young
fellow get the border fever, and with it his death. Let me advise
you to learn the ways of the hunters; to watch some one skilled in
woodcraft. Perhaps Wetzel himself will take you in hand. I don't
mind saying that he spoke of you to me in a tone I never heard Lew
use before."

"He did?" questioned Joe, eagerly, flushing with pleasure. "Do you
think he'd take me out? Dare I ask him?"

"Don't be impatient. Perhaps I can arrange it. Come over here now to
Metzar's place. I want to make you acquainted with him. These boys
have all been cutting timber; they've just come in for dinner. Be
easy and quiet with them; then you'll get on."

Colonel Zane introduced Joe to five sturdy boys and left him in
their company. Joe sat down on a log outside a cabin and leisurely
surveyed the young men. They all looked about the same: strong
without being heavy, light-haired and bronze-faced. In their turn
they carefully judged Joe. A newcomer from the East was always
regarded with some doubt. If they expected to hear Joe talk much
they were mistaken. He appeared good-natured, but not too friendly.

"Fine weather we're havin'," said Dick Metzar.

"Fine," agreed Joe, laconically.

"Like frontier life?"

"Sure."

A silence ensued after this breaking of the ice. The boys were
awaiting their turn at a little wooden bench upon which stood a
bucket of water and a basin.

"Hear ye got ketched by some Shawnees?" remarked another youth, as
he rolled up his shirt-sleeves. They all looked at Joe now. It was
not improbably their estimate of him would be greatly influenced by
the way he answered this question.

"Yes; was captive for three days."

"Did ye knock any redskins over?" This question was artfully put to
draw Joe out. Above all things, the bordermen detested boastfulness;
tried on Joe the ruse failed signally.

"I was scared speechless most of the time," answered Joe, with his
pleasant smile.

"By gosh, I don't blame ye!" burst out Will Metzar. "I hed that
experience onct, an' onct's enough."

The boys laughed and looked in a more friendly manner at Joe. Though
he said he had been frightened, his cool and careless manner belied
his words. In Joe's low voice and clear, gray eye there was
something potent and magnetic, which subtly influenced those with
whom he came in contact.

While his new friends were at dinner Joe strolled over to where
Colonel Zane sat on the doorstep of his home.

"How did you get on with the boys?" inquired the colonel.

"All right, I hope. Say, Colonel Zane, I'd like to talk to your
Indian guide."

Colonel Zane spoke a few words in the Indian language to the guide,
who left his post and came over to them. The colonel then had a
short conversation with him, at the conclusion of which he pointed
toward Joe.

"How do--shake," said Tome, extending his hand.

Joe smiled, and returned the friendly hand-pressure.

"Shawnee--ketch'um?" asked the Indian, in his fairly intelligible
English.

Joe nodded his head, while Colonel Zane spoke once more in Shawnee,
explaining the cause of Silvertip's emnity.

"Shawnee--chief--one--bad--Injun," replied Tome, seriously.
"Silvertip--mad--thunder-mad. Ketch'um paleface--scalp'um sure."

After giving this warning the chief returned to his former position
near the corner of the cabin.

"He can talk in English fairly well, much better than the Shawnee
brave who talked with me the other day," observed Joe.

"Some of the Indians speak the language almost fluently," said
Colonel Zane. "You could hardly have distinguished Logan's speech
from a white man's. Corn-planter uses good English, as also does my
brother's wife, a Wyandot girl."

"Did your brother marry an Indian?" and Joe plainly showed his
surprise.

"Indeed he did, and a most beautiful girl she is. I'll tell you
Isaac's story some time. He was a captive among the Wyandots for ten
years. The chief's daughter, Myeerah, loved him, kept him from being
tortured, and finally saved him from the stake."

"Well, that floors me," said Joe; "yet I don't see why it should.
I'm just surprised. Where is your brother now?"

"He lives with the tribe. He and Myeerah are working hard for peace.
We are now on more friendly terms with the great Wyandots, or
Hurons, as we call them, than ever before."

"Who is this big man coming from the the fort?" asked Joe, suddenly
observing a stalwart frontiersman approaching.

"Major Sam McColloch. You have met him. He's the man who jumped his
horse from yonder bluff."

"Jonathan and he have the same look, the same swing," observed Joe,
as he ran his eye over the major. His faded buckskin costume,
beaded, fringed, and laced, was similar to that of the colonel's
brother. Powder-flask and bullet-pouch were made from cow-horns and
slung around his neck on deerhide strings. The hunting coat was
unlaced, exposing, under the long, fringed borders, a tunic of the
same well-tanned, but finer and softer, material. As he walked, the
flaps of his coat fell back, showing a belt containing two knives,
sheathed in heavy buckskin, and a bright tomahawk. He carried a long
rifle in the hollow of his arm.

"These hunters have the same kind of buckskin suits," continued Joe;
"still, it doesn't seem to me the clothes make the resemblance to
each other. The way these men stand, walk and act is what strikes me
particularly, as in the case of Wetzel."

"I know what you mean. The flashing eye, the erect poise of
expectation, and the springy step--those, my lad, come from a life
spent in the woods. Well, it's a grand way to live."

"Colonel, my horse is laid up," said Major McColloch, coming to the
steps. He bowed pleasantly to Joe.

"So you are going to Short Creek? You can have one of my horses; but
first come inside and we'll talk over you expedition."

The afternoon passed uneventfully for Joe. His brother and Mr. Wells
were absorbed in plans for their future work, and Nell and Kate were
resting; therefore he was forced to find such amusement or
occupation as was possible in or near the stockade.



Chapter IX.

Joe went to bed that night with a promise to himself to rise early
next morning, for he had been invited to take part in a "raising,"
which term meant that a new cabin was to be erected, and such task
was ever an event in the lives of the settlers.

The following morning Joe rose early, dressing himself in a complete
buckskin suit, for which he had exchanged his good garments of
cloth. Never before had he felt so comfortable. He wanted to hop,
skip and jump. The soft, undressed buckskin was as warm and smooth
as silk-plush; the weight so light, the moccasins so well-fitting
and springy, that he had to put himself under considerable restraint
to keep from capering about like a frolicsome colt.

The possession of this buckskin outfit, and the rifle and
accouterments which went with the bargain, marked the last stage in
Joe's surrender to the border fever. The silent, shaded glens, the
mystery of the woods, the breath of this wild, free life claimed him
from this moment entirely and forever.

He met the others, however, with a serene face, showing no trace of
the emotion which welled up strongly from his heart. Nell glanced
shyly at him; Kate playfully voiced her admiration; Jim met him with
a brotherly ridicule which bespoke his affection as well as his
amusement; but Colonel Zane, having once yielded to the same
burning, riotous craving for freedom which now stirred in the boy's
heart, understood, and felt warmly drawn toward the lad. He said
nothing, though as he watched Joe his eyes were grave and kind. In
his long frontier life, where many a day measured the life and fire
of ordinary years, he had seen lad after lad go down before this
forest fever. It was well, he thought, because the freedom of the
soil depended on these wild, light-footed boys; yet it always made
him sad. How many youths, his brother among them, lay under the
fragrant pine-needle carpet of the forest, in their last earthly
sleep!

The "raising" brought out all the settlement--the women to look on
and gossip, while the children played; the men to bend their backs
in the moving of the heavy timbers. They celebrated the erection of
a new cabin as a noteworthy event. As a social function it had a
prominent place in the settlers' short list of pleasures.

Joe watched the proceeding with the same pleasure and surprise he
had felt in everything pertaining to border life.

To him this log-raising appeared the hardest kind of labor. Yet it
was plain these hardy men, these low-voiced women, and merry
children regarded the work as something far more significant than
the mere building of a cabin. After a while he understood the
meaning of the scene. A kindred spirit, the spirit of the pioneer,
drew them all into one large family. This was another cabin; another
home; another advance toward the conquering of the wilderness, for
which these brave men and women were giving their lives. In the
bright-eyed children's glee, when they clapped their little hands at
the mounting logs, Joe saw the progress, the march of civilization.

"Well, I'm sorry you're to leave us to-night," remarked Colonel Zane
to Joe, as the young man came over to where he, his wife, and sister
watched the work. "Jonathan said all was ready for your departure at
sundown."

"Do we travel by night?"

"Indeed, yes, my lad. There are Indians everywhere on the river. I
think, however, with Jack and Lew handling the paddles, you will
slip by safely. The plan is to keep along the south shore all night;
then cross over at a place called Girty's Point, where you are to
remain in hiding during daylight. From there you paddle up Yellow
Creek; then portage across country to the head of the Tuscarwawas.
Another night's journey will then bring you to the Village of
Peace."

Jim and Mr. Wells, with his nieces, joined the party now, and all
stood watching as the last logs were put in place.

"Colonel Zane, my first log-raising is an education to me," said the
young minister, in his earnest manner. "This scene is so full of
life. I never saw such goodwill among laboring men. Look at that
brawny-armed giant standing on the topmost log. How he whistles as
he swings his ax! Mr. Wells, does it not impress you?"

"The pioneers must be brothers because of their isolation and peril;
to be brothers means to love one another; to love one another is to
love God. What you see in this fraternity is God. And I want to see
this same beautiful feeling among the Indians."

"I have seen it," said Colonel Zane, to the old missionary. "When I
came out here alone twelve years ago the Indians were peaceable. If
the pioneers had paid for land, as I paid Cornplanter, there would
never have been a border war. But no; the settlers must grasp every
acre they could. Then the Indians rebelled; then the Girtys and
their allies spread discontent, and now the border is a bloody
warpath."

"Have the Jesuit missionaries accomplished anything with these war
tribes?" inquired Jim.

"No; their work has been chiefly among the Indians near Detroit and
northward. The Hurons, Delawares, Shawnees and other western tribes
have been demoralized by the French traders' rum, and incited to
fierce hatred by Girty and his renegades. Your work at Gnaddenhutten
must be among these hostile tribes, and it is surely a hazardous
undertaking."

"My life is God's," murmured the old minister. No fear could assail
his steadfast faith.

"Jim, it strikes me you'd be more likely to impress these Indians
Colonel Zane spoke of if you'd get a suit like mine and wear a knife
and tomahawk," interposed Joe, cheerfully. "Then, if you couldn't
convert, you could scalp them."

"Well, well, let us hope for the best," said Colonel Zane, when the
laughter had subsided. "We'll go over to dinner now. Come, all of
you. Jonathan, bring Wetzel. Betty, make him come, if you can."

As the party slowly wended its way toward the colonel's cabin Jim
and Nell found themselves side by side. They had not exchanged a
word since the evening previous, when Jim had kissed her. Unable to
look at each other now, and finding speech difficult, they walked in
embarrassed silence.

"Doesn't Joe look splendid in his hunting suit?" asked Jim,
presently.

"I hadn't noticed. Yes; he looks well," replied Nell, carelessly.
She was too indifferent to be natural.

"Are you angry with him?"

"Certainly not."

Jim was always simple and frank in his relations with women. He had
none of his brother's fluency of speech, with neither confidence,
boldness nor understanding of the intricate mazes of a woman's
moods.

"But--you are angry with--me?" he whispered.

Nell flushed to her temples, yet she did not raise her eyes nor
reply.

"It was a terrible thing for me to do," went on Jim, hesitatingly.
"I don't know why I took advantage--of--of your mistaking me for
Joe. If you only hadn't held up your mouth. No--I don't mean
that--of course you didn't. But--well, I couldn't help it. I'm
guilty. I have thought of little else. Some wonderful feeling has
possessed me ever since--since---"

"What has Joe been saying about me?" demanded Nell, her eyes burning
like opals.

"Why, hardly anything," answered Jim, haltingly. "I took him to task
about--about what I considered might be wrong to you. Joe has never
been very careful of young ladies' feelings, and I thought--well, it
was none of my business. He said he honestly cared for you, that you
had taught him how unworthy he was of a good woman. But he's wrong
there. Joe is wild and reckless, yet his heart is a well of gold. He
is a diamond in the rough. Just now he is possessed by wild notions
of hunting Indians and roaming through the forests; but he'll come
round all right. I wish I could tell you how much he has done for
me, how much I love him, how I know him! He can be made worthy of
any woman. He will outgrow this fiery, daring spirit, and
then--won't you help him?"

"I will, if he will let me," softly whispered Nell, irresistibly
drawn by the strong, earnest love thrilling in his voice.



Chapter X.

Once more out under the blue-black vault of heaven, with its myriads
of twinkling stars, the voyagers resumed their westward journey.
Whispered farewells of new but sincere friends lingered in their
ears. Now the great looming bulk of the fort above them faded into
the obscure darkness, leaving a feeling as if a protector had
gone--perhaps forever. Admonished to absolute silence by the stern
guides, who seemed indeed to have embarked upon a dark and deadly
mission, the voyagers lay back in the canoes and thought and
listened. The water eddied with soft gurgles in the wake of the
racing canoes; but that musical sound was all they heard. The
paddles might have been shadows, for all the splash they made; they
cut the water swiftly and noiselessly. Onward the frail barks glided
into black space, side by side, close under the overhanging willows.
Long moments passed into long hours, as the guides paddled
tirelessly as if their sinews were cords of steel.

With gray dawn came the careful landing of the canoes, a cold
breakfast eaten under cover of a willow thicket, and the beginning
of a long day while they were lying hidden from the keen eyes of
Indian scouts, waiting for the friendly mantle of night.

The hours dragged until once more the canoes were launched, this
time not on the broad Ohio, but on a stream that mirrored no shining
stars as it flowed still and somber under the dense foliage.

The voyagers spoke not, nor whispered, nor scarcely moved, so
menacing had become the slow, listening caution of Wetzel and Zane.
Snapping of twigs somewhere in the inscrutable darkness delayed them
for long moments. Any movement the air might resound with the
horrible Indian war-whoop. Every second was heavy with fear. How
marvelous that these scouts, penetrating the wilderness of gloom,
glided on surely, silently, safely! Instinct, or the eyes of the
lynx, guide their course. But another dark night wore on to the
tardy dawn, and each of its fearful hours numbered miles past and
gone.

The sun was rising in ruddy glory when Wetzel ran his canoe into the
bank just ahead of a sharp bend in the stream.

"Do we get out here?" asked Jim, seeing Jonathan turn his canoe
toward Wetzel's.

"The village lies yonder, around the bend," answered the guide.
"Wetzel cannot go there, so I'll take you all in my canoe."

"There's no room; I'll wait," replied Joe, quietly. Jim noted his
look--a strange, steady glance it was--and then saw him fix his eyes
upon Nell, watching her until the canoe passed around the
green-bordered bend in the stream.

Unmistakable signs of an Indian town were now evident. Dozens of
graceful birchen canoes lay upon the well-cleared banks; a log
bridge spanned the stream; above the slight ridge of rising ground
could be seen the poles of Indian teepees.

As the canoe grated upon the sandy beach a little Indian boy, who
was playing in the shallow water, raised his head and smiled.

"That's an Indian boy," whispered Kate.

"The dear little fellow!" exclaimed Nell.

The boy came running up to them, when they were landed, with
pleasure and confidence shining in his dusky eyes. Save for tiny
buckskin breeches, he was naked, and his shiny skin gleamed
gold-bronze in the sunlight. He was a singularly handsome child.

"Me--Benny," he lisped in English, holding up his little hand to
Nell.

The action was as loving and trusting as any that could have been
manifested by a white child. Jonathan Zane stared with a curious
light in his dark eyes; Mr. Wells and Jim looked as though they
doubted the evidence of their own sight. Here, even in an Indian
boy, was incontestable proof that the savage nature could be tamed
and civilized.

With a tender exclamation Nell bent over the child and kissed him.

Jonathan Zane swung his canoe up-stream for the purpose of bringing
Joe. The trim little bark slipped out of sight round the bend.
Presently its gray, curved nose peeped from behind the willows; then
the canoe swept into view again. There was only one person in it,
and that the guide.

"Where is my brother?" asked Jim, in amazement.

"Gone," answered Zane, quietly.

"Gone! What do you mean? Gone? Perhaps you have missed the spot
where you left him."

"They're both gone."

Nell and Jim gazed at each other with slowly whitening faces.

"Come, I'll take you up to the village," said Zane, getting out of
his canoe. All noticed that he was careful to take his weapons with
him.

"Can't you tell us what it means--this disappearance?" asked Jim,
his voice low and anxious.

"They're gone, canoe and all. I knew Wetzel was going, but I didn't
calkilate on the lad. Mebbe he followed Wetzel, mebbe he didn't,"
answered the taciturn guide, and he spoke no more.

In his keen expectation and wonder as to what the village would be
like, Jim momentarily forgot his brother's disappearance, and when
he arrived at the top of the bank he surveyed the scene with
eagerness. What he saw was more imposing than the Village of Peace
which he had conjured up in his imagination. Confronting him was a
level plain, in the center of which stood a wide, low structure
surrounded by log cabins, and these in turn encircled by Indian
teepees. A number of large trees, mostly full-foliaged maples,
shaded the clearing. The settlement swarmed with Indians. A few
shrill halloes uttered by the first observers of the newcomers
brought braves, maidens and children trooping toward the party with
friendly curiosity.

Jonathan Zane stepped before a cabin adjoining the large structure,
and called in at the open door. A short, stoop-shouldered white man,
clad in faded linsey, appeared on the threshold. His serious, lined
face had the unmistakable benevolent aspect peculiar to most
teachers of the gospel.

"Mr. Zeisberger, I've fetched a party from Fort Henry," said Zane,
indicating those he had guided. Then, without another word, never
turning his dark face to the right or left, he hurried down the lane
through the throng of Indians.

Jim remembered, as he saw the guide vanish over the bank of the
creek, that he had heard Colonel Zane say that Jonathan, as well as
Wetzel, hated the sight of an Indian. No doubt long years of war and
bloodshed had rendered these two great hunters callous. To them
there could be no discrimination--an Indian was an Indian.

"Mr. Wells, welcome to the Village of Peace!" exclaimed Mr.
Zeisberger, wringing the old missionary's hand. "The years have not
been so long but that I remember you."

"Happy, indeed, am I to get here, after all these dark, dangerous
journeys," returned Mr. Wells. "I have brought my nieces, Nell and
Kate, who were children when you left Williamsburg, and this young
man, James Downs, a minister of God, and earnest in his hope for our
work."

"A glorious work it is! Welcome, young ladies, to our peaceful
village. And, young man, I greet you with heartfelt thankfulness. We
need young men. Come in, all of your, and share my cabin. I'll have
your luggage brought up. I have lived in this hut alone. With some
little labor, and the magic touch women bring to the making of a
home, we can be most comfortable here."

Mr. Zeisberger gave his own room to the girls, assuring them with a
smile that it was the most luxurious in the village. The apartment
contained a chair, a table, and a bed of Indian blankets and buffalo
robes. A few pegs driven in the chinks between the logs completed
the furnishings. Sparse as were the comforts, they appealed warmly
to the girls, who, weary from their voyage, lay down to rest.

"I am not fatigued," said Mr. Wells, to his old friend. "I want to
hear all about your work, what you have done, and what you hope to
do."

"We have met with wonderful success, far beyond our wildest dreams,"
responded Mr. Zeisberger. "Certainly we have been blessed of God."

Then the missionary began a long, detailed account of the Moravian
Mission's efforts among the western tribes. The work lay chiefly
among the Delawares, a noble nation of redmen, intelligent, and
wonderfully susceptible to the teaching of the gospel. Among the
eastern Delawares, living on the other side of the Allegheny
Mountains, the missionaries had succeeded in converting many; and it
was chiefly through the western explorations of Frederick Post that
his Church decided the Indians of the west could as well be taught
to lead Christian lives. The first attempt to convert the western
redmen took place upon the upper Allegheny, where many Indians,
including Allemewi, a blind Delaware chief, accepted the faith. The
mission decided, however, it would be best to move farther west,
where the Delawares had migrated and were more numerous.

In April, 1770, more than ten years before, sixteen canoes, filled
with converted Indians and missionaries, drifted down the Allegheny
to Fort Pitt; thence down the Ohio to the Big Beaver; up that stream
and far into the Ohio wilderness.

Upon a tributary of the Muskingong, called the Tuscarwawas, a
settlement was founded. Near and far the news was circulated. Redmen
from all tribes came flocking to the new colony. Chiefs and
warriors, squaws and maidens, were attracted by the new doctrine of
the converted Indians. They were astonished at the missionaries'
teachings. Many doubted, some were converted, all listened. Great
excitement prevailed when old Glickhican, one of the wisest chiefs
of the Turtle tribe of the Delawares, became a convert to the
palefaces' religion.

The interest widened, and in a few years a beautiful, prosperous
town arose, which was called Village of Peace. The Indians of the
warlike tribes bestowed the appropriate name. The vast forests were
rich in every variety of game; the deep, swift streams were teeming
with fish. Meat and grain in abundance, buckskin for clothing, and
soft furs for winter garments were to be had for little labor. At
first only a few wigwams were erected. Soon a large log structure
was thrown up and used as a church. Then followed a school, a mill,
and a workshop. The verdant fields were cultivated and surrounded by
rail fences. Horses and cattle grazed with the timid deer on the
grassy plains.

The Village of Peace blossomed as a rose. The reports of the love
and happiness existing in this converted community spread from mouth
to mouth, from town to town, with the result that inquisitive
savages journeyed from all points to see this haven. Peaceful and
hostile Indians were alike amazed at the change in their brethren.
The good-fellowship and industry of the converts had a widespread
and wonderful influence. More, perhaps, than any other thing, the
great fields of waving corn, the hills covered with horses and
cattle, those evidences of abundance, impressed the visitors with
the well-being of the Christians. Bands of traveling Indians,
whether friendly or otherwise, were treated with hospitality, and
never sent away empty-handed. They were asked to partake of the
abundance and solicited to come again.

A feature by no means insignificant in the popularity of the village
was the church bell. The Indians loved music, and this bell charmed
them. On still nights the savages in distant towns could hear at
dusk the deep-toned, mellow notes of the bell summoning the
worshipers to the evening service. Its ringing clang, so strange, so
sweet, so solemn, breaking the vast dead wilderness quiet, haunted
the savage ear as though it were a call from a woodland god.

"You have arrived most opportunely," continued Mr. Zeisberger. "Mr.
Edwards and Mr. Young are working to establish other missionary
posts. Heckewelder is here now in the interest of this branching
out."

"How long will it take me to learn the Delaware language?" inquired
Jim.

"Not long. You do not, however, need to speak the Indian tongue, for
we have excellent interpreters."

"We heard much at Fort Pitt and Fort Henry about the danger, as well
as uselessness, of our venture," Jim continued. "The frontiersmen
declared that every rod of the way was beset with savage foes, and
that, even in the unlikely event of our arriving safely at the
Village of Peace, we would then be hemmed in by fierce, vengeful
tribes."

"Hostile savages abound here, of course; but we do not fear them. We
invite them. Our work is to convert the wicked, to teach them to
lead good, useful lives. We will succeed."

Jim could not help warming to the minister for his unswervable
faith, his earnest belief that the work of God could not fail;
nevertheless, while he felt no fear and intended to put all his
heart in the work, he remembered with disquietude Colonel Zane's
warnings. He thought of the wonderful precaution and eternal
vigilance of Jonathan and Wetzel--men of all men who most understood
Indian craft and cunning. It might well be possible that these good
missionaries, wrapped up in saving the souls of these children of
the forest, so full of God's teachings as to have little mind for
aught else, had no knowledge of the Indian nature beyond what the
narrow scope of their work invited. If what these frontiersmen
asserted was true, then the ministers' zeal had struck them blind.

Jim had a growing idea of the way in which the savages could be best
taught. He resolved to go slowly; to study the redmen's natures; not
to preach one word of the gospel to them until he had mastered their
language and could convey to their simple minds the real truth. He
would make Christianity as clear to them as were the deer-trails on
the moss and leaves of the forest.

"Ah, here you are. I hope you have rested well," said Mr.
Zeisberger, when at the conclusion of this long recital Nell and
Kate came into the room.

"Thank you, we feel much better," answered Kate. The girls certainly
looked refreshed. The substitution of clean gowns for their former
travel-stained garments made a change that called forth the
minister's surprise and admiration.

"My! My! Won't Edwards and Young beg me to keep them here now!" he
exclaimed, his pleased eyes resting on Nell's piquant beauty and
Kate's noble proportions and rich coloring. "Come; I will show you
over the Village of Peace."

"Are all these Indians Christians?" asked Jim.

"No, indeed. These Indians you see here, and out yonder under the
shade, though they are friendly, are not Christians. Our converts
employ themselves in the fields or shops. Come; take a peep in here.
This is where we preach in the evenings and during inclement
weather. On pleasant days we use the maple grove yonder."

Jim and the others looked in at the door of the large log structure.
They saw an immense room, the floor covered with benches, and a
raised platform at one end. A few windows let in the light. Spacious
and barn-like was this apartment; but undoubtedly, seen through the
beaming eyes of the missionary, it was a grand amphitheater for
worship. The hard-packed clay floor was velvet carpet; the rude
seats soft as eiderdown; the platform with its white-oak cross, an
altar of marble and gold.

"This is one of our shops," said Mr. Zeisberger, leading them to a
cabin. "Here we make brooms, harness for the horses, farming
implements--everything useful that we can. We have a forge here.
Behold an Indian blacksmith!"

The interior of the large cabin presented a scene of bustling
activity. Twenty or more Indians bent their backs in earnest
employment. In one corner a savage stood holding a piece of red-hot
iron on an anvil, while a brawny brave wielded a sledge-hammer. The
sparks flew; the anvil rang. In another corner a circle of braves
sat around a pile of dried grass and flags. They were twisting and
fashioning these materials into baskets. At a bench three Indian
carpenters were pounding and sawing. Young braves ran back and
forth, carrying pails, rough-hewn boards and blocks of wood.

Instantly struck by two things, Jim voiced his curiosity:

"Why do these Indians all wear long hair, smooth and shiny, without
adornment?"

"They are Christians. They wear neither headdress, war-bonnet, nor
scalp-lock," replied Mr. Zeisberger, with unconscious pride.

"I did not expect to see a blacksmith's anvil out here in the
wilderness. Where did you procure these tools?"

"We have been years getting them here. Some came by way of the Ohio
River; others overland from Detroit. That anvil has a history. It
was lost once, and lay for years in the woods, until some Indians
found it again. It is called the Ringing Stone, and Indians come
from miles around to see and hear it."

The missionary pointed out wide fields of corn, now growing yellow,
and hillsides doted with browsing cattle, droves of sturdy-limbed
horses, and pens of fat, grunting pigs--all of which attested to the
growing prosperity of the Village of Peace.

On the way back to the cabin, while the others listened to and
questioned Mr. Zeisberger, Jim was silent and thoughtful, for his
thoughts reverted to his brother.

Later, as he walked with Nell by the golden-fringed stream, he spoke
of Joe.

"Joe wanted so much to hunt with Wetzel. He will come back; surely
he will return to us when he has satisfied his wild craving for
adventure. Do you not think so?"

There was an eagerness that was almost pleading in Jim's voice. What
he so much hoped for--that no harm had befallen Joe, and that he
would return--he doubted. He needed the encouragement of his hope.

"Never," answered Nell, solemnly.

"Oh, why--why do you say that?"

"I saw him look at you--a strange, intent glance. He gazed long at
me as we separated. Oh! I can feel his eyes. No; he will never come
back."

"Nell, Nell, you do not mean he went away deliberately--because, oh!
I cannot say it."

"For no reason, except that the wilderness called him more than love
for you or--me."

"No, no," returned Jim, his face white. "You do not understand. He
really loved you--I know it. He loved me, too. Ah, how well! He has
gone because--I can't tell you."

"Oh, Jim, I hope--he loved--me," sobbed Nell, bursting into tears.
"His coldness--his neglect those--last few days--hurt me--so. If he
cared--as you say--I won't be--so--miserable."

"We are both right--you when you say he will never return, and I
when I say he loved us both," said Jim sadly, as the bitter
certainty forced itself into his mind.

As she sobbed softly, and he gazed with set, stern face into the
darkening forest, the deep, mellow notes of the church bell pealed
out. So thrilled, so startled were they by this melody wondrously
breaking the twilight stillness, that they gazed mutely at each
other. Then they remembered. It was the missionary's bell summoning
the Christian Indians to the evening service.



Chapter XI.

The, sultry, drowsy, summer days passed with no untoward event to
mar their slumbering tranquillity. Life for the newcomers to the
Village of Peace brought a content, the like of which they had never
dreamed of. Mr. Wells at once began active work among the Indians,
preaching to them through an interpreter; Nell and Kate, in hours
apart from household duties, busied themselves brightening their new
abode, and Jim entered upon the task of acquainting himself with the
modes and habits of the redmen. Truly, the young people might have
found perfect happiness in this new and novel life, if only Joe had
returned. His disappearance and subsequent absence furnished a theme
for many talks and many a quiet hour of dreamy sadness. The
fascination of his personality had been so impelling that long after
it was withdrawn a charm lingered around everything which reminded
them of him; a subtle and sweet memory, with perverse and half
bitter persistence, returned hauntingly. No trace of Joe had been
seen by any of the friendly Indian runners. He was gone into the
mazes of deep-shadowed forests, where to hunt for him would be like
striving to trail the flight of a swallow. Two of those he had left
behind always remembered him, and in their thoughts followed him in
his wanderings.

Jim settled down to his study of Indians with single-heartedness of
purpose. He spent part of every morning with the interpreters, with
whose assistance he rapidly acquired the Delaware language. He went
freely among the Indians, endeavoring to win their good-will. There
were always fifty to an hundred visiting Indians at the village;
sometimes, when the missionaries had advertised a special meeting,
there were assembled in the shady maple grove as many as five
hundred savages. Jim had, therefore, opportunities to practice his
offices of friendliness.

Fortunately for him, he at once succeeded in establishing himself in
the good graces of Glickhican, the converted Delaware chief. The
wise old Indian was of inestimable value to Jim. Early in their
acquaintance he evinced an earnest regard for the young minister,
and talked with him for hours.

From Glickhican Jim learned the real nature of the redmen. The
Indian's love of freedom and honor, his hatred of subjection and
deceit, as explained by the good old man, recalled to Jim Colonel
Zane's estimate of the savage character. Surely, as the colonel had
said, the Indians had reason for their hatred of the pioneers.
Truly, they were a blighted race.

Seldom had the rights of the redmen been thought of. The settler
pushed onward, plodding, as it were, behind his plow with a rifle.
He regarded the Indian as little better than a beast; he was easier
to kill than to tame. How little the settler knew the proud
independence, the wisdom, the stainless chastity of honor, which
belonged so truly to many Indian chiefs!

The redmen were driven like hounded deer into the untrodden wilds.
From freemen of the forests, from owners of the great boundless
plains, they passed to stern, enduring fugitives on their own lands.
Small wonder that they became cruel where once they had been gentle!
Stratagem and cunning, the night assault, the daylight ambush took
the place of their one-time open warfare. Their chivalrous courage,
that sublime inheritance from ancestors who had never known the
paleface foe, degenerated into a savage ferocity.

Interesting as was this history to Jim, he cared more for
Glickhican's rich portrayal of the redmen's domestic life, for the
beautiful poetry of his tradition and legends. He heard with delight
the exquisite fanciful Indian lore. From these romantic legends,
beautiful poems, and marvelous myths he hoped to get ideas of the
Indian's religion. Sweet and simple as childless dreams were these
quaint tales--tales of how the woodland fairies dwelt in
fern-carpeted dells; how at sunrise they came out to kiss open the
flowers; how the forest walks were spirit-haunted paths; how the
leaves whispered poetry to the winds; how the rocks harbored Indian
gods and masters who watched over their chosen ones.

Glickhican wound up his long discourses by declaring he had never
lied in the whole course of his seventy years, had never stolen,
never betrayed, never murdered, never killed, save in self-defence.
Gazing at the chief's fine features, now calm, yet showing traces of
past storms, Jim believed he spoke the truth.

When the young minister came, however, to study the hostile Indians
that flocked to the village, any conclusive delineation of
character, or any satisfactory analysis of their mental state in
regard to the paleface religion, eluded him. Their passive, silent,
sphinx-like secretiveness was baffling. Glickhican had taught him
how to propitiate the friendly braves, and with these he was
successful. Little he learned, however, from the unfriendly ones.
When making gifts to these redmen he could never be certain that his
offerings were appreciated. The jewels and gold he had brought west
with him went to the French traders, who in exchange gave him
trinkets, baubles, bracelets and weapons. Jim made hundreds of
presents. Boldly going up to befeathered and befringed chieftains,
he offered them knives, hatchets, or strings of silvery beads.
Sometimes his kindly offerings were repelled with a haughty stare;
at other times they would be accepted coldly, suspiciously, as if
the gifts brought some unknown obligation.

For a white man it was a never-to-be-forgotten experience to see
eight or ten of these grim, slowly stepping forest kings, arrayed in
all the rich splendor of their costume, stalking among the teepees
of the Village of Peace. Somehow, such a procession always made Jim
shiver. The singing, praying and preaching they heard unmoved. No
emotion was visible on their bronzed faces; nothing changed their
unalterable mien. Had they not moved, or gazed with burning eyes,
they would have been statues. When these chieftains looked at the
converted Indians, some of whom were braves of their nations, the
contempt in their glances betrayed that they now regarded these
Christian Indians as belonging to an alien race.

Among the chiefs Glickhican pointed out to Jim were Wingenund, the
Delaware; Tellane, the Half-King; Shingiss and Kotoxen--all of the
Wolf tribe of the Delawares.

Glickhican was careful to explain that the Delaware nation had been
divided into the Wolf and Turtle tribes, the former warlike people,
and the latter peaceable. Few of the Wolf tribe had gone over to the
new faith, and those who had were scorned. Wingenund, the great
power of the Delawares--indeed, the greatest of all the western
tribes--maintained a neutral attitude toward the Village of Peace.
But it was well known that his right-hand war-chiefs, Pipe and
Wishtonah, remained coldly opposed.

Jim turned all he had learned over and over in his mind, trying to
construct part of it to fit into a sermon that would be different
from any the Indians had ever heard. He did not want to preach far
over their heads. If possible, he desired to keep to their
ideals--for he deemed them more beautiful than his own--and to
conduct his teaching along the simple lines of their belief, so that
when he stimulated and developed their minds he could pass from what
they knew to the unknown Christianity of the white man.

His first address to the Indians was made one day during the
indisposition of Mr. Wells--who had been over-working himself--and
the absence of the other missionaries. He did not consider himself
at all ready for preaching, and confined his efforts to simple,
earnest talk, a recital of the thoughts he had assimilated while
living here among the Indians.

Amazement would not have described the state of his feelings when he
learned that he had made a powerful impression. The converts were
loud in his praise; the unbelievers silent and thoughtful. In spite
of himself, long before he had been prepared, he was launched on his
teaching. Every day he was called upon to speak; every day one
savage, at least, was convinced; every day the throng of interested
Indians was augmented. The elder missionaries were quite overcome
with joy; they pressed him day after day to speak, until at length
he alone preached during the afternoon service.

The news flew apace; the Village of Peace entertained more redmen
than ever before. Day by day the faith gained a stronger foothold. A
kind of religious trance affected some of the converted Indians, and
this greatly influenced the doubting ones. Many of them half
believed the Great Manitou had come.

Heckewelder, the acknowledged leader of the western Moravian
Mission, visited the village at this time, and, struck by the young
missionary's success, arranged a three days' religious festival.
Indian runners were employed to carry invitations to all the tribes.
The Wyandots in the west, the Shawnees in the south, and the
Delawares in the north were especially requested to come. No
deception was practiced to lure the distant savages to the Village
of Peace. They were asked to come, partake of the feasts, and listen
to the white man's teaching.



Chapter XII.

"The Groves Were God's First Temples."

From dawn until noon on Sunday bands of Indians arrived at the
Village of Peace. Hundreds of canoes glided down the swift stream
and bumped their prows into the pebbly beach. Groups of mounted
warriors rode out of the forests into the clearing; squaws with
papooses, maidens carrying wicker baskets, and children playing with
rude toys, came trooping along the bridle-paths.

Gifts were presented during the morning, after which the visitors
were feasted. In the afternoon all assembled in the grove to hear
the preaching.

The maple grove wherein the service was to be conducted might have
been intended by Nature for just such a purpose as it now fulfilled.
These trees were large, spreading, and situated far apart. Mossy
stones and the thick carpet of grass afforded seats for the
congregation.

Heckewelder--a tall, spare, and kindly appearing man--directed the
arranging of the congregation. He placed the converted Indians just
behind the knoll upon which the presiding minister was to stand. In
a half circle facing the knoll he seated the chieftains and
important personages of the various tribes. He then made a short
address in the Indian language, speaking of the work of the mission,
what wonders it had accomplished, what more good work it hoped to
do, and concluded by introducing the young missionary.

While Heckewelder spoke, Jim, who stood just behind, employed the
few moments in running his eye over the multitude. The sight which
met his gaze was one he thought he would never forget. An
involuntary word escaped him.

"Magnificent!" he exclaimed.

The shady glade had been transformed into a theater, from which
gazed a thousand dark, still faces. A thousand eagle plumes waved,
and ten thousand bright-hued feathers quivered in the soft breeze.
The fantastically dressed scalps presented a contrast to the smooth,
unadorned heads of the converted redmen. These proud plumes and
defiant feathers told the difference between savage and Christian.

In front of the knoll sat fifty chiefs, attentive and dignified.
Representatives of every tribe as far west as the Scioto River were
numbered in that circle. There were chiefs renowned for war, for
cunning, for valor, for wisdom. Their stately presence gave the
meeting tenfold importance. Could these chiefs be interested, moved,
the whole western world of Indians might be civilized.

Hepote, a Maumee chief, of whom it was said he had never listened to
words of the paleface, had the central position in this circle. On
his right and left, respectively, sat Shaushoto and Pipe, implacable
foes of all white men. The latter's aspect did not belie his
reputation. His copper-colored, repulsive visage compelled fear; it
breathed vindictiveness and malignity. A singular action of his was
that he always, in what must have been his arrogant vanity, turned
his profile to those who watched him, and it was a remarkable one;
it sloped in an oblique line from the top of his forehead to his
protruding chin, resembling somewhat the carved bowl of his pipe,
which was of flint and a famed inheritance from his ancestors. From
it he took his name. One solitary eagle plume, its tip stained
vermilion, stuck from his scalp-lock. It slated backward on a line
with his profile.

Among all these chiefs, striking as they were, the figure of
Wingenund, the Delaware, stood out alone.

His position was at the extreme left of the circle, where he leaned
against a maple. A long, black mantle, trimmed with spotless white,
enveloped him. One bronzed arm, circled by a heavy bracelet of gold,
held the mantle close about his lofty form. His headdress, which
trailed to the ground, was exceedingly beautiful. The eagle plumes
were of uniform length and pure white, except the black-pointed
tips.

At his feet sat his daughter, Whispering Winds. Her maidens were
gathered round her. She raised her soft, black eyes, shining with a
wondrous light of surprise and expectation, to the young
missionary's face.

Beyond the circle the Indians were massed together, even beyond the
limits of the glade. Under the trees on every side sat warriors
astride their steeds; some lounged on the green turf; many reclined
in the branches of low-spreading maples.

As Jim looked out over the sea of faces he started in surprise. The
sudden glance of fiery eyes had impelled his gaze. He recognized
Silvertip, the Shawnee chief. The Indian sat motionless on a
powerful black horse. Jim started again, for the horse was Joe's
thoroughbred, Lance. But Jim had no further time to think of Joe's
enemy, for Heckewelder stepped back.

Jim took the vacated seat, and, with a far-reaching, resonant voice
began his discourse to the Indians.

"Chieftains, warriors, maidens, children of the forest, listen, and
your ears shall hear no lie. I am come from where the sun rises to
tell you of the Great Spirit of the white man.

"Many, many moons ago, as many as blades of grass grow on yonder
plain, the Great Spirit of whom I shall speak created the world. He
made the sparkling lakes and swift rivers, the boundless plains and
tangled forests, over which He caused the sun to shine and the rain
to fall. He gave life to the kingly elk, the graceful deer, the
rolling bison, the bear, the fox--all the beasts and birds and
fishes. But He was not content; for nothing He made was perfect in
His sight. He created the white man in His own image, and from this
first man's rib He created his mate--a woman. He turned them free in
a beautiful forest.

"Life was fair in the beautiful forest. The sun shone always, the
birds sang, the waters flowed with music, the flowers cast sweet
fragrance on the air. In this forest, where fruit bloomed always,
was one tree, the Tree of Life, the apple of which they must not
eat. In all this beautiful forest of abundance this apple alone was
forbidden them.

"Now evil was born with woman. A serpent tempted her to eat of the
apple of Life, and she tempted the man to eat. For their sin the
Great Spirit commanded the serpent to crawl forever on his belly,
and He drove them from the beautiful forest. The punishment for
their sin was to be visited on their children's children, always,
until the end of time. The two went afar into the dark forest, to
learn to live as best they might. From them all tribes descended.
The world is wide. A warrior might run all his days and not reach
the setting sun, where tribes of yellow-skins live. He might travel
half his days toward the south-wind, where tribes of black-skins
abound. People of all colors inhabited the world. They lived in
hatred toward one another. They shed each other's blood; they stole
each other's lands, gold, and women. They sinned.

"Many moons ago the Great Spirit sorrowed to see His chosen tribe,
the palefaces, living in ignorance and sin. He sent His only Son to
redeem them, and said if they would listen and believe, and teach
the other tribes, He would forgive their sin and welcome them to the
beautiful forest.

"That was moons and moons ago, when the paleface killed his brother
for gold and lands, and beat his women slaves to make them plant his
corn. The Son of the Great Spirit lifted the cloud from the
palefaces' eyes, and they saw and learned. So pleased was the Great
Spirit that He made the palefaces wiser and wiser, and master of the
world. He bid them go afar to teach the ignorant tribes.

"To teach you is why the young paleface journeyed from the rising
sun. He wants no lands or power. He has given all that he had. He
walks among you without gun or knife. He can gain nothing but the
happiness of opening the redmen's eyes.

"The Great Spirit of whom I teach and the Great Manitou, your idol,
are the same; the happy hunting ground of the Indian and the
beautiful forest of the paleface are the same; the paleface and the
redman are the same. There is but one Great Spirit, that is God; but
one eternal home, that is heaven; but one human being, that is man.

"The Indian knows the habits of the beaver; he can follow the paths
of the forests; he can guide his canoe through the foaming rapids;
he is honest, he is brave, he is great; but he is not wise. His
wisdom is clouded with the original sin. He lives in idleness; he
paints his face; he makes his squaw labor for him, instead of
laboring for her; he kills his brothers. He worships the trees and
rocks. If he were wise he would not make gods of the swift arrow and
bounding canoe; of the flowering ash and the flaming flint. For
these things have not life. In his dreams he sees his arrow speed to
the reeling deer; in his dreams he sees his canoe shoot over the
crest of shining waves; and in his mind he gives them life. When his
eyes are opened he will see they have no spirit. The spirit is in
his own heart. It guides the arrow to the running deer, and steers
the canoe over the swirling current. The spirit makes him find the
untrodden paths, and do brave deeds, and love his children and his
honor. It makes him meet his foe face to face, and if he is to die
it gives him strength to die--a man. The spirit is what makes him
different from the arrow, the canoe, the mountain, and all the birds
and beasts. For it is born of the Great Spirit, the creator of all.
Him you must worship.

"Redmen, this worship is understanding your spirit and teaching it
to do good deeds. It is called Christianity. Christianity is love.
If you will love the Great Spirit you will love your wives, your
children, your brothers, your friends, your foes--you will love the
palefaces. No more will you idle in winter and wage wars in summer.
You will wear your knife and tomahawk only when you hunt for meat.
You will be kind, gentle, loving, virtuous--you will have grown
wise. When your days are done you will meet all your loved ones in
the beautiful forest. There, where the flowers bloom, the fruits
ripen always, where the pleasant water glides and the summer winds
whisper sweetly, there peace will dwell forever.

"Comrades, be wise, think earnestly. Forget the wicked paleface; for
there are many wicked palefaces. They sell the serpent firewater;
they lie and steal and kill. These palefaces' eyes are still
clouded. If they do not open they will never see the beautiful
forest. You have much to forgive, but those who forgive please the
Great Spirit; you must give yourselves to love, but those who love
are loved; you must work, but those who work are happy.

"Behold the Village of Peace! Once it contained few; now there are
many. Where once the dark forest shaded the land, see the cabins,
the farms, the horses, the cattle! Field on field of waving, golden
grain shine there under your eyes. The earth has blossomed
abundance. Idling and fighting made not these rich harvests. Belief
made love; love made wise eyes; wise eyes saw, and lo! there came
plenty.

"The proof of love is happiness. These Christian Indians are happy.
They are at peace with the redman and the paleface. They till the
fields and work in the shops. In days to come cabins and farms and
fields of corn will be theirs. They will bring up their children,
not to hide in the forest to slay, but to walk hand in hand with the
palefaces as equals.

"Oh, open your ears! God speaks to you; peace awaits you! Cast the
bitterness from your hearts; it is the serpent-poison. While you
hate, God shuts His eyes. You are great on the trail, in the
council, in war; now be great in forgiveness. Forgive the palefaces
who have robbed you of your lands. Then will come peace. If you do
not forgive, the war will go on; you will lose lands and homes, to
find unmarked graves under the forest leaves. Revenge is sweet; but
it is not wise. The price of revenge is blood and life. Root it out
of your hearts. Love these Christian Indians; love the missionaries
as they love you; love all living creatures. Your days are but few;
therefore, cease the the strife. Let us say, 'Brothers, that is
God's word, His law; that is love; that is Christianity!' If you
will say from your heart, brother, you are a Christian.

"Brothers, the paleface teacher beseeches you. Think not of this
long, bloody war, of your dishonored dead, of your silenced wigwams,
of your nameless graves, of your homeless children. Think of the
future. One word from you will make peace over all this broad land.
The paleface must honor a Christian. He can steal no Christian's
land. All the palefaces, as many as the stars of the great white
path, dare not invade the Village of Peace. For God smiles here.
Listen to His words: 'Come unto me all that are weary and heavy
laden, and I will give you rest.'"

Over the multitude brooded an impressive, solemn silence. Then an
aged Delaware chief rose, with a mien of profound thought, and
slowly paced before the circle of chiefs. Presently he stopped,
turned to the awaiting Indians, and spoke:

"Netawatwees is almost persuaded to be a Christian." He resumed his
seat.

Another interval of penetrating quiet ensued. At length a
venerable-looking chieftain got up:

"White Eyes hears the rumbling thunder in his ears. The smoke blows
from his eyes. White Eyes is the oldest chief of the Lenni-Lenape.
His days are many; they are full; they draw near the evening of his
life; he rejoices that wisdom is come before his sun is set.

"White Eyes believes the young White Father. The ways of the Great
Spirit are many as the fluttering leaves; they are strange and
secret as the flight of a loon; White Eyes believes the redman's
happy hunting grounds need not be forgotten to love the palefaces'
God. As a young brave pants and puzzles over his first trail, so the
grown warrior feels in his understanding of his God. He gropes
blindly through dark ravines.

"White Eyes speaks few words to-day, for he is learning wisdom; he
bids his people hearken to the voice of the White Father. War is
wrong; peace is best. Love is the way to peace. The paleface
advances one step nearer his God. He labors for his home; he keeps
the peace; he asks but little; he frees his women. That is well.
White Eyes has spoken."

The old chief slowly advanced toward the Christian Indians. He laid
aside his knife and tomahawk, and then his eagle plumes and
war-bonnet. Bareheaded, he seated himself among the converted
redmen. They began chanting in low, murmuring tones.

Amid the breathless silence that followed this act of such great
significance, Wingenund advanced toward the knoll with slow, stately
step. His dark eye swept the glade with lightning scorn; his glance
alone revealed the passion that swayed him.

"Wingenund's ears are keen; they have heard a feather fall in the
storm; now they hear a soft-voiced thrush. Wingenund thunders to his
people, to his friends, to the chiefs of other tribes: 'Do not bury
the hatchet!' The young White Father's tongue runs smooth like the
gliding brook; it sings as the thrush calls its mate. Listen; but
wait, wait! Let time prove his beautiful tale; let the moons go by
over the Village of Peace.

"Wingenund does not flaunt his wisdom. He has grown old among his
warriors; he loves them; he fears for them. The dream of the
palefaces' beautiful forest glimmers as the rainbow glows over the
laughing falls of the river. The dream of the paleface is too
beautiful to come true. In the days of long ago, when Wingenund's
forefathers heard not the paleface's ax, they lived in love and
happiness such as the young White Father dreams may come again. They
waged no wars. A white dove sat in every wigwam. The lands were
theirs and they were rich. The paleface came with his leaden death,
his burning firewater, his ringing ax, and the glory of the redmen
faded forever.

"Wingenund seeks not to inflame his braves to anger. He is sick of
blood-spilling--not from fear; for Wingenund cannot feel fear. But
he asks his people to wait. Remember, the gifts of the paleface ever
contained a poisoned arrow. Wingenund's heart is sore. The day of
the redman is gone. His sun is setting. Wingenund feels already the
gray shades of evening."

He stopped one long moment as if to gather breath for his final
charge to his listeners. Then with a magnificent gesture he
thundered:

"Is the Delaware a fool? When Wingenund can cross unarmed to the Big
Water he shall change his mind. When Deathwind ceases to blow his
bloody trail over the fallen leaves Wingenund will believe."



Chapter XIII.

As the summer waned, each succeeding day, with its melancholy calm,
its changing lights and shades, its cool, damp evening winds,
growing more and more suggestive of autumn, the little colony of
white people in the Village of Peace led busy, eventful lives.

Upwards of fifty Indians, several of them important chiefs, had
become converted since the young missionary began preaching.
Heckewelder declared that this was a wonderful showing, and if it
could be kept up would result in gaining a hold on the Indian tribes
which might not be shaken. Heckewelder had succeeded in interesting
the savages west of the Village of Peace to the extent of permitting
him to establish missionary posts in two other localities--one near
Goshhocking, a Delaware town; and one on the Muskingong, the
principal river running through central Ohio. He had, with his
helpers, Young and Edwards, journeyed from time to time to these
points, preaching, making gifts, and soliciting help from chiefs.

The most interesting feature, perhaps, of the varied life of the
missionary party was a rivalry between Young and Edwards for the
elder Miss Wells. Usually Nell's attractiveness appealed more to men
than Kate's; however, in this instance, although the sober teachers
of the gospel admired Nell's winsome beauty, they fell in love with
Kate. The missionaries were both under forty, and good, honest men,
devoted to the work which had engrossed them for years. Although
they were ardent lovers, certainly they were not picturesque. Two
homelier men could hardly have been found. Moreover, the sacrifice
of their lives to missionary work had taken them far from the
companionship of women of their own race, so that they lacked the
ease of manner which women like to see in men. Young and Edwards
were awkward, almost uncouth. Embarrassment would not have done
justice to their state of feeling while basking in the shine of
Kate's quiet smile. They were happy, foolish, and speechless.

If Kate shared in the merriment of the others--Heckewelder could not
conceal his, and Nell did not try very hard to hide hers--she never
allowed a suspicion of it to escape. She kept the easy, even tenor
of her life, always kind and gracious in her quaint way, and
precisely the same to both her lovers. No doubt she well knew that
each possessed, under all his rough exterior, a heart of gold.

One day the genial Heckewelder lost, or pretended to lose, his
patience.

"Say, you worthy gentlemen are becoming ornamental instead of
useful. All this changing of coats, trimming of mustaches, and
eloquent sighing doesn't seem to have affected the young lady. I've
a notion to send you both to Maumee town, one hundred miles away.
This young lady is charming, I admit, but if she is to keep on
seriously hindering the work of the Moravian Mission I must object.
As for that matter, I might try conclusions myself. I'm as young as
either of you, and, I flatter myself, much handsomer. You'll have a
dangerous rival presently. Settle it! You can't both have her;
settle it!"

This outburst from their usually kind leader placed the earnest but
awkward gentlemen in a terrible plight.

On the afternoon following the crisis Heckewelder took Mr. Wells to
one of the Indian shops, and Jim and Nell went canoeing. Young and
Edwards, after conferring for one long, trying hour, determined on
settling the question.

Young was a pale, slight man, very homely except when he smiled. His
smile not only broke up the plainness of his face, but seemed to
chase away a serious shadow, allowing his kindly, gentle spirit to
shine through. He was nervous, and had a timid manner. Edwards was
his opposite, being a man of robust frame, with a heavy face, and a
manner that would have suggested self-confidence in another man.

They were true and tried friends.

"Dave, I couldn't ask her," said Young, trembling at the very
thought. "Besides, there's no hope for me. I know it. That's why I'm
afraid, why I don't want to ask her. What'd such a glorious creature
see in a poor, puny little thing like me?"

"George, you're not over-handsome," admitted Dave, shaking his head.
"But you can never tell about women. Sometimes they like even
little, insignificant fellows. Don't be too scared about asking her.
Besides, it will make it easier for me. You might tell her about
me--you know, sort of feel her out, so I'd---"

Dave's voice failed him here; but he had said enough, and that was
most discouraging to poor George. Dave was so busy screwing up his
courage that he forgot all about his friend.

"No; I couldn't," gasped George, falling into a chair. He was
ghastly pale. "I couldn't ask her to accept me, let alone do another
man's wooing. She thinks more of you. She'll accept you."

"You really think so?" whispered Dave, nervously.

"I know she will. You're such a fine, big figure of a man. She'll
take you, and I'll be glad. This fever and fretting has about
finished me. When she's yours I'll not be so bad. I'll be happy in
your happiness. But, Dave, you'll let me see her occasionally, won't
you? Go! Hurry--get it over!"

"Yes; we must have it over," replied Dave, getting up with a brave,
effort. Truly, if he carried that determined front to his lady-love
he would look like a masterful lover. But when he got to the door he
did not at all resemble a conqueror.

"You're sure she--cares for me?" asked Dave, for the hundredth time.
This time, as always, his friend was faithful and convincing.

"I know she does. Go--hurry. I tell you I can't stand this any
longer," cried George, pushing Dave out of the door.

"You won't go--first?" whispered Dave, clinging to the door.

"I won't go at all. I couldn't ask her--I don't want her--go! Get
out!"

Dave started reluctantly toward the adjoining cabin, from the open
window of which came the song of the young woman who was responsible
for all this trouble. George flung himself on his bed. What a relief
to feel it was all over! He lay there with eves shut for hours, as
it seemed. After a time Dave came in. George leaped to his feet and
saw his friend stumbling over a chair. Somehow, Dave did not look as
usual. He seemed changed, or shrunken, and his face wore a
discomfited, miserable expression.

"Well?" cried George, sharply. Even to his highly excited
imagination this did not seem the proper condition for a victorious
lover.

"She refused--refused me," faltered Dave. "She was very sweet and
kind; said something about being my sister--I don't remember just
what--but she wouldn't have me."

"What did you say to her?" whispered George, a paralyzing hope
almost rendering him speechless.

"I--I told her everything I could think of," replied Dave,
despondently; "even what you said."

"What I said? Dave, what did you tell her I said?"

"Why, you know--about she cared for me--that you were sure of it,
and that you didn't want her---"

"Jackass!" roared George, rising out of his meekness like a lion
roused from slumber.

"Didn't you--say so?" inquired Dave, weakly.

"No! No! No! Idiot!"

As one possessed, George rushed out of the cabin, and a moment later
stood disheveled and frantic before Kate.

"Did that fool say I didn't love you?" he demanded.

Kate looked up, startled; but as an understanding of George's wild
aspect and wilder words dawned upon her, she resumed her usual calm
demeanor. Looking again to see if this passionate young man was
indeed George, she turned her face as she said:

"If you mean Mr. Edwards, yes; I believe he did say as much. Indeed,
from his manner, he seemed to have monopolized all the love near the
Village of Peace."

"But it's not true. I do love you. I love you to distraction. I have
loved you ever since I first saw you. I told Dave that. Heckewelder
knows it; even the Indians know it," cried George, protesting
vehemently against the disparaging allusion to his affections. He
did not realize he was making a most impassioned declaration of
love. When he was quite out of breath he sat down and wiped his
moist brow.

A pink bloom tinged Kate's cheeks, and her eyes glowed with a happy
light; but George never saw these womanly evidences of pleasure.

"Of course I know you don't care for me---"

"Did Mr. Edwards tell you so?" asked Kate, glancing up quickly.

"Why, yes, he has often said he thought that. Indeed, he always
seemed to regard himself as the fortunate object of your affections.
I always believed he was."

"But it wasn't true."

"What?"

"It's not true."

"What's not true?"

"Oh--about my--not caring."

"Kate!" cried George, quite overcome with rapture. He fell over two
chairs getting to her; but he succeeded, and fell on his knees to
kiss her hand.

"Foolish boy! It has been you all the time," whispered Kate, with
her quiet smile.

                *       *       *

"Look here, Downs; come to the door. See there," said Heckewelder to
Jim.

Somewhat surprised at Heckewelder's grave tone, Jim got up from the
supper-table and looked out of the door. He saw two tall Indians
pacing to and fro under the maples. It was still early twilight and
light enough to see clearly. One Indian was almost naked; the lithe,
graceful symmetry of his dark figure standing out in sharp contrast
to the gaunt, gaudily-costumed form of the other.

"Silvertip! Girty!" exclaimed Jim, in a low voice.

"Girty I knew, of course; but I was not sure the other was the
Shawnee who captured you and your brother," replied Heckewelder,
drawing Jim into another room.

"What do they mean by loitering around the village? Inquired Jim,
apprehensively. Whenever he heard Girty's name mentioned, or even
thought of him, he remembered with a shudder the renegade's allusion
to the buzzards. Jim never saw one of these carrion birds soaring
overhead but his thoughts instantly reverted to the frontier ruffian
and his horrible craving.

"I don't know," answered Heckewelder. "Girty has been here several
times of late. I saw him conferring with Pipe at Goshhocking. I hope
there's no deviltry afoot. Pipe is a relentless enemy of all
Christians, and Girty is a fiend, a hyena. I think, perhaps, it will
be well for you and the girls to stay indoors while Girty and
Silvertip are in the village."

That evening the entire missionary party were gathered in Mr. Wells'
room. Heckewelder told stories of Indian life; Nell sang several
songs, and Kate told many amusing things said and done by the little
Indian boys in her class at the school. Thus the evening passed
pleasantly for all.

"So next Wednesday I am to perform the great ceremony," remarked
Heckewelder, laying his hand kindly on Young's knee. "We'll
celebrate the first white wedding in the Village of Peace."

Young looked shyly down at his boots; Edwards crossed one leg over
the other, and coughed loudly to hide his embarrassment. Kate wore,
as usual, her pensive smile; Nell's eyes twinkled, and she was about
to speak, when Heckewelder's quizzical glance in her direction made
her lips mute.

"I hope I'll have another wedding on my hands soon," he said
placidly.

This ordinary remark had an extraordinary effect. Nell turned with
burning cheeks and looked out of the window. Jim frowned fiercely
and bit his lips. Edwards began to laugh, and even Mr. Wells'
serious face lapsed into a smile.

"I mean I've picked out a nice little Delaware squaw for Dave," said
Heckewelder, seeing his badinage had somehow gone amiss.

"Oh-h!" suddenly cried Nell, in shuddering tones.

They all gazed at her in amazement. Every vestige of color had
receded from her face, leaving it marblelike. Her eves were fixed in
startled horror. Suddenly she relaxed her grasp on the windowsill
and fell back limp and senseless.

Heckewelder ran to the door to look out, while the others bent over
the unconscious girl, endeavoring to revive her. Presently a
fluttering breath and a quivering of her dark lashes noted a return
of suspended life. Then her beautiful eyes opened wide to gaze with
wonder and fear into the grave faces bent so anxiously over her.

"Nell, dearest, you are safe. What was it? What frightened you so?"
said Kate, tenderly.

"Oh, it was fearful!" gasped Nell, sitting up. She clung to her
sister with one hand, while the other grasped Jim's sleeve.

"I was looking out into the dark, when suddenly I beheld a face, a
terrible face!" cried Nell. Those who watched her marveled at the
shrinking, awful fear in her eyes. "It was right by the window. I
could have touched it. Such a greedy, wolfish face, with a long,
hooked nose! The eyes, oh! the eyes! I'll never forget them. They
made me sick; they paralyzed me. It wasn't an Indian's face. It
belonged to that white man, that awful white man! I never saw him
before; but I knew him."

"Girty!" said Heckewelder, who had come in with his quiet step. "He
looked in at the window. Calm yourself, Nellie. The renegade has
gone."

The incident worried them all at the time, and made Nell nervous for
several days; but as Girty had disappeared, and nothing more was
heard of him, gradually they forgot. Kate's wedding day dawned with
all the little party well and happy. Early in the afternoon Jim and
Nell, accompanied by Kate and her lover, started out into the woods
just beyond the clearing for the purpose of gathering wild flowers
to decorate the cabin.

"We are both thinking of--him," Jim said, after he and Nell had
walked some little way in silence.

"Yes," answered Nell, simply.

"I hope--I pray Joe comes back, but if he doesn't--Nell--won't you
care a little for me?"

He received no answer. But Nell turned her face away.

"We both loved him. If he's gone forever our very love for him
should bring us together. I know--I know he would have wished that."

"Jim, don't speak of love to me now," she whispered. Then she turned
to the others. "Come quickly; here are great clusters of wild
clematis and goldenrod. How lovely! Let us gather a quantity."

The young men had almost buried the girls under huge masses of the
beautiful flowers, when the soft tread of moccasined feet caused
them all to turn in surprise. Six savages stood waist-deep in the
bushes, where they had lain concealed. Fierce, painted visages
scowled from behind leveled rifles.

"Don't yell!" cried a hoarse voice in English. Following the voice
came a snapping of twigs, and then two other figures came into view.
They were Girty and Silvertip.

"Don't yell, er I'll leave you layin' here fer the buzzards," said
the renegade. He stepped forward and grasped Young, at the same time
speaking in the Indian language and pointing to a nearby tree.
Strange to relate, the renegade apparently wanted no bloodshed.
While one of the savages began to tie Young to the tree, Girty
turned his gaze on the girls. His little, yellow eyes glinted; he
stroked his chin with a bony hand, and his dark, repulsive face was
wreathed in a terrible, meaning smile.

"I've been layin' fer you," he croaked, eyeing Nell. "Ye're the
purtiest lass, 'ceptin' mebbe Bet Zane, I ever seed on the border. I
got cheated outen her, but I've got you; arter I feed yer Injun
preacher to ther buzzards mebbe ye'll larn to love me."

Nell gazed one instant into the monster's face. Her terror-stricken
eyes were piteous to behold. She tried to speak; but her voice
failed. Then, like stricken bird, she fell on the grass.



Chapter XIV.

Not many miles from the Village of Peace rose an irregular chain of
hills, the first faint indications of the grand Appalachian Mountain
system. These ridges were thickly wooded with white oak, poplar and
hickory, among which a sentinel pine reared here and there its
evergreen head. There were clefts in the hills, passes lined by
gray-stoned cliffs, below which ran clear brooks, tumbling over
rocks in a hurry to meet their majestic father, the Ohio.

One of these valleys, so narrow that the sun seldom brightened the
merry brook, made a deep cut in the rocks. The head of this valley
tapered until the walls nearly met; it seemed to lose itself in the
shade of fern-faced cliffs, shadowed as they were by fir trees
leaning over the brink, as though to search for secrets of the
ravine. So deep and dark and cool was this sequestered nook that
here late summer had not dislodged early spring. Everywhere was a
soft, fresh, bright green. The old gray cliffs were festooned with
ferns, lichens and moss. Under a great, shelving rock, damp and
stained by the copper-colored water dripping down its side, was a
dewy dell into which the sunshine had never peeped. Here the swift
brook tarried lovingly, making a wide turn under the cliff, as
though loth to leave this quiet nook, and then leaped once more to
enthusiasm in its murmuring flight.

Life abounded in this wild, beautiful, almost inaccessible spot.
Little brown and yellow birds flitted among the trees; thrushes ran
along the leaf-strewn ground; orioles sang their melancholy notes;
robins and flickers darted beneath the spreading branches. Squirrels
scurried over the leaves like little whirlwinds, and leaped daringly
from the swinging branches or barked noisily from woody perches.
Rabbits hopped inquisitively here and there while nibbling at the
tender shoots of sassafras and laurel.

Along this flower-skirted stream a tall young man, carrying a rifle
cautiously stepped, peering into the branches overhead. A gray flash
shot along a limb of a white oak; then the bushy tail of a squirrel
flitted into a well-protected notch, from whence, no doubt, a keen
little eye watched the hunter's every movement.

The rifle was raised; then lowered. The hunter walked around the
tree. Presently up in the tree top, snug under a knotty limb, he
spied a little ball of gray fur. Grasping a branch of underbush, he
shook it vigorously. The thrashing sound worried the gray squirrel,
for he slipped from his retreat and stuck his nose over the limb.
CRACK! With a scratching and tearing of bark the squirrel loosened
his hold and then fell; alighting with a thump. As the hunter picked
up his quarry a streak of sunshine glinting through the tree top
brightened his face.

The hunter was Joe.

He was satisfied now, for after stowing the squirrel in the pocket
of his hunting coat he shouldered his rifle and went back up the
ravine. Presently a dull roar sounded above the babble of the brook.
It grew louder as he threaded his way carefully over the stones.
Spots of white foam flecked the brook. Passing under the gray,
stained cliff, Joe turned around a rocky corner, and came to an
abrupt end of the ravine. A waterfall marked the spot where the
brook entered. The water was brown as it took the leap, light green
when it thinned out; and below, as it dashed on the stones, it
became a beautiful, sheeny white.

Upon a flat rock, so near the cascade that spray flew over him, sat
another hunter. The roaring falls drowned all other sounds, yet the
man roused from his dreamy contemplation of the waterfall when Joe
rounded the corner.

"I heerd four shots," he said, as Joe came up.

"Yes; I got a squirrel for every shot."

Wetzel led the way along a narrow foot trail which gradually wound
toward the top of the ravine. This path emerged presently, some
distance above the falls, on the brink of a bluff. It ran along the
edge of the precipice a few yards, then took a course back into
densely wooded thickets. Just before stepping out on the open cliff
Wetzel paused and peered keenly on all sides. There was no living
thing to be seen; the silence was the deep, unbroken calm of the
wilderness.

Wetzel stepped to the bluff and looked over. The stony wall opposite
was only thirty feet away, and somewhat lower. From Wetzel's action
it appeared as if he intended to leap the fissure. In truth, many a
band of Indians pursuing the hunter into this rocky fastness had
come out on the bluff, and, marveling at what they thought Wetzel's
prowess, believed he had made a wonderful leap, thus eluding them.
But he had never attempted that leap, first, because he knew it was
well-nigh impossible, and secondly, there had never been any
necessity for such risk.

Any one leaning over this cliff would have observed, perhaps ten
feet below, a narrow ledge projecting from the face of the rock. He
would have imagined if he were to drop on that ledge there would be
no way to get off and he would be in a worse predicament.

Without a moment's hesitation Wetzel swung himself over the ledge.
Joe followed suit. At one end of this lower ledge grew a hardy shrub
of the ironwood species, and above it a scrub pine leaned
horizontally out over the ravine. Laying his rifle down, Wetzel
grasped a strong root and cautiously slid over the side. When all of
his body had disappeared, with the exception of his sinewy fingers,
they loosened their hold on the root, grasped the rifle, and dragged
it down out of sight. Quietly, with similar caution, Joe took hold
of the same root, let himself down, and when at full length swung
himself in under the ledge. His feet found a pocket in the cliff.
Letting go of the root, he took his rifle, and in another second was
safe.

Of all Wetzel's retreats--for he had many--he considered this one
the safest. The cavern under the ledge he had discovered by
accident. One day, being hotly pursued by Shawnees, he had been
headed off on this cliff, and had let himself down on the ledge,
intending to drop from it to the tops of the trees below. Taking
advantage of every little aid, he hung over by means of the shrub,
and was in the act of leaping when he saw that the cliff shelved
under the ledge, while within reach of his feet was the entrance to
a cavern. He found the cave to be small with an opening at the back
into a split in the rock. Evidently the place had been entered from
the rear by bears, who used the hole for winter sleeping quarters.
By crawling on his hands and knees, Wetzel found the rear opening.
Thus he had established a hiding place where it was almost
impossible to locate him. He provisioned his retreat, which he
always entered by the cliff and left by the rear.

An evidence of Wetzel's strange nature, and of his love for this
wild home, manifested itself when he bound Joe to secrecy. It was
unlikely, even if the young man ever did get safely out of the
wilderness, that any stories he might relate would reveal the
hunter's favorite rendezvous. But Wetzel seriously demanded this
secrecy, as earnestly as if the forest were full of Indians and
white men, all prowling in search of his burrow.

Joe was in the seventh heaven of delight, and took to the free life
as a wild gosling takes to the water. No place had ever appealed to
him as did this dark, silent hole far up on the side of a steep
cliff. His interest in Wetzel soon passed into a great admiration,
and from that deepened to love.

This afternoon, when they were satisfied that all was well within
their refuge, Joe laid aside his rifle, and, whistling softly, began
to prepare supper. The back part of the cave permitted him to stand
erect, and was large enough for comparative comfort. There was a
neat, little stone fireplace, and several cooking utensils and
gourds. From time to time Wetzel had brought these things. A pile of
wood and a bundle of pine cones lay in one corner. Haunches of dried
beef, bear and buffalo meat hung from pegs; a bag of parched corn,
another of dried apples lay on a rocky shelf. Nearby hung a
powder-horn filled with salt and pepper. In the cleft back of the
cave was a spring of clear, cold water.

The wants of woodsmen are few and simple. Joe and Wetzel, with
appetites whetted by their stirring outdoor life, relished the
frugal fare as they could never have enjoyed a feast. As the shadows
of evening entered the cave, they lighted their pipes to partake of
the hunter's sweetest solace, a quiet smoke.

Strange as it may appear, this lonely, stern Indian-hunter and the
reckless, impulsive boy were admirably suited for companionship.
Wetzel had taken a liking to the young man when he led the brothers
to Fort Henry. Subsequent events strengthened his liking, and now,
many days after, Joe having followed him into the forest, a strong
attachment had been insensibly forged between them.

Wetzel understood Joe's burning desire to roam the forests; but he
half expected the lad would soon grow tired of this roving life, but
exactly the opposite symptoms were displayed. The hunter had
intended to take his comrade on a hunting trip, and to return with
him, after that was over, to Fort Henry. They had now been in the
woods for weeks and every day in some way had Joe showed his mettle.
Wetzel finally admitted him into the secrets of his most cherished
hiding place. He did not want to hurt the lad's feelings by taking
him back to the settlement; he could not send him back. So the days
wore on swiftly; full of heart-satisfying incident and life, with
man and boy growing closer in an intimacy that was as warm as it was
unusual.

Two reasons might account for this: First, there is no sane human
being who is not better off for companionship. An exile would find
something of happiness in one who shared his misery. And, secondly,
Joe was a most acceptable comrade, even for a slayer of Indians.
Wedded as Wetzel was to the forest trails, to his lonely life, to
the Nemesis-pursuit he had followed for eighteen long years, he was
still a white man, kind and gentle in his quiet hours, and because
of this, though he knew it not, still capable of affection. He had
never known youth; his manhood had been one pitiless warfare against
his sworn foes; but once in all those years had his sore, cold heart
warmed; and that was toward a woman who was not for him. His life
had held only one purpose--a bloody one. Yet the man had a heart,
and he could not prevent it from responding to another. In his
simple ignorance he rebelled against this affection for anything
other than his forest homes. Man is weak against hate; what can he
avail against love? The dark caverns of Wetzel's great heart opened,
admitting to their gloomy depths this stranger. So now a new love
was born in that cheerless heart, where for so long a lonely inmate,
the ghost of old love, had dwelt in chill seclusion.

The feeling of comradeship which Wetzel had for Joe was something
altogether new in the hunter's life. True he had hunted with
Jonathan Zane, and accompanied expeditions where he was forced to
sleep with another scout; but a companion, not to say friend, he had
never known. Joe was a boy, wilder than an eagle, yet he was a man.
He was happy and enthusiastic, still his good spirits never jarred
on the hunter; they were restrained. He never asked questions, as
would seem the case in any eager lad; he waited until he was spoken
to. He was apt; he never forgot anything; he had the eye of a born
woodsman, and lastly, perhaps what went far with Wetzel, he was as
strong and supple as a young lynx, and absolutely fearless.

On this evening Wetzel and Joe followed their usual custom; they
smoked a while before lying down to sleep. Tonight the hunter was
even more silent than usual, and the lad, tired out with his day's
tramp, lay down on a bed of fragrant boughs.

Wetzel sat there in the gathering gloom while he pulled slowly on
his pipe. The evening was very quiet; the birds had ceased their
twittering; the wind had died away; it was too early for the bay of
a wolf, the wail of a panther, or hoot of an owl; there was simply
perfect silence.

The lad's deep, even breathing caught Wetzel's ear, and he found
himself meditating, as he had often of late, on this new something
that had crept into his life. For Joe loved him; he could not fail
to see that. The lad had preferred to roam with the lonely
Indian-hunter through the forests, to encounter the perils and
hardships of a wild life, rather than accept the smile of fortune
and of love. Wetzel knew that Colonel Zane had taken a liking to the
boy, and had offered him work and a home; and, also, the hunter
remembered the warm light he had seen in Nell's hazel eyes. Musing
thus, the man felt stir in his heart an emotion so long absent that
it was unfamiliar. The Avenger forgot, for a moment his brooding
plans. He felt strangely softened. When he laid his head on the rude
pillow it was with some sense of gladness that, although he had
always desired a lonely life, and wanted to pass it in the
fulfillment of his vow, his loneliness was now shared by a lad who
loved him.

Joe was awakened by the merry chirp of a chipmunk that every morning
ran along the seamy side of the opposite wall of the gorge. Getting
up, he went to the back of the cave, where he found Wetzel combing
out his long hair. The lad thrust his hands into the cold pool, and
bathed his face. The water was icy cold, and sent an invigorating
thrill through him. Then he laughed as he took a rude comb Wetzel
handed to him.

"My scalp is nothing to make an Indian very covetous, is it?" said
he, eyeing in admiration the magnificent black hair that fell over
the hunter's shoulders.

"It'll grow," answered Wetzel.

Joe did not wonder at the care Wetzel took of his hair, nor did he
misunderstand the hunter's simple pride. Wetzel was very careful of
his rifle, he was neat and clean about his person, he brushed his
buckskin costume, he polished his knife and tomahawk; but his hair
received more attention than all else. It required much care. When
combed out it reached fully to his knees. Joe had seen him, after he
returned from a long hunt, work patiently for an hour with his
wooden comb, and not stop until every little burr was gone, or
tangle smoothed out. Then he would comb it again in the
morning--this, of course, when time permitted--and twist and tie it
up so as to offer small resistance to his slipping through the
underbush. Joe knew the hunter's simplicity was such, that if he cut
off his hair it would seem he feared the Indians--for that streaming
black hair the Indians had long coveted and sworn to take. It would
make any brave a famous chief, and was the theme of many a savage
war tale.

After breakfast Wetzel said to Joe:

"You stay here, an' I'll look round some; mebbe I'll come back soon,
and we'll go out an' kill a buffalo. Injuns sometimes foller up a
buffalo trail, an' I want to be sure none of the varlets are chasin'
that herd we saw to-day."

Wetzel left the cave by the rear. It took him fifteen minutes to
crawl to the head of the tortuous, stony passage. Lifting the stone
which closed up the aperture, he looked out and listened. Then,
rising, he replaced the stone, and passed down the wooded hillside.

It was a beautiful morning; the dew glistened on the green leaves,
the sun shone bright and warm, the birds warbled in the trees. The
hunter's moccasins pressed so gently on the moss and leaves that
they made no more sound than the soft foot of a panther. His trained
ear was alert to catch any unfamiliar noise; his keen eyes sought
first the remoter open glades and glens, then bent their gaze on the
mossy bluff beneath his feet. Fox squirrels dashed from before him
into bushy retreats; grouse whirred away into the thickets; startled
deer whistled, and loped off with their white-flags upraised. Wetzel
knew from the action of these denizens of the woods that he was the
only creature, not native to these haunts, who had disturbed them
this morning. Otherwise the deer would not have been grazing, but
lying low in some close thicket; fox squirrels seldom or never were
disturbed by a hunter twice in one day, for after being frightened
these little animals, wilder and shyer than gray squirrels, remained
hidden for hours, and grouse that have been flushed a little while
before, always get up unusually quick, and fly very far before
alighting.

Wetzel circled back over the hill, took a long survey from a rocky
eminence, and then reconnoitered the lowland for several miles. He
located the herd of buffalo, and satisfying himself there were no
Indians near--for the bison were grazing quietly--he returned to the
cave. A soft whistle into the back door of the rocky home told Joe
that the hunter was waiting.

"Coast clear?" whispered the lad, thrusting his head out of the
entrance. His gray eyes gleamed brightly, showing his eager spirit.

The hunter nodded, and, throwing his rifle in the hollow of his arm,
proceeded down the hill. Joe followed closely, endeavoring, as
Wetzel had trained him, to make each step precisely in the hunter's
footprints. The lad had soon learned to step nimbly and softly as a
cat. When half way down the bill Wetzel paused.

"See anythin'?" he whispered.

Joe glanced on all sides. Many mistakes had taught him to be
cautious. He had learned from experience that for every woodland
creature he saw, there were ten watching his every move. Just now he
could not see even a little red squirrel. Everywhere were sturdy
hickory and oak trees, thickets and hazelnuts, slender ash saplings,
and, in the open glades, patches of sumach. Rotting trees lay on the
ground, while ferns nodded long, slender heads over the fallen
monarchs. Joe could make out nothing but the colors of the woods,
the gray of the tree trunks, and, in the openings through the
forest-green, the dead purple haze of forests farther on. He smiled,
and, shaking his head at the hunter, by his action admitted failure.

"Try again. Dead ahead," whispered Wetzel.

Joe bent a direct gaze on the clump of sassafras one hundred feet
ahead. He searched the open places, the shadows--even the branches.
Then he turned his eyes slowly to the right. Whatever was
discernible to human vision he studied intently. Suddenly his eye
became fixed on a small object protruding from behind a beech tree.
It was pointed, and in color darker than the gray bark of the beech.
It had been a very easy matter to pass over this little thing; but
now that the lad saw it, he knew to what it belonged.

"That's a buck's ear," he replied.

Hardly had he finished speaking when Wetzel intentionally snapped a
twig. There was a crash and commotion in the thicket; branches moved
and small saplings waved; then out into the open glade bounded a
large buck with a whistle of alarm. Throwing his rifle to a level,
Joe was trying to cover the bounding deer, when the hunter struck up
his piece.

"Lad, don't kill fer the sake of killin," he said, quietly. "We have
plenty of venison. We'll go arter a buffalo. I hev a hankerin' fer a
good rump steak."

Half an hour later, the hunters emerged from the forest into a wide
plain of waving grass. It was a kind of oval valley, encircled by
hills, and had been at one time, perhaps, covered with water. Joe
saw a herd of large animals browsing, like cattle, in a meadow. His
heart beat high, for until that moment the only buffalo he had seen
were the few which stood on the river banks as the raft passed down
the Ohio. He would surely get a shot at one of these huge fellows.

Wetzel bade Joe do exactly as he did, whereupon he dropped on his
hands and knees and began to crawl through the long grass. This was
easy for the hunter, but very bard for the lad to accomplish. Still,
he managed to keep his comrade in sight, which was a matter for
congratulation, because the man crawled as fast as he walked. At
length, after what to Joe seemed a very long time, the hunter
paused.

"Are we near enough?" whispered Joe, breathlessly.

"Nope. We're just circlin' on 'em. The wind's not right, an' I'm
afeered they'll get our scent."

Wetzel rose carefully and peeped over the top of the grass; then,
dropping on all fours, he resumed the advance.

He paused again, presently and waited for Joe to come up.

"See here, young fellar, remember, never hurry unless the bizness
calls fer speed, an' then act like lightnin'."

Thus admonishing the eager lad, Wetzel continued to crawl. It was
easy for him. Joe wondered how those wide shoulders got between the
weeds and grasses without breaking, or, at least, shaking them. But
so it was.

"Flat now," whispered Wetzel, putting his broad hand on Joe's back
and pressing him down. "Now's yer time fer good practice. Trail yer
rifle over yer back--if yer careful it won't slide off--an' reach
out far with one arm an' dig yer fingers in deep. Then pull yerself
forrard."

Wetzel slipped through the grass like a huge buckskin snake. His
long, lithe body wormed its way among the reeds. But for Joe, even
with the advantage of having the hunter's trail to follow, it was
difficult work. The dry reeds broke under him, and the stalks of
saw-grass shook. He worked persistently at it, learning all the
while, and improving with every rod. He was surprised to hear a
swish, followed by a dull blow on the ground. Raising his head, he
looked forward. He saw the hunter wipe his tomahawk on the grass.

"Snake," whispered Wetzel.

Joe saw a huge blacksnake squirming in the grass. Its head had been
severed. He caught glimpses of other snakes gliding away, and glossy
round moles darting into their holes. A gray rabbit started off with
a leap.

"We're near enough," whispered Wetzel, stopping behind a bush. He
rose and surveyed the plain; then motioned Joe to look.

Joe raised himself on his knees. As his gaze reached the level of
the grassy plain his heart leaped. Not fifty yards away was a great,
shaggy, black buffalo. He was the king of the herd; but ill at ease,
for he pawed the grass and shook his huge head. Near him were
several cows and a half-grown calf. Beyond was the main herd,
extending as far as Joe could see--a great sea of black humps! The
lad breathed hard as he took in the grand sight.

"Pick out the little fellar--the reddish-brown one--an' plug him
behind the shoulder. Shoot close now, fer if we miss, mebbe I can't
hit one, because I'm not used to shootin' at sich small marks."

Wetzel's rare smile lighted up his dark face. Probably he could have
shot a fly off the horn of the bull, if one of the big flies or
bees, plainly visible as they swirled around the huge head, had
alighted there.

Joe slowly raised his rifle. He had covered the calf, and was about
to pull the trigger, when, with a sagacity far beyond his experience
as hunter, he whispered to Wetzel:

"If I fire they may run toward us."

"Nope; they'll run away," answered Wetzel, thinking the lad was as
keen as an Indian.

Joe quickly covered the calf again, and pulled the trigger.
Bellowing loud the big bull dashed off. The herd swung around toward
the west, and soon were galloping off with a lumbering roar. The
shaggy humps bobbed up and down like hot, angry waves on a
storm-blackened sea.

Upon going forward, Wetzel and Joe found the calf lying dead in the
grass.

"You might hev did better'n that," remarked the hunter, as he saw
where the bullet had struck. "You went a little too fer back, but
mebbe thet was 'cause the calf stepped as you shot."



Chapter XV.

So the days passed swiftly, dreamily, each one bringing Joe a keener
delight. In a single month he was as good a woodsman as many
pioneers who had passed years on the border, for he had the
advantage of a teacher whose woodcraft was incomparable. Besides, he
was naturally quick in learning, and with all his interest centered
upon forest lore, it was no wonder he assimilated much of Wetzel's
knowledge. He was ever willing to undertake anything whereby he
might learn. Often when they were miles away in the dense forest,
far from their cave, he asked Wetzel to let him try to lead the way
back to camp. And he never failed once, though many times he got off
a straight course, thereby missing the easy travelling.

Joe did wonderfully well, but he lacked, as nearly all white men do,
the subtler, intuitive forest-instinct, which makes the Indian as
much at home in the woods as in his teepee. Wetzel had this
developed to a high degree. It was born in him. Years of training,
years of passionate, unrelenting search for Indians, had given him a
knowledge of the wilds that was incomprehensible to white men, and
appalling to his red foes.

Joe saw how Wetzel used this ability, but what it really was baffled
him. He realized that words were not adequate to explain fully this
great art. Its possession required a marvelously keen vision, an eye
perfectly familiar with every creature, tree, rock, shrub and thing
belonging in the forest; an eye so quick in flight as to detect
instantly the slightest change in nature, or anything unnatural to
that environment. The hearing must be delicate, like that of a deer,
and the finer it is, the keener will be the woodsman. Lastly, there
is the feeling that prompts the old hunter to say: "No game to-day."
It is something in him that speaks when, as he sees a night-hawk
circling low near the ground, he says: "A storm to-morrow." It is
what makes an Indian at home in any wilderness. The clouds may hide
the guiding star; the northing may be lost; there may be no moss on
the trees, or difference in their bark; the ridges may be flat or
lost altogether, and there may be no water-courses; yet the Indian
brave always goes for his teepee, straight as a crow flies. It was
this voice which rightly bade Wetzel, when he was baffled by an
Indian's trail fading among the rocks, to cross, or circle, or
advance in the direction taken by his wily foe.

Joe had practiced trailing deer and other hoofed game, until he was
true as a hound. Then he began to perfect himself in the art of
following a human being through the forest. Except a few old Indian
trails, which the rain had half obliterated, he had no tracks to
discover save Wetzel's, and these were as hard to find as the airy
course of a grosbeak. On soft ground or marshy grass, which Wetzel
avoided where he could, he left a faint trail, but on a hard
surface, for all the traces he left, he might as well not have gone
over the ground at all.

Joe's persistence stood him in good stead; he hung on, and the more
he failed, the harder he tried. Often he would slip out of the cave
after Wetzel had gone, and try to find which way he had taken. In
brief, the lad became a fine marksman, a good hunter, and a close,
persevering student of the wilderness. He loved the woods, and all
they contained. He learned the habits of the wild creatures. Each
deer, each squirrel, each grouse that he killed, taught him some
lesson.

He was always up with the lark to watch the sun rise red and grand
over the eastern hills, and chase away the white mist from the
valleys. Even if he was not hunting, or roaming the woods, if it was
necessary for him to lie low in camp awaiting Wetzel's return, he
was always content. Many hours he idled away lying on his back, with
the west wind blowing softly over him, his eye on the distant hills,
where the cloud shadows swept across with slow, majestic movement,
like huge ships at sea.

If Wetzel and Joe were far distant from the cave, as was often the
case, they made camp in the open woods, and it was here that Joe's
contentment was fullest. Twilight shades stealing down over the
camp-fire; the cheery glow of red embers; the crackling of dry
stocks; the sweet smell of wood smoke, all had for the lad a subtle,
potent charm.

The hunter would broil a venison steak, or a partridge, on the
coals. Then they would light their pipes and smoke while twilight
deepened. The oppressive stillness of the early evening hour always
brought to the younger man a sensation of awe. At first he
attributed this to the fact that he was new to this life; however,
as the days passed and the emotion remained, nay, grew stronger, he
concluded it was imparted by this close communion with nature. Deep
solemn, tranquil, the gloaming hour brought him no ordinary fullness
of joy and clearness of perception.

"Do you ever feel this stillness?" he asked Wetzel one evening, as
they sat near their flickering fire.

The hunter puffed his pipe, and, like an Indian, seemed to let the
question take deep root.

"I've scalped redskins every hour in the day, 'ceptin' twilight," he
replied.

Joe wondered no longer whether the hunter was too hardened to feel
this beautiful tranquillity. That hour which wooed Wetzel from his
implacable pursuit was indeed a bewitching one.

There was never a time, when Joe lay alone in camp waiting for
Wetzel, that he did not hope the hunter would return with
information of Indians. The man never talked about the savages, and
if he spoke at all it was to tell of some incident of his day's
travel. One evening he came back with a large black fox that he had
killed.

"What beautiful, glossy fur!" said Joe. "I never saw a black fox
before."

"I've been layin' fer this fellar some time," replied Wetzel, as he
began his first evening task, that of combing his hair. "Jest back
here in a clump of cottonwoods there's a holler log full of leaves.
Happenin' to see a blacksnake sneakin' round, I thought mebbe he was
up to somethin', so I investigated, an' found a nest full of young
rabbits. I killed the snake, an' arter that took an interest in 'em.
Every time I passed I'd look in at the bunnies, an' each time I seen
signs that some tarnal varmint had been prowlin' round. One day I
missed a bunny, an' next day another; so on until only one was left,
a peart white and gray little scamp. Somethin' was stealin' of 'em,
an' it made me mad. So yistidday an' to-day I watched, an' finally I
plugged this black thief. Yes, he's got a glossy coat; but he's a
bad un fer all his fine looks. These black foxes are bigger,
stronger an' cunniner than red ones. In every litter you'll find a
dark one, the black sheep of the family. Because he grows so much
faster, an' steals all the food from the others, the mother jest
takes him by the nape of the neck an' chucks him out in the world to
shift fer hisself. An' it's a good thing."

The next day Wetzel told Joe they would go across country to seek
new game fields. Accordingly the two set out, and tramped
industriously until evening. They came upon a country no less
beautiful than the one they had left, though the picturesque cliffs
and rugged hills had given way to a rolling land, the luxuriance of
which was explained by the abundant springs and streams. Forests and
fields were thickly interspersed with bubbling springs, narrow and
deep streams, and here and there a small lake with a running outlet.

Wetzel had said little concerning this region, but that little was
enough to rouse all Joe's eagerness, for it was to the effect that
they were now in a country much traversed by Indians, especially
runners and hunting parties travelling from north to south. The
hunter explained that through the center of this tract ran a buffalo
road; that the buffalo always picked out the straightest, lowest and
dryest path from one range to another, and the Indians followed
these first pathfinders.

Joe and Wetzel made camp on the bank of a stream that night, and as
the lad watched the hunter build a hidden camp-fire, he peered
furtively around half expecting to see dark forms scurrying through
the forest. Wetzel was extremely cautious. He stripped pieces of
bark from fallen trees and built a little hut over his firewood. He
rubbed some powder on a piece of punk, and then with flint and steel
dropped two or three sparks on the inflammable substance. Soon he
had a blaze. He arranged the covering so that not a ray of light
escaped. When the flames had subsided, and the wood had burned down
to a glowing bed of red, he threw aside the bark, and broiled the
strips of venison they had brought with them.

They rested on a bed of boughs which they had cut and arranged
alongside a huge log. For hours Joe lay awake, he could not sleep.
He listened to the breeze rustling the leaves, and shivered at the
thought of the sighing wind he had once heard moan through the
forest. Presently he turned over. The slight noise instantly
awakened Wetzel who lifted his dark face while he listened intently.
He spoke one word: "Sleep," and lay back again on the leaves. Joe
forced himself to be quiet, relaxed all his muscles and soon
slumbered.

On the morrow Wetzel went out to look over the hunting prospects.
About noon he returned. Joe was surprised to find some slight change
in the hunter. He could not tell what it was.

"I seen Injun sign," said Wetzel. "There's no tellin' how soon we
may run agin the sneaks. We can't hunt here. Like as not there's
Hurons and Delawares skulkin' round. I think I'd better take you
back to the village."

"It's all on my account you say that," said Joe.

"Sure," Wetzel replied.

"If you were alone what would you do?"

"I calkilate I'd hunt fer some red-skinned game."

The supreme moment had come. Joe's heart beat hard. He could not
miss this opportunity; he must stay with the hunter. He looked
closely at Wetzel.

"I won't go back to the village," he said.

The hunter stood in his favorite position, leaning on his long
rifle, and made no response.

"I won't go," continued Joe, earnestly. "Let me stay with you. If at
any time I hamper you, or can not keep the pace, then leave me to
shift for myself; but don't make me go until I weaken. Let me stay."

Fire and fearlessness spoke in Joe's every word, and his gray eyes
contracted with their peculiar steely flash. Plain it was that,
while he might fail to keep pace with Wetzel, he did not fear this
dangerous country, and, if it must be, would face it alone.

Wetzel extended his broad hand and gave his comrade's a viselike
squeeze. To allow the lad to remain with him was more than he would
have done for any other person in the world. Far better to keep the
lad under his protection while it was possible, for Joe was taking
that war-trail which had for every hunter, somewhere along its
bloody course, a bullet, a knife, or a tomahawk. Wetzel knew that
Joe was conscious of this inevitable conclusion, for it showed in
his white face, and in the resolve in his big, gray eyes.

So there, in the shade of a towering oak, the Indian-killer admitted
the boy into his friendship, and into a life which would no longer
be play, but eventful, stirring, hazardous.

"Wal, lad, stay," he said, with that rare smile which brightened his
dark face like a ray of stray sunshine. "We'll hang round these
diggins a few days. First off, we'll take in the lay of the land.
You go down stream a ways an' scout round some, while I go up, an'
then circle down. Move slow, now, an' don't miss nothin'."

Joe followed the stream a mile or more. He kept close in the shade
of willows, and never walked across an open glade without first
waiting and watching. He listened to all sounds; but none were
unfamiliar. He closely examined the sand along the stream, and the
moss and leaves under the trees. When he had been separated from
Wetzel several hours, and concluded he would slowly return to camp,
he ran across a well-beaten path winding through the forest. This
was, perhaps, one of the bridle-trails Wetzel had referred to. He
bent over the worn grass with keen scrutiny.

CRACK!

The loud report of a heavily charged rifle rang out. Joe felt the
zip of a bullet as it fanned his cheek. With an agile leap he gained
the shelter of a tree, from behind which he peeped to see who had
shot at him. He was just in time to detect the dark form of an
Indian dart behind the foliage an hundred yards down the path. Joe
expected to see other Indians, and to hear more shots, but he was
mistaken. Evidently the savage was alone, for the tree Joe had taken
refuge behind was scarcely large enough to screen his body, which
disadvantage the other Indians would have been quick to note.

Joe closely watched the place where his assailant had disappeared,
and presently saw a dark hand, then a naked elbow, and finally the
ramrod of a rifle. The savage was reloading. Soon a rifle-barrel
protruded from behind the tree. With his heart beating like a
trip-hammer, and the skin tightening on his face, Joe screened his
body as best he might. The tree was small, but it served as a
partial protection. Rapidly he revolved in his mind plans to outwit
the enemy. The Indian was behind a large oak with a low limb over
which he could fire without exposing his own person to danger.

"Bang!" The Indian's rifle bellowed; the bullet crumbled the bark
close to Joe's face. The lad yelled loudly, staggered to his knees,
and then fell into the path, where he lay quiet.

The redskin gave an exultant shout. Seeing that the fallen figure
remained quite motionless he stepped forward, drawing his knife as
he came. He was a young brave, quick and eager in his movements, and
came nimbly up the path to gain his coveted trophy, the paleface's
scalp.

Suddenly Joe sat up, raised his rifle quickly as thought, and fired
point-blank at the Indian.

But he missed.

The redskin stopped aghast when he saw the lad thus seemingly come
back to life. Then, realizing that Joe's aim had been futile, he
bounded forward, brandishing his knife, and uttering infuriated
yells.

Joe rose to his feet with rifle swung high above his head.

When the savage was within twenty feet, so near that his dark face,
swollen with fierce passion, could be plainly discerned, a peculiar
whistling noise sounded over Joe's shoulder. It was accompanied,
rather than followed, by a clear, ringing rifleshot.

The Indian stopped as if he had encountered a heavy shock from a
tree or stone barring his way. Clutching at his breast, he uttered a
weird cry, and sank slowly on the grass.

Joe ran forward to bend over the prostrate figure. The Indian, a
slender, handsome young brave, had been shot through the breast. He
held his hand tightly over the wound, while bright red blood
trickled between his fingers, flowed down his side, and stained the
grass.

The brave looked steadily up at Joe. Shot as he was, dying as he
knew himself to be, there was no yielding in the dark eye--only an
unquenchable hatred. Then the eyes glazed; the fingers ceased
twitching.

Joe was bending over a dead Indian.

It flashed into his mind, of course, that Wetzel had come up in time
to save his life, but he did not dwell on the thought; he shrank
from this violent death of a human being. But it was from the aspect
of the dead, not from remorse for the deed. His heart beat fast, his
fingers trembled, yet he felt only a strange coldness in all his
being. The savage had tried to kill him, perhaps, even now, had it
not been for the hunter's unerring aim, would have been gloating
over a bloody scalp.

Joe felt, rather than heard, the approach of some one, and he turned
to see Wetzel coming down the path.

"He's a lone Shawnee runner," said the hunter, gazing down at the
dead Indian. "He was tryin' to win his eagle plumes. I seen you both
from the hillside."

"You did!" exclaimed Joe. Then he laughed. "It was lucky for me. I
tried the dodge you taught me, but in my eagerness I missed."

"Wal, you hadn't no call fer hurry. You worked the trick clever, but
you missed him when there was plenty of time. I had to shoot over
your shoulder, or I'd hev plugged him sooner."

"Where were you?" asked Joe.

"Up there by that bit of sumach!" and Wetzel pointed to an open
ridge on a hillside not less than one hundred and fifty yards
distant.

Joe wondered which of the two bullets, the death-seeking one fired
by the savage, or the life-saving missile from Wetzel's fatal
weapon, had passed nearest to him.

"Come," said the hunter, after he had scalped the Indian.

"What's to be done with this savage?" inquired Joe, as Wetzel
started up the path.

"Let him lay."

They returned to camp without further incident. While the hunter
busied himself reinforcing their temporary shelter--for the clouds
looked threatening--Joe cut up some buffalo meat, and then went down
to the brook for a gourd of water. He came hurriedly back to where
Wetzel was working, and spoke in a voice which he vainly endeavors
to hold steady:

"Come quickly. I have seen something which may mean a good deal."

He led the way down to the brookside.

"Look!" Joe said, pointing at the water.

Here the steam was about two feet deep, perhaps twenty wide, and had
just a noticeable current. Shortly before, it had been as clear as a
bright summer sky; it was now tinged with yellow clouds that slowly
floated downstream, each one enlarging and becoming fainter as the
clear water permeated and stained. Grains of sand glided along with
the current, little pieces of bark floated on the surface, and
minnows darted to and fro nibbling at these drifting particles.

"Deer wouldn't roil the water like that. What does it mean?" asked
Joe.

"Injuns, an' not fer away."

Wetzel returned to the shelter and tore it down. Then he bent the
branch of a beech tree low over the place. He pulled down another
branch over the remains of the camp-fire. These precautions made the
spot less striking. Wetzel knew that an Indian scout never glances
casually; his roving eyes survey the forest, perhaps quickly, but
thoroughly. An unnatural position of bush or log always leads to an
examination.

This done, the hunter grasped Joe's hand and led him up the knoll.
Making his way behind a well-screened tree, which had been uprooted,
he selected a position where, hidden themselves, they could see the
creek.

Hardly had Wetzel, admonished Joe to lie perfectly still, when from
a short distance up the stream came the sound of splashing water;
but nothing could be seen above the open glade, as in that direction
willows lined the creek in dense thickets. The noise grew more
audible.

Suddenly Joe felt a muscular contraction pass over the powerful
frame lying close beside him. It was a convulsive thrill such as
passes through a tiger when he is about to spring upon his quarry.
So subtle and strong was its meaning, so clearly did it convey to
the lad what was coming, that he felt it himself; save that in his
case it was a cold, chill shudder.

Breathless suspense followed. Then into the open space along the
creek glided a tall Indian warrior. He was knee-deep in the water,
where he waded with low, cautious steps. His garish, befrilled
costume seemed familiar to Joe. He carried a rifle at a low trail,
and passed slowly ahead with evident distrust. The lad believed he
recognized that head, with its tangled black hair, and when he saw
the swarthy, villainous countenance turned full toward him, he
exclaimed:

"Girty! by---"

Wetzel's powerful arm forced him so hard against the log that he
could not complete the exclamation; but he could still see. Girty
had not heard that stifled cry, for he continued his slow wading,
and presently his tall, gaudily decorated form passed out of sight.

Another savage appeared in the open space, and then another. Close
between them walked a white man, with hands bound behind him. The
prisoner and guards disappeared down stream among the willows.

The splashing continued--grew even louder than before. A warrior
came into view, then another, and another. They walked close
together. Two more followed. They were wading by the side of a raft
made of several logs, upon which were two prostrate figures that
closely resembled human beings.

Joe was so intent upon the lithe forms of the Indians that he barely
got a glimpse of their floating prize, whatever it might have been.
Bringing up the rear was an athletic warrior, whose broad shoulders,
sinewy arms, and shaved, polished head Joe remembered well. It was
the Shawnee chief, Silvertip.

When he, too, passed out of sight in the curve of willows, Joe found
himself trembling. He turned eagerly to Wetzel; but instantly
recoiled.

Terrible, indeed, had been the hunter's transformation. All calmness
of facial expression was gone; he was now stern, somber. An intense
emotion was visible in his white face; his eyes seemed reduced to
two dark shining points, and they emitted so fierce, so piercing a
flash, so deadly a light, that Joe could not bear their glittering
gaze.

"Three white captives, two of 'em women," uttered the hunter, as if
weighing in his mind the importance of this fact.

"Were those women on the raft?" questioned Joe, and as Wetzel only
nodded, he continued, "A white man and two women, six warriors,
Silvertip, and that renegade, Jim Girty!"

Wetzel deigned not to answer Joe's passionate outburst, but
maintained silence and his rigid posture. Joe glanced once more at
the stern face.

"Considering we'd go after Girty and his redskins if they were
alone, we're pretty likely to go quicker now that they've got white
women prisoners, eh?" and Joe laughed fiercely between his teeth.

The lad's heart expanded, while along every nerve tingled an
exquisite thrill of excitement. He had yearned for wild, border
life. Here he was in it, with the hunter whose name alone was to the
savages a symbol for all that was terrible.

Wetzel evidently decided quickly on what was to be done, for in few
words he directed Joe to cut up so much of the buffalo meat as they
could stow in their pockets. Then, bidding the lad to follow, he
turned into the woods, walking rapidly, and stopping now and then
for a brief instant. Soon they emerged from the forest into more
open country. They faced a wide plain skirted on the right by a
long, winding strip of bright green willows which marked the course
of the stream. On the edge of this plain Wetzel broke into a run. He
kept this pace for a distance of an hundred yards, then stopped to
listen intently as he glanced sharply on all sides, after which he
was off again.

Half way across this plain Joe's wind began to fail, and his
breathing became labored; but he kept close to the hunter's heels.
Once he looked back to see a great wide expanse of waving grass.
They had covered perhaps four miles at a rapid pace, and were
nearing the other side of the plain. The lad felt as if his head was
about to burst; a sharp pain seized upon his side; a blood-red film
obscured his sight. He kept doggedly on, and when utterly exhausted
fell to the ground.

When, a few minutes later, having recovered his breath, he got up,
they had crossed the plain and were in a grove of beeches. Directly
in front of him ran a swift stream, which was divided at the rocky
head of what appeared to be a wooded island. There was only a slight
ripple and fall of the water, and, after a second glance, it was
evident that the point of land was not an island, but a portion of
the mainland which divided the stream. The branches took almost
opposite courses.

Joe wondered if they had headed off the Indians. Certainly they had
run fast enough. He was wet with perspiration. He glanced at Wetzel,
who was standing near. The man's broad breast rose and fell a little
faster; that was the only evidence of exertion. The lad had a
painful feeling that he could never keep pace with the hunter, if
this five-mile run was a sample of the speed he would be forced to
maintain.

"They've got ahead of us, but which crick did they take?" queried
Wetzel, as though debating the question with himself.

"How do you know they've passed?"

"We circled," answered Wetzel, as he shook his head and pointed into
the bushes. Joe stepped over and looked into the thicket. He found a
quantity of dead leaves, sticks, and litter thrown aside, exposing
to light a long, hollowed place on the ground. It was what would be
seen after rolling over a log that had lain for a long time. Little
furrows in the ground, holes, mounds, and curious winding passages
showed where grubs and crickets had made their homes. The frightened
insects were now running round wildly.

"What was here? A log?"

"A twenty-foot canoe was hid under thet stuff. The Injuns has taken
one of these streams."

"How can we tell which one?"

"Mebbe we can't; but we'll try. Grab up a few of them bugs, go below
thet rocky point, an' crawl close to the bank so you can jest peep
over. Be keerful not to show the tip of your head, an' don't knock
nothin' off'en the bank into the water. Watch fer trout. Look
everywheres, an' drop in a bug now and then. I'll do the same fer
the other stream. Then we'll come back here an' talk over what the
fish has to say about the Injuns."

Joe walked down stream a few paces, and, dropping on his knees,
crawled carefully to the edge of the bank. He slightly parted the
grass so he could peep through, and found himself directly over a
pool with a narrow shoal running out from the opposite bank. The
water was so clear he could see the pebbly bottom in all parts,
except a dark hole near a bend in the shore close by. He did not see
a living thing in the water, not a crawfish, turtle, nor even a
frog. He peered round closely, then flipped in one of the bugs he
had brought along. A shiny yellow fish flared up from the depths of
the deep hole and disappeared with the cricket; but it was a bass or
a pike, not a trout. Wetzel had said there were a few trout living
near the cool springs of these streams. The lad tried again to coax
one to the surface. This time the more fortunate cricket swam and
hopped across the stream to safety.

When Joe's eyes were thoroughly accustomed to the clear water, with
its deceiving lights and shades, he saw a fish lying snug under the
side of a stone. The lad thought he recognized the snub-nose, the
hooked, wolfish jaw, but he could not get sufficient of a view to
classify him. He crawled to a more advantageous position farther
down stream, and then he peered again through the woods. Yes, sure
enough, he had espied a trout. He well knew those spotted silver
sides, that broad, square tail. Such a monster! In his admiration
for the fellow, and his wish for a hook and line to try conclusions
with him, Joe momentarily forgot his object. Remembering, he tossed
out a big, fat cricket, which alighted on the water just above the
fish. The trout never moved, nor even blinked. The lad tried again,
with no better success. The fish would not rise. Thereupon Joe
returned to the point where he had left Wetzel.

"I couldn't see nothin' over there," said the hunter, who was
waiting. "Did you see any?'

"One, and a big fellow."

"Did he see you?"

"No."

"Did he rise to a bug?"

"No, he didn't; but then maybe he wasn't hungry" answered Joe, who
could not understand what Wetzel was driving at.

"Tell me exactly what he did."

"That's just the trouble; he didn't do anything," replied Joe,
thoughtfully. "He just lay low, stifflike, under a stone. He never
batted an eye. But his side-fins quivered like an aspen leaf."

"Them side-fins tell us the story. Girty, an' his redskins hev took
this branch," said Wetzel, positively. "The other leads to the Huron
towns. Girty's got a place near the Delaware camp somewheres. I've
tried to find it a good many times. He's took more'n one white lass
there, an' nobody ever seen her agin."

"Fiend! To think of a white woman, maybe a girl like Nell Wells, at
the mercy of those red devils!"

"Young fellar, don't go wrong. I'll allow Injuns is bad enough; but
I never hearn tell of one abusin' a white woman, as mayhap you mean.
Injuns marry white women sometimes; kill an' scalp 'em often, but
that's all. It's men of our own color, renegades like this Girty, as
do worse'n murder."

Here was the amazing circumstance of Lewis Wetzel, the acknowledged
unsatiable foe of all redmen, speaking a good word for his enemies.
Joe was so astonished he did not attempt to answer.

"Here's where they got in the canoe. One more look, an' then we're
off," said Wetzel. He strode up and down the sandy beach; examined
the willows, and scrutinized the sand. Suddenly he bent over and
picked up an object from the water. His sharp eyes had caught the
glint of something white, which, upon being examined, proved to be a
small ivory or bone buckle with a piece broken out. He showed it to
Joe.

"By heavens! Wetzel, that's a buckle off Nell Well's shoe. I've seen
it too many times to mistake it."

"I was afeared Girty hed your friends, the sisters, an' mebbe your
brother, too. Jack Zane said the renegade was hangin' round the
village, an' that couldn't be fer no good."

"Come on. Let's kill the fiend!" cried Joe, white to the lips.

"I calkilate they're about a mile down stream, makin' camp fer the
night. I know the place. There's a fine spring, an, look! D'ye see
them crows flyin' round thet big oak with the bleached top? Hear
them cawin'? You might think they was chasin' a hawk, or king-birds
were arter 'em, but thet fuss they're makin' is because they see
Injuns."

"Well?" asked Joe, impatiently.

"It'll be moonlight a while arter midnight. We'll lay low an' wait,
an' then---"

The sharp click of his teeth, like the snap of a steel trap,
completed the sentence. Joe said no more, but followed the hunter
into the woods. Stopping near a fallen tree, Wetzel raked up a
bundle of leaves and spread them on the ground. Then he cut a few
spreading branches from a beech, and leaned them against a log.
Bidding the lad crawl in before he took one last look around and
then made his way under the shelter.

It was yet daylight, which seemed a strange time to creep into this
little nook; but, Joe thought, it was not to sleep, only to wait,
wait, wait for the long hours to pass. He was amazed once more,
because, by the time twilight had given place to darkness, Wetzel
was asleep. The lad said then to himself that he would never again
be surprised at the hunter. He assumed once and for all that Wetzel
was capable of anything. Yet how could he lose himself in slumber?
Feeling, as he must, over the capture of the girls; eager to draw a
bead on the black-hearted renegade; hating Indians with all his soul
and strength, and lying there but a few hours before what he knew
would be a bloody battle, Wetzel calmly went to sleep. Knowing the
hunter to be as bloodthirsty as a tiger, Joe had expected he would
rush to a combat with his foes; but, no, this man, with his keen
sagacity, knew when to creep upon his enemy; he bided that time,
and, while he waited, slept.

Joe could not close his eyes in slumber. Through the interstices in
the branches he saw the stars come out one by one, the darkness
deepened, and the dim outline of tall trees over the dark hill came
out sharply. The moments dragged, each one an hour. He heard a
whippoorwill call, lonely and dismal; then an owl hoot monotonously.
A stealthy footed animal ran along the log, sniffed at the boughs,
and then scurried away over the dry leaves. By and by the dead
silence of night fell over all. Still Joe lay there wide awake,
listening--his heart on fire. He was about to rescue Nell; to kill
that hawk-nosed renegade; to fight Silvertip to the death.

The hours passed, but not Joe's passionate eagerness. When at last
he saw the crescent moon gleam silver-white over the black hilltop
he knew the time was nigh, and over him ran thrill on thrill.



Chapter XVI.

When the waning moon rose high enough to shed a pale light over
forest and field, two dark figures, moving silently from the shade
of the trees, crossed the moonlit patches of ground, out to the open
plain where low on the grass hung silver mists.

A timber wolf, gray and gaunt, came loping along with lowered nose.
A new scent brought the animal to a standstill. His nose went up,
his fiery eyes scanned the plain. Two men had invaded his domain,
and, with a short, dismal bark, he dashed away.

Like spectres, gliding swiftly with noiseless tread, the two
vanished. The long grass had swallowed them.

Deserted once again seemed the plain. It became unutterably lonely.
No stir, no sound, no life; nothing but a wide expanse bathed in
sad, gray light.

The moon shone steadily; the silver radiance mellowed; the stars
paled before this brighter glory.

Slowly the night hours wore away.

On the other side of the plain, near where the adjoining forest
loomed darkling, the tall grass parted to disclose a black form. Was
it only a deceiving shade cast by a leafy branch--only a shadow?
Slowly it sank, and was lost. Once more the gray, unwavering line of
silver-crested grass tufts was unbroken.

Only the night breeze, wandering caressingly over the grass, might
have told of two dark forms gliding, gliding, gliding so softly, so
surely, so surely toward the forest. Only the moon and the pale
stars had eyes to see these creeping figures.

Like avengers they moved, on a mission to slay and to save!

On over the dark line where plain merged into forest they crawled.
No whispering, no hesitating; but a silent, slow, certain progress
showed their purpose. In single file they slipped over the moss, the
leader clearing the path. Inch by inch they advanced. Tedious was
this slow movement, difficult and painful this journey which must
end in lightninglike speed. They rustled no leaf, nor snapped a
twig, nor shook a fern, but passed onward slowly, like the approach
of Death. The seconds passed as minutes; minutes as hours; an entire
hour was spent in advancing twenty feet!

At last the top of the knoll was reached. The Avenger placed his
hand on his follower's shoulder. The strong pressure was meant to
remind, to warn, to reassure. Then, like a huge snake, the first
glided away.

He who was left behind raised his head to look into the open place
called the glade of the Beautiful Spring. An oval space lay before
him, exceedingly lovely in the moonlight; a spring, as if a pearl,
gemmed the center. An Indian guard stood statuelike against a stone.
Other savages lay in a row, their polished heads shining. One
slumbering form was bedecked with feathers and frills. Near him lay
an Indian blanket, from the border of which peered two faces,
gleaming white and sad in the pitying moonlight.

The watcher quivered at the sight of those pale faces; but he must
wait while long moments passed. He must wait for the Avenger to
creep up, silently kill the guard, and release the prisoners without
awakening the savages. If that plan failed, he was to rush into the
glade, and in the excitement make off with one of the captives.

He lay there waiting, listening, wrought up to the intensest pitch
of fierce passion. Every nerve was alert, every tendon strung, and
every muscle strained ready for the leap.

Only the faint rustling of leaves, the low swish of swaying
branches, the soft murmur of falling water, and over all the sigh of
the night wind, proved to him that this picture was not an evil
dream. His gaze sought the quiet figures, lingered hopefully on the
captives, menacingly on the sleeping savages, and glowered over the
gaudily arrayed form. His glance sought the upright guard, as he
stood a dark blot against the gray stone. He saw the Indian's plume,
a single feather waving silver-white. Then it became riveted on the
bubbling, refulgent spring. The pool was round, perhaps five feet
across, and shone like a burnished shield. It mirrored the moon, the
twinkling stars, the spectre trees.

An unaccountable horror suddenly swept over the watching man. His
hair stood straight up; a sensation as of cold stole chillingly over
him. Whether it was the climax of this long night's excitement, or
anticipation of the bloody struggle soon to come, he knew not. Did
this boiling spring, shimmering in the sliver moon-rays, hold in its
murky depths a secret? Did these lonesome, shadowing trees, with
their sad drooping branches, harbor a mystery? If a future tragedy
was to be enacted here in this quiet glade, could the murmuring
water or leaves whisper its portent? No; they were only silent, only
unintelligible with nature's mystery.

The waiting man cursed himself for a craven coward; he fought back
the benumbing sense; he steeled his heart. Was this his vaunted
willingness to share the Avenger's danger? His strong spirit rose up
in arms; once more he was brave and fierce.

He fastened a piercing gaze on the plumed guard. The Indian's
lounging posture against the rock was the same as it had been
before, yet now it seemed to have a kind of strained attention. The
savage's head was poised, like that of a listening deer. The wary
Indian scented danger.

A faint moan breathed low above the sound of gently splashing water
somewhere beyond the glade.

"Woo-o-oo."

The guard's figure stiffened, and became rigidly erect; his blanket
slowly slid to his feet.

"Ah-oo-o," sighed the soft breeze in the tree tops.

Louder then, with a deep wail, a moan arose out of the dark gray
shadows, swelled thrilling on the still air, and died away
mournfully.

"Um-m-mmwoo-o-o-o!"

The sentinel's form melted into the shade. He was gone like a
phantom.

Another Indian rose quickly, and glanced furtively around the glade.
He bent over a comrade and shook him. Instantly the second Indian
was on his feet. Scarcely had he gained a standing posture when an
object, bounding like a dark ball, shot out of the thicket and
hurled both warriors to the earth. A moonbeam glinted upon something
bright. It flashed again on a swift, sweeping circle. A short,
choking yell aroused the other savages. Up they sprang, alarmed,
confused.

The shadow-form darted among them. It moved with inconceivable
rapidity; it became a monster. Terrible was the convulsive conflict.
Dull blows, the click of steel, angry shouts, agonized yells, and
thrashing, wrestling sounds mingled together and half drowned by an
awful roar like that of a mad bull. The strife ceased as suddenly as
it had begun. Warriors lay still on the grass; others writhed in
agony. For an instant a fleeting shadow crossed the open lane
leading out of the glade; then it vanished.

Three savages had sprung toward their rifles. A blinding flash, a
loud report burst from the thicket overhead. The foremost savage
sank lifelessly. The others were intercepted by a giant shadow with
brandished rifle. The watcher on the knoll had entered the glade. He
stood before the stacked rifles and swung his heavy gun. Crash! An
Indian went down before that sweep, but rose again. The savages
backed away from this threatening figure, and circled around it.

The noise of the other conflict ceased. More savages joined the
three who glided to and fro before their desperate foe. They closed
in upon him, only to be beaten back. One savage threw a glittering
knife, another hurled a stone, a third flung his tomahawk, which
struck fire from the swinging rifle.

He held them at bay. While they had no firearms he was master of the
situation. With every sweep of his arms he brought the long rifle
down and knocked a flint from the firelock of an enemy's weapon.
Soon the Indians' guns were useless. Slowly then he began to edge
away from the stone, toward the opening where he had seen the
fleeting form vanish.

His intention was to make a dash for life, for he had heard a noise
behind the rock, and remembered the guard. He saw the savages glance
behind him, and anticipated danger from that direction, but he must
not turn. A second there might be fatal. He backed defiantly along
the rock until he gained its outer edge. But too late! The Indians
glided before him, now behind him; he was surrounded. He turned
around and around, with the ever-circling rifle whirling in the
faces of the baffled foe.

Once opposite the lane leading from the glade he changed his
tactics, and plunged with fierce impetuosity into the midst of the
painted throng. Then began a fearful conflict. The Indians fell
before the sweep of his powerful arms; but grappled with him from
the ground. He literally plowed his way through the struggling mass,
warding off an hundred vicious blows. Savage after savage he flung
off, until at last he had a clear path before him. Freedom lay
beyond that shiny path. Into it he bounded.

As he left the glade the plumed guard stepped from behind a tree
near the entrance of the path, and cast his tomahawk.

A white, glittering flash, it flew after the fleeing runner; its aim
was true.

Suddenly the moonlight path darkened in the runner's sight; he saw a
million flashing stars; a terrible pain assailed him; he sank
slowly, slowly down; then all was darkness.



Chapter XVII.

Joe awoke as from a fearsome nightmare. Returning consciousness
brought a vague idea that he had been dreaming of clashing weapons,
of yelling savages, of a conflict in which he had been clutched by
sinewy fingers. An acute pain pulsed through his temples; a bloody
mist glazed his eyes; a sore pressure cramped his arms and legs.
Surely he dreamed this distress, as well as the fight. The red film
cleared from his eyes. His wandering gaze showed the stern reality.

The bright sun, making the dewdrops glisten on the leaves, lighted
up a tragedy. Near him lay an Indian whose vacant, sightless eyes
were fixed in death. Beyond lay four more savages, the peculiar,
inert position of whose limbs, the formlessness, as it were, as if
they had been thrown from a great height and never moved again,
attested that here, too, life had been extinguished. Joe took in
only one detail--the cloven skull of the nearest--when he turned
away sickened. He remembered it all now. The advance, the rush, the
fight--all returned. He saw again Wetzel's shadowy form darting like
a demon into the whirl of conflict; he heard again that hoarse,
booming roar with which the Avenger accompanied his blows. Joe's
gaze swept the glade, but found no trace of the hunter.

He saw Silvertip and another Indian bathing a wound on Girty's head.
The renegade groaned and writhed in pain. Near him lay Kate, with
white face and closed eyes. She was unconscious, or dead. Jim sat
crouched under a tree to which he was tied.

"Joe, are you badly hurt?" asked the latter, in deep solicitude.

"No, I guess not; I don't know," answered Joe. "Is poor Kate dead?"

"No, she has fainted."

"Where's Nell?"

"Gone," replied Jim, lowering his voice, and glancing at the
Indians. They were too busy trying to bandage Girty's head to pay
any attention to their prisoners. "That whirlwind was Wetzel, wasn't
it?"

"Yes; how'd you know?"

"I was awake last night. I had an oppressive feeling, perhaps a
presentiment. Anyway, I couldn't sleep. I heard that wind blow
through the forest, and thought my blood would freeze. The moan is
the same as the night wind, the same soft sigh, only louder and
somehow pregnant with superhuman power. To speak of it in broad
daylight one seems superstitious, but to hear it in the darkness of
this lonely forest, it is fearful! I hope I am not a coward; I
certainly know I was deathly frightened. No wonder I was scared!
Look at these dead Indians, all killed in a moment. I heard the
moan; I saw Silvertip disappear, and the other two savages rise.
Then something huge dropped from the rock; a bright object seemed to
circle round the savages; they uttered one short yell, and sank to
rise no more. Somehow at once I suspected that this shadowy form,
with its lightninglike movements, its glittering hatchet, was
Wetzel. When he plunged into the midst of the other savages I
distinctly recognized him, and saw that he had a bundle, possibly
his coat, wrapped round his left arm, and his right hand held the
glittering tomahawk. I saw him strike that big Indian there, the one
lying with split skull. His wonderful daring and quickness seemed to
make the savages turn at random. He broke through the circle, swung
Nell under his arm, slashed at my bonds as he passed by, and then
was gone as he had come. Not until after you were struck, and
Silvertip came up to me, was I aware my bonds were cut. Wetzel's
hatchet had severed them; it even cut my side, which was bleeding. I
was free to help, to fight, and I did not know it. Fool that I am!"

"I made an awful mess of my part of the rescue," groaned Joe. "I
wonder if the savages know it was Wetzel."

"Do they? Well, I rather think so. Did you not hear them scream that
French name? As far as I am able to judge, only two Indians were
killed instantly. The others died during the night. I had to sit
here, tied and helpless, listening as they groaned and called the
name of their slayer, even in their death-throes. Deathwind! They
have named him well."

"I guess he nearly killed Girty."

"Evidently, but surely the evil one protects the renegade."

"Jim Girty's doomed," whispered Joe, earnestly. "He's as good as
dead already. I've lived with Wetzel, and know him. He told me Girty
had murdered a settler, a feeble old man, who lived near Fort Henry
with his son. The hunter has sworn to kill the renegade; but, mind
you, he did not tell me that. I saw it in his eyes. It wouldn't
surprise me to see him jump out of these bushes at any moment. I'm
looking for it. If he knows there are only three left, he'll be
after them like a hound on a trail. Girty must hurry. Where's he
taking you?"

"To the Delaware town."

"I don't suppose the chiefs will let any harm befall you; but Kate
and I would be better off dead. If we can only delay the march,
Wetzel will surely return."

"Hush! Girty's up."

The renegade staggered to an upright position, and leaned on the
Shawnee's arm. Evidently he had not been seriously injured, only
stunned. Covered with blood from a swollen, gashed lump on his
temple, he certainly presented a savage appearance.

"Where's the yellow-haired lass?" he demanded, pushing away
Silvertip's friendly arm. He glared around the glade. The Shawnee
addressed him briefly, whereupon he raged to and fro under the tree,
cursing with foam-flecked lips, and actually howling with baffled
rage. His fury was so great that he became suddenly weak, and was
compelled to sit down.

"She's safe, you villainous renegade!" cried Joe.

"Hush, Joe! Do not anger him. It can do no good," interposed Jim.

"Why not? We couldn't be worse off," answered Joe.

"I'll git her, I'll git her agin," panted Girty. "I'll keep her, an'
she'll love me."

The spectacle of this perverted wretch speaking as if he had been
cheated out of love was so remarkable, so pitiful, so monstrous,
that for a moment Joe was dumbfounded.

"Bah! You white-livered murderer!" Joe hissed. He well knew it was
not wise to give way to his passion; but he could not help it. This
beast in human guise, whining for love, maddened him. "Any white
woman on earth would die a thousand deaths and burn for a million
years afterward rather than love you!"

"I'll see you killed at the stake, beggin' fer mercy, an' be feed
fer buzzards," croaked the renegade.

"Then kill me now, or you may slip up on one of your cherished
buzzard-feasts," cried Joe, with glinting eye and taunting voice.
"Then go sneaking back to your hole like a hyena, and stay there.
Wetzel is on your trail! He missed you last night; but it was
because of the girl. He's after you, Girty; he'll get you one of
these days, and when he does--My God!---"

Nothing could be more revolting than that swarthy, evil face turned
pale with fear. Girty's visage was a ghastly, livid white. So
earnest, so intense was Joe's voice, that it seemed to all as if
Wetzel was about to dart into the glade, with his avenging tomahawk
uplifted to wreak an awful vengeance on the abductor. The renegade's
white, craven heart contained no such thing as courage. If he ever
fought it was like a wolf, backed by numbers. The resemblance ceased
here, for even a cornered wolf will show his teeth, and Girty,
driven to bay, would have cringed and cowered. Even now at the
mention of Wetzel's enmity he trembled.

"I'll shet yer wind," he cried, catching up his tomahawk and making
for Joe.

Silvertip intervened, and prevented the assault. He led Girty back
to his seat and spoke low, evidently trying to soothe the renegade's
feelings.

"Silvertip, give me a tomahawk, and let me fight him," implored Joe.

"Paleface brave--like Injun chief. Paleface Shawnee's prisoner--no
speak more," answered Silvertip, with respect in his voice.

"Oh, where's Nellie?"

A grief-stricken whisper caught Jim's ear. He turned to see Kate's
wide, questioning eyes fixed upon him.

"Nell was rescued."

"Thank God!" murmured the girl.

"Come along," shouted Girty, in his harsh voice, as, grasping Kate's
arm, he pulled the girl violently to her feet. Then, picking up his
rifle, he led her into the forest. Silvertip followed with Joe,
while the remaining Indian guarded Jim.

                *       *       *

The great council-lodge of the Delawares rang with savage and fiery
eloquence. Wingenund paced slowly before the orators. Wise as he
was, he wanted advice before deciding what was to be done with the
missionary. The brothers had been taken to the chief, who
immediately called a council. The Indians sat in a half circle
around the lodge. The prisoners, with hands bound, guarded by two
brawny braves, stood in one corner gazing with curiosity and
apprehension at this formidable array. Jim knew some of the braves,
but the majority of those who spoke bitterly against the palefaces
had never frequented the Village of Peace. Nearly all were of the
Wolf tribe of Delawares. Jim whispered to Joe, interpreting that
part of the speeches bearing upon the disposal to be made of them.
Two white men, dressed in Indian garb, held prominent positions
before Wingenund. The boys saw a resemblance between one of these
men and Jim Girty, and accordingly concluded he was the famous
renegade, or so-called white Indian, Simon Girty. The other man was
probably Elliott, the Tory, with whom Girty had deserted from Fort
Pitt. Jim Girty was not present. Upon nearing the encampment he had
taken his captive and disappeared in a ravine.

Shingiss, seldom in favor of drastic measures with prisoners,
eloquently urged initiating the brothers into the tribe. Several
other chiefs were favorably inclined, though not so positive as
Shingiss. Kotoxen was for the death penalty; the implacable Pipe for
nothing less than burning at the stake. Not one was for returning
the missionary to his Christian Indians. Girty and Elliott, though
requested to speak, maintained an ominous silence.

Wingenund strode with thoughtful mien before his council. He had
heard all his wise chiefs and his fiery warriors. Supreme was his
power. Freedom or death for the captives awaited the wave of his
hand. His impassive face gave not the slightest inkling of what to
expect. Therefore the prisoners were forced to stand there with
throbbing hearts while the chieftain waited the customary dignified
interval before addressing the council.

"Wingenund has heard the Delaware wise men and warriors. The white
Indian opens not his lips; his silence broods evil for the
palefaces. Pipe wants the blood of the white men; the Shawnee chief
demands the stake. Wingenund says free the white father who harms no
Indian. Wingenund hears no evil in the music of his voice. The white
father's brother should die. Kill the companion of Deathwind!"

A plaintive murmur, remarkable when coming from an assembly of
stern-browed chiefs, ran round the circle at the mention of the
dread appellation.

"The white father is free," continued Wingenund. "Let one of my
runners conduct him to the Village of Peace."

A brave entered and touched Jim on the shoulder.

Jim shook his head and pointed to Joe. The runner touched Joe.

"No, no. I am not the missionary," cried Joe, staring aghast at his
brother. "Jim, have you lost your senses?"

Jim sadly shook his head, and turning to Wingenund made known in a
broken Indian dialect that his brother was the missionary, and would
sacrifice himself, taking this opportunity to practice the
Christianity he had taught.

"The white father is brave, but he is known," broke in Wingenund's
deep voice, while he pointed to the door of the lodge. "Let him go
back to his Christian Indians."

The Indian runner cut Joe's bonds, and once more attempted to lead
him from the lodge. Rage and misery shown in the lad's face. He
pushed the runner aside. He exhausted himself trying to explain, to
think of Indian words enough to show he was not the missionary. He
even implored Girty to speak for him. When the renegade sat there
stolidly silent Joe's rage burst out.

"Curse you all for a lot of ignorant redskins. I am not a
missionary. I am Deathwind's friend. I killed a Delaware. I was the
companion of Le Vent de la Mort!"

Joe's passionate vehemence, and the truth that spoke from his
flashing eyes compelled the respect, if not the absolute belief of
the Indians. The savages slowly shook their heads. They beheld the
spectacle of two brothers, one a friend, the other an enemy of all
Indians, each willing to go to the stake, to suffer an awful agony,
for love of the other. Chivalrous deeds always stir an Indian's
heart. It was like a redman to die for his brother. The
indifference, the contempt for death, won their admiration.

"Let the white father stand forth," sternly called Wingenund.

A hundred somber eyes turned on the prisoners. Except that one wore
a buckskin coat, the other a linsey one, there was no difference.
The strong figures were the same, the white faces alike, the stern
resolve in the gray eyes identical--they were twin brothers.

Wingenund once more paced before his silent chiefs. To deal rightly
with this situation perplexed him. To kill both palefaces did not
suit him. Suddenly he thought of a way to decide.

"Let Wingenund's daughter come," he ordered.

A slight, girlish figure entered. It was Whispering Winds. Her
beautiful face glowed while she listened to her father.

"Wingenund's daughter has her mother's eyes, that were beautiful as
a doe's, keen as a hawk's, far-seeing as an eagle's. Let the
Delaware maiden show her blood. Let her point out the white father."

Shyly but unhesitatingly Whispering Winds laid her hand Jim's arm.

"Missionary, begone!" came the chieftain's command. "Thank
Wingenund's daughter for your life, not the God of your Christians!"

He waved his hand to the runner. The brave grasped Jim's arm.

"Good-by, Joe," brokenly said Jim.

"Old fellow, good-by," came the answer.

They took one last, long look into each others' eyes. Jim's glance
betrayed his fear--he would never see his brother again. The light
in Joe's eyes was the old steely flash, the indomitable
spirit--while there was life there was hope.

"Let the Shawnee chief paint his prisoner black," commanded
Wingenund.

When the missionary left the lodge with the runner, Whispering Winds
had smiled, for she had saved him whom she loved to hear speak; but
the dread command that followed paled her cheek. Black paint meant
hideous death. She saw this man so like the white father. Her
piteous gaze tried to turn from that white face; but the cold,
steely eyes fascinated her.

She had saved one only to be the other's doom!

She had always been drawn toward white men. Many prisoners had she
rescued. She had even befriended her nation's bitter foe, Deathwind.
She had listened to the young missionary with rapture; she had been
his savior. And now when she looked into the eyes of this young
giant, whose fate had rested on her all unwitting words, she
resolved to save him.

She had been a shy, shrinking creature, fearing to lift her eyes to
a paleface's, but now they were raised clear and steadfast.

As she stepped toward the captive and took his hand, her whole
person radiated with conscious pride in her power. It was the
knowledge that she could save. When she kissed his hand, and knelt
before him, she expressed a tender humility.

She had claimed questionable right of an Indian maiden; she asked
what no Indian dared refuse a chief's daughter; she took the
paleface for her husband.

Her action was followed by an impressive silence. She remained
kneeling. Wingenund resumed his slow march to and fro. Silvertip
retired to his corner with gloomy face. The others bowed their heads
as if the maiden's decree was irrevocable.

Once more the chieftain's sonorous command rang out. An old Indian,
wrinkled and worn, weird of aspect, fanciful of attire, entered the
lodge and waved his wampum wand. He mumbled strange words, and
departed chanting a long song.

Whispering Winds arose, a soft, radiant smile playing over her face,
and, still holding Joe's hand, she led him out of the lodge, through
long rows of silent Indians, down a land bordered by teepees, he
following like one in a dream.

He expected to awaken at any minute to see the stars shining through
the leaves. Yet he felt the warm, soft pressure of a little hand.
Surely this slender, graceful figure was real.

She bade him enter a lodge of imposing proportions. Still silent, in
amazement and gratitude, he obeyed.

The maiden turned to Joe. Though traces of pride still lingered, all
her fire had vanished. Her bosom rose with each quick-panting
breath; her lips quivered, she trembled like a trapped doe.

But at last the fluttering lashes rose. Joe saw two velvety eyes
dark with timid fear, yet veiling in their lustrous depths an
unuttered hope and love.

"Whispering Winds--save--paleface," she said, in a voice low and
tremulous. "Fear--father. Fear--tell--Wingenund--she--Christian."

                *       *       *

Indian summer, that enchanted time, unfolded its golden, dreamy haze
over the Delaware village. The forests blazed with autumn fire, the
meadows boomed in rich luxuriance. All day low down in the valleys
hung a purple smoke which changed, as the cool evening shades crept
out of the woodland, into a cloud of white mist. All day the asters
along the brooks lifted golden-brown faces to the sun as if to catch
the warning warmth of his smile. All day the plains and forests lay
in melancholy repose. The sad swish of the west wind over the tall
grass told that he was slowly dying away before his enemy, the north
wind. The sound of dropping nuts was heard under the motionless
trees.

For Joe the days were days of enchantment. His wild heart had found
its mate. A willing captive he was now. All his fancy for other
women, all his memories faded into love for his Indian bride.

Whispering Winds charmed the eye, mind, and heart. Every day her
beauty seemed renewed. She was as apt to learn as she was quick to
turn her black-crowned head, but her supreme beauty was her loving,
innocent soul. Untainted as the clearest spring, it mirrored the
purity and simplicity of her life. Indian she might be, one of a
race whose morals and manners were alien to the man she loved, yet
she would have added honor to the proudest name.

When Whispering Winds raised her dark eyes they showed radiant as a
lone star; when she spoke low her voice made music.

"Beloved," she whispered one day to him, "teach the Indian maiden
more love for you, and truth, and God. Whispering Winds yearns to go
to the Christians, but she fears her stern father. Wingenund would
burn the Village of Peace. The Indian tribes tremble before the
thunder of his wrath. Be patient, my chief. Time changes the leaves,
so it will the anger of the warriors. Whispering Winds will set you
free, and be free herself to go far with you toward the rising sun,
where dwell your people. She will love, and be constant, as the
northern star. Her love will be an eternal spring where blossoms
bloom ever anew, and fresh, and sweet. She will love your people,
and raise Christian children, and sit ever in the door of your home
praying for the west wind to blow. Or, if my chief wills, we shall
live the Indian life, free as two eagles on their lonely crag."

Although Joe gave himself up completely to his love for his bride,
he did not forget that Kate was in the power of the renegade, and
that he must rescue her. Knowing Girty had the unfortunate girls
somewhere near the Delaware encampment, he resolved to find the
place. Plans of all kinds he resolved in his mind. The best one he
believed lay through Whispering Winds. First to find the whereabouts
of Girty; kill him if possible, or at least free Kate, and then get
away with her and his Indian bride. Sanguine as he invariably was,
he could not but realize the peril of this undertaking. If
Whispering Winds betrayed her people, it meant death to her as well
as to him. He would far rather spend the remaining days of his life
in the Indian village, than doom the maiden whose love had saved
him. Yet he thought he might succeed in getting away with her, and
planned to that end. His natural spirit, daring, reckless, had
gained while he was associated with Wetzel.

Meanwhile he mingled freely with the Indians, and here, as
elsewhere, his winning personality, combined with his athletic
prowess, soon made him well liked. He was even on friendly terms
with Pipe. The swarthy war chief liked Joe because, despite the
animosity he had aroused in some former lovers of Whispering Winds,
he actually played jokes on them. In fact, Joe's pranks raised many
a storm; but the young braves who had been suitors for Wingenund's
lovely daughter, feared the muscular paleface, and the tribe's
ridicule more; so he continued his trickery unmolested. Joe's idea
was to lead the savages to believe he was thoroughly happy in his
new life, and so he was, but it suited him better to be free. He
succeeded in misleading the savages. At first he was closely
watched, the the vigilance relaxed, and finally ceased.

This last circumstance was owing, no doubt, to a ferment of
excitement that had suddenly possessed the Delawares. Council after
council was held in the big lodge. The encampment was visited by
runner after runner. Some important crisis was pending.

Joe could not learn what it all meant, and the fact that Whispering
Winds suddenly lost her gladsome spirit and became sad caused him
further anxiety. When he asked her the reason for her unhappiness,
she was silent. Moreover, he was surprised to learn, when he
questioned her upon the subject of their fleeing together, that she
was eager to go immediately. While all this mystery puzzled Joe, it
did not make any difference to him or in his plans. It rather
favored the latter. He understood that the presence of Simon Girty
and Elliott, with several other renegades unknown to him, was
significant of unrest among the Indians. These presagers of evil
were accustomed to go from village to village, exciting the savages
to acts of war. Peace meant the downfall and death of these men.
They were busy all day and far into the night. Often Joe heard
Girty's hoarse voice lifted in the council lodge. Pipe thundered
incessantly for war. But Joe could not learn against whom. Elliott's
suave, oily oratory exhorted the Indians to vengeance. But Joe could
not guess upon whom. He was, however, destined to learn.

The third day of the councils a horseman stopped before Whispering
Winds' lodge, and called out. Stepping to the door, Joe saw a white
man, whose dark, keen, handsome face seemed familiar. Yet Joe knew
he had never seen this stalwart man.

"A word with you," said the stranger. His tone was curt,
authoritative, as that of a man used to power.

"As many as you like. Who are you?"

"I am Isaac Zane. Are you Wetzel's companion, or the renegade
Deering?"

"I am not a renegade any more than you are. I was rescued by the
Indian girl, who took me as her husband," said Joe coldly. He was
surprised, and did not know what to make of Zane's manner.

"Good! I'm glad to meet you," instantly replied Zane, his tone and
expression changing. He extended his hand to Joe. "I wanted to be
sure. I never saw the renegade Deering. He is here now. I am on my
way to the Wyandot town. I have been to Fort Henry, where my brother
told me of you and the missionaries. When I arrived here I heard
your story from Simon Girty. If you can, you must get away from
here. If I dared I'd take you to the Huron village, but it's
impossible. Go, while you have a chance."

"Zane, I thank you. I've suspected something was wrong. What is it?"

"Couldn't be worse," whispered Zane, glancing round to see if they
were overheard. "Girty and Elliott, backed by this Deering, are
growing jealous of the influence of Christianity on the Indians.
They are plotting against the Village of Peace. Tarhe, the Huron
chief, has been approached, and asked to join in a concerted
movement against religion. Seemingly it is not so much the
missionaries as the converted Indians, that the renegades are fuming
over. They know if the Christian savages are killed, the strength of
the missionaries' hold will be forever broken. Pipe is wild for
blood. These renegades are slowly poisoning the minds of the few
chiefs who are favorably disposed. The outlook is bad! bad!"

"What can I do?"

"Cut out for yourself. Get away, if you can, with a gun. Take the
creek below, follow the current down to the Ohio, and then make east
for Fort Henry.

"But I want to rescue the white girl Jim Girty has concealed here
somewhere."

"Impossible! Don't attempt it unless you want to throw your life
away. Buzzard Jim, as we call Girty, is a butcher; he has probably
murdered the girl."

"I won't leave without trying. And there's my wife, the Indian girl
who saved me. Zane, she's a Christian. She wants to go with me. I
can't leave her."

"I am warning you, that's all. If I were you I'd never leave without
a try to find the white girl, and I'd never forsake my Indian bride.
I've been through the same thing. You must be a good woodsman, or
Wetzel wouldn't have let you stay with him. Pick out a favorable
time and make the attempt. I suggest you make your Indian girl show
you where Girty is. She knows, but is afraid to tell you, for she
fears Girty. Get your dog and horse from the Shawnee. That's a fine
horse. He can carry you both to safety. Take him away from
Silvertip."

"How?"

"Go right up and demand your horse and dog. Most of these Delawares
are honest, for all their blood-shedding and cruelty. With them
might is right. The Delawares won't try to get your horse for you;
but they'll stick to you when you assert your rights. They don't
like the Shawnee, anyhow. If Silvertip refuses to give you the
horse, grab him before he can draw a weapon, and beat him good.
You're big enough to do it. The Delawares will be tickled to see you
pound him. He's thick with Girty; that's why he lays round here.
Take my word, it's the best way. Do it openly, and no one will
interfere."

"By Heavens, Zane, I'll give him a drubbing. I owe him one, and am
itching to get hold of him."

"I must go now. I shall send a Wyandot runner to your brother at the
village. They shall be warned. Good-by. Good luck. May we meet
again."

Joe watched Zane ride swiftly down the land and disappear in the
shrubbery. Whispering Winds came to the door of the lodge. She
looked anxiously at him. He went within, drawing her along with him,
and quickly informed her that he had learned the cause of the
council, that he had resolved to get away, and she must find out
Girty's hiding place. Whispering Winds threw herself into his arms,
declaring with an energy and passion unusual to her, that she would
risk anything for him. She informed Joe that she knew the direction
from which Girty always returned to the village. No doubt she could
find his retreat. With a cunning that showed her Indian nature, she
suggested a plan which Joe at once saw was excellent. After Joe got
his horse, she would ride around the village, then off into the
woods, where she could leave the horse and return to say he had run
away from her. As was their custom during afternoons, they would
walk leisurely along the brook, and, trusting to the excitement
created by the councils, get away unobserved. Find the horse, if
possible rescue the prisoner, and then travel east with all speed.

Joe left the lodge at once to begin the working out of the plan.
Luck favored him at the outset, for he met Silvertip before the
council lodge. The Shawnee was leading Lance, and the dog followed
at his heels. The spirit of Mose had been broken. Poor dog, Joe
thought, he had been beaten until he was afraid to wag his tail at
his old master. Joe's resentment blazed into fury, but he kept cool
outwardly.

Right before a crowd of Indians waiting for the council to begin,
Joe planted himself in front of the Shawnee, barring his way.

"Silvertip has the paleface's horse and dog," said Joe, in a loud
voice.

The chief stared haughtily while the other Indians sauntered nearer.
They all knew how the Shawnee had got the animals, and now awaited
the outcome of the white man's challenge.

"Paleface--heap--liar," growled the Indian. His dark eyes glowed
craftily, while his hand dropped, apparently in careless habit, to
the haft of his tomahawk.

Joe swung his long arm; his big fist caught the Shawnee on the jaw,
sending him to the ground. Uttering a frightful yell, Silvertip drew
his weapon and attempted to rise, but the moment's delay in seizing
the hatchet, was fatal to his design. Joe was upon him with
tigerlike suddenness. One kick sent the tomahawk spinning, another
landed the Shawnee again on the ground. Blind with rage, Silvertip
leaped up, and without a weapon rushed at his antagonist; but the
Indian was not a boxer, and he failed to get his hands on Joe.
Shifty and elusive, the lad dodged around the struggling savage.
One, two, three hard blows staggered Silvertip, and a fourth,
delivered with the force of Joe's powerful arm, caught the Indian
when he was off his balance, and felled him, battered and bloody, on
the grass. The surrounding Indians looked down at the vanquished
Shawnee, expressing their approval in characteristic grunts.

With Lance prancing proudly, and Mose leaping lovingly beside him,
Joe walked back to his lodge. Whispering Winds sprang to meet him
with joyful face. She had feared the outcome of trouble with the
Shawnee, but no queen ever bestowed upon returning victorious lord a
loftier look of pride, a sweeter glance of love, than the Indian
maiden bent upon her lover.

Whispering Winds informed Joe that an important council was to be
held that afternoon. It would be wise for them to make the attempt
to get away immediately after the convening of the chiefs.
Accordingly she got upon Lance and rode him up and down the village
lane, much to the pleasure of the watching Indians. She scattered
the idle crowds on the grass plots, she dashed through the side
streets, and let every one in the encampment see her clinging to the
black stallion. Then she rode him out along the creek. Accustomed to
her imperious will, the Indians thought nothing unusual. When she
returned an hour later, with flying hair and disheveled costume, no
one paid particular attention to her.

That afternoon Joe and his bride were the favored of fortune. With
Mose running before them, they got clear of the encampment and into
the woods. Once in the forest Whispering Winds rapidly led the way
east. When they climbed to the top of a rocky ridge she pointed down
into a thicket before her, saying that somewhere in this dense
hollow was Girty's hut. Joe hesitated about taking Mose. He wanted
the dog, but in case he had to run it was necessary Whispering Winds
should find his trail, and for this he left the dog with her.

He started down the ridge, and had not gone a hundred paces when
over some gray boulders he saw the thatched roof of a hut. So wild
and secluded was the spot, that he would never have discovered the
cabin from any other point than this, which he had been so fortunate
as to find.

His study and practice under Wetzel now stood him in good stead. He
picked out the best path over the rough stones and through the
brambles, always keeping under cover. He stepped as carefully as if
the hunter was behind him. Soon he reached level ground. A dense
laurel thicket hid the cabin, but he knew the direction in which it
lay. Throwing himself flat on the ground, he wormed his way through
the thicket, carefully, yet swiftly, because he knew there was no
time to lose. Finally the rear of the cabin stood in front of him.

It was made of logs, rudely hewn, and as rudely thrown together. In
several places clay had fallen from chinks between the timbers,
leaving small holes. Like a snake Joe slipped close to the hut.
Raising his head he looked through one of the cracks.

Instantly he shrank back into the grass, shivering with horror. He
almost choked in his attempt to prevent an outcry.



Chapter XVIII.

The sight which Joe had seen horrified him, for several moments,
into helpless inaction. He lay breathing heavily, impotent, in an
awful rage. As he remained there stunned by the shock, he gazed up
through the open space in the leaves, trying to still his fury, to
realize the situation, to make no hasty move. The soft blue of the
sky, the fleecy clouds drifting eastward, the fluttering leaves and
the twittering birds--all assured him he was wide awake. He had
found Girty's den where so many white women had been hidden, to see
friends and home no more. He had seen the renegade sleeping, calmly
sleeping like any other man. How could the wretch sleep! He had seen
Kate. It had been the sight of her that had paralyzed him. To make a
certainty of his fears, he again raised himself to peep into the
hole. As he did so a faint cry came from within.

Girty lay on a buffalo robe near a barred door. Beyond him sat Kate,
huddled in one corner of the cabin. A long buckskin thong was
knotted round her waist, and tied to a log. Her hair was matted and
tangled, and on her face and arms were many discolored bruises.
Worse still, in her plaintive moaning, in the meaningless movement
of her head, in her vacant expression, was proof that her mind had
gone. She was mad. Even as an agonizing pity came over Joe, to be
followed by the surging fire of rage, blazing up in his breast, he
could not but thank God that she was mad! It was merciful that Kate
was no longer conscious of her suffering.

Like leaves in a storm wavered Joe's hands as he clenched them until
the nails brought blood. "Be calm, be cool," whispered his monitor,
Wetzel, ever with him in spirit. But God! Could he be cool? Bounding
with lion-spring he hurled his heavy frame against the door.

Crash! The door was burst from its fastenings.

Girty leaped up with startled yell, drawing his knife as he rose. It
had not time to descend before Joe's second spring, more fierce even
than the other, carried him directly on top of the renegade. As the
two went down Joe caught the villain's wrist with a grip that
literally cracked the bones. The knife fell and rolled away from the
struggling men. For an instant they tumbled about on the floor,
clasped in a crushing embrace. The renegade was strong, supple,
slippery as an eel. Twice he wriggled from his foe. Gnashing his
teeth, he fought like a hyena. He was fighting for life--life, which
is never so dear as to a coward and a murderer. Doom glared from
Joe's big eyes, and scream after scream issued from the renegade's
white lips.

Terrible was this struggle, but brief. Joe seemingly had the
strength of ten men. Twice he pulled Girty down as a wolf drags a
deer. He dashed him against the wall, throwing him nearing and
nearer the knife. Once within reach of the blade Joe struck the
renegade a severe blow on the temple and the villain's wrestling
became weaker. Planting his heavy knee on Girty's breast, Joe
reached for the knife, and swung it high. Exultantly he cried, mad
with lust for the brute's blood.

But the slight delay saved Girty's life.

The knife was knocked from Joe's hand and he leaped erect to find
himself confronted by Silvertip. The chief held a tomahawk with
which he had struck the weapon from the young man's grasp, and, to
judge from his burning eyes and malignant smile, he meant to brain
the now defenseless paleface.

In a single fleeting instant Joe saw that Girty was helpless for the
moment, that Silvertip was confident of his revenge, and that the
situation called for Wetzel's characteristic advice, "act like
lightnin'."

Swifter than the thought was the leap he made past Silvertip. It
carried him to a wooden bar which lay on the floor. Escape was easy,
for the door was before him and the Shawnee behind, but Joe did not
flee! He seized the bar and rushed at the Indian. Then began a duel
in which the savage's quickness and cunning matched the white man's
strength and fury. Silvertip dodged the vicious swings Joe aimed at
him; he parried many blows, any one of which would have crushed his
skull. Nimble as a cat, he avoided every rush, while his dark eyes
watched for an opening. He fought wholly on the defensive, craftily
reserving his strength until his opponent should tire.

At last, catching the bar on his hatchet, he broke the force of the
blow, and then, with agile movement, dropped to the ground and
grappled Joe's legs. Long before this he had drawn his knife, and
now he used it, plunging the blade into the young man's side.

Cunning and successful as was the savage's ruse, it failed signally,
for to get hold of the Shawnee was all Joe wanted. Feeling the sharp
pain as they fell together, he reached his hand behind him and
caught Silvertip's wrist. Exerting all his power, he wrenched the
Indian's arm so that it was not only dislocated, but the bones
cracked.

Silvertip saw his fatal mistake, but he uttered no sound. Crippled,
though he was, he yet made a supreme effort, but it was as if he had
been in the hands of a giant. The lad handled him with remorseless
and resistless fury. Suddenly he grasped the knife, which Silvertip
had been unable to hold with his crippled hand, and thrust it deeply
into the Indian's side.

All Silvertip's muscles relaxed as if a strong tension had been
removed. Slowly his legs straightened, his arms dropped, and from
his side gushed a dark flood. A shadow crept over his face, not dark
nor white, but just a shadow. His eyes lost their hate; they no
longer saw the foe, they looked beyond with gloomy question, and
then were fixed cold in death. Silvertip died as he had lived--a
chief.

Joe glared round for Girty. He was gone, having slipped away during
the fight. The lad turned to release the poor prisoner, when he
started back with a cry of fear. Kate lay bathed in a pool of
blood--dead. The renegade, fearing she might be rescued, had
murdered her, and then fled from the cabin.

Almost blinded by horror, and staggering with weakness, Joe turned
to leave the cabin. Realizing that he was seriously, perhaps
dangerously, wounded he wisely thought he must not leave the place
without weapons. He had marked the pegs where the renegade's rifle
hung, and had been careful to keep between that and his enemies. He
took down the gun and horns, which were attached to it, and, with
one last shuddering glance at poor Kate, left the place.

He was conscious of a queer lightness in his head, but he suffered
no pain. His garments were dripping with blood. He did not know how
much of it was his, or the Indian's. Instinct rather than sight was
his guide. He grew weaker and weaker; his head began to whirl, yet
he kept on, knowing that life and freedom were his if he found
Whispering Winds. He gained the top of the ridge; his eyes were
blurred, his strength gone. He called aloud, and then plunged
forward on his face. He heard dimly, as though the sound were afar
off, the whine of a dog. He felt something soft and wet on his face.
Then consciousness left him.

When he regained his senses he was lying on a bed of ferns under a
projecting rock. He heard the gurgle of running water mingling with
the song of birds. Near him lay Mose, and beyond rose a wall of
green thicket. Neither Whispering Winds nor his horse was visible.

He felt a dreamy lassitude. He was tired, but had no pain. Finding
he could move without difficulty, he concluded his weakness was more
from loss of blood than a dangerous wound. He put his hand on the
place where he had been stabbed, and felt a soft, warm compress such
as might have been made by a bunch of wet leaves. Some one had
unlaced his hunting-shirt--for he saw the strings were not as he
usually tied them--and had dressed the wound. Joe decided, after
some deliberation, that Whispering Winds had found him, made him as
comfortable as possible, and, leaving Mose on guard, had gone out to
hunt for food, or perhaps back to the Indian encampment. The rifle
and horns he had taken from Girty's hut, together with Silvertip's
knife, lay beside him.

As Joe lay there hoping for Whispering Winds' return, his
reflections were not pleasant. Fortunate, indeed, he was to be
alive; but he had no hope he could continue to be favored by
fortune. Odds were now against his escape. Girty would have the
Delawares on his trail like a pack of hungry wolves. He could not
understand the absence of Whispering Winds. She would have died
sooner than desert him. Girty had, perhaps, captured her, and was
now scouring the woods for him.

"I'll get him next time, or he'll get me," muttered Joe, in bitter
wrath. He could never forgive himself for his failure to kill the
renegade.

The recollection of how nearly he had forever ended Girty's brutal
career brought before Joe's mind the scene of the fight. He saw
again Buzzard Jim's face, revolting, unlike anything human. There
stretched Silvertip's dark figure, lying still and stark, and there
was Kate's white form in its winding, crimson wreath of blood.
Hauntingly her face returned, sad, stern in its cold rigidity.

"Poor girl, better for her to be dead," he murmured. "Not long will
she be unavenged!"

His thoughts drifted to the future. He had no fear of starvation,
for Mose could catch a rabbit or woodchuck at any time. When the
strips of meat he had hidden in his coat were gone, he could start a
fire and roast more. What concerned him most was pursuit. His trail
from the cabin had been a bloody one, which would render it easily
followed. He dared not risk exertion until he had given his wound
time to heal. Then, if he did escape from Girty and the Delawares,
his future was not bright. His experiences of the last few days had
not only sobered, but brought home to him this real border life.
With all his fire and daring he new he was no fool. He had eagerly
embraced a career which, at the present stage of his training, was
beyond his scope--not that he did not know how to act in sudden
crises, but because he had not had the necessary practice to quickly
and surely use his knowledge.

Bitter, indeed, was his self-scorn when he recalled that of the
several critical positions he had been in since his acquaintance
with Wetzel, he had failed in all but one. The exception was the
killing of Silvertip. Here his fury had made him fight as Wetzel
fought with only his every day incentive. He realized that the
border was no place for any save the boldest and most experienced
hunters--men who had become inured to hardship, callous as to death,
keen as Indians. Fear was not in Joe nor lack of confidence; but he
had good sense, and realized he would have done a wiser thing had he
stayed at Fort Henry. Colonel Zane was right. The Indians were
tigers, the renegades vultures, the vast untrammeled forests and
plains their covert. Ten years of war had rendered this wilderness a
place where those few white men who had survived were hardened to
the spilling of blood, stern even in those few quiet hours which
peril allowed them, strong in their sacrifice of all for future
generations.

A low growl from Mose broke into Joe's reflections. The dog had
raised his nose from his paws and sniffed suspiciously at the air.
The lad heard a slight rustling outside, and in another moment was
overjoyed at seeing Whispering Winds. She came swiftly, with a
lithe, graceful motion, and flying to him like a rush of wind, knelt
beside him. She kissed him and murmured words of endearment.

"Winds, where have you been?" he asked her, in the mixed English and
Indian dialect in which they conversed.

She told him the dog had led her to him two evenings before. He was
insensible. She had bathed and bandaged his wound, and remained with
him all that night. The next day, finding he was ill and delirious,
she decided to risk returning to the village. If any questions
arose, she could say he had left her. Then she would find a way to
get back to him, bringing healing herbs for his wound and a soothing
drink. As it turned out Girty had returned to the camp. He was
battered and bruised, and in a white heat of passion. Going at once
to Wingenund, the renegade openly accused Whispering Winds of aiding
her paleface lover to escape. Wingenund called his daughter before
him, and questioned her. She confessed all to her father.

"Why is the daughter of Wingenund a traitor to her race?" demanded
the chief.

"Whispering Winds is a Christian."

Wingenund received this intelligence as a blow. He dismissed Girty
and sent his braves from his lodge, facing his daughter alone.
Gloomy and stern, he paced before her.

"Wingenund's blood might change, but would never betray. Wingenund
is the Delaware chief," he said. "Go. Darken no more the door of
Wingenund's wigwam. Let the flower of the Delawares fade in alien
pastures. Go. Whispering Winds is free!"

Tears shone brightly in the Indian girl's eyes while she told Joe
her story. She loved her father, and she would see him no more.

"Winds is free," she whispered. "When strength returns to her master
she can follow him to the white villages. Winds will live her life
for him."

"Then we have no one to fear?" asked Joe.

"No redman, now that the Shawnee chief is dead."

"Will Girty follow us? He is a coward; he will fear to come alone."

"The white savage is a snake in the grass."

Two long days followed, during which the lovers lay quietly in
hiding. On the morning of the third day Joe felt that he might risk
the start for the Village of Peace. Whispering Winds led the horse
below a stone upon which the invalid stood, thus enabling him to
mount. Then she got on behind him.

The sun was just gilding the horizon when they rode out of the woods
into a wide plain. No living thing could be seen. Along the edge of
the forest the ground was level, and the horse traveled easily.
Several times during the morning Joe dismounted beside a pile of
stones or a fallen tree. The miles were traversed without serious
inconvenience to the invalid, except that he grew tired. Toward the
middle of the afternoon, when they had ridden perhaps twenty-five
miles, they crossed a swift, narrow brook. The water was a beautiful
clear brown. Joe made note of this, as it was an unusual
circumstance. Nearly all the streams, when not flooded, were green
in color. He remembered that during his wanderings with Wetzel they
had found one stream of this brown, copper-colored water. The lad
knew he must take a roundabout way to the village so that he might
avoid Indian runners or scouts, and he hoped this stream would prove
to be the one he had once camped upon.

As they were riding toward a gentle swell or knoll covered with
trees and shrubbery, Whispering Winds felt something warm on her
hand, and, looking, was horrified to find it covered with blood.
Joe's wound had opened. She told him they must dismount here, and
remain until he was stronger. The invalid himself thought this
conclusion was wise. They would be practically safe now, since they
must be out of the Indian path, and many miles from the encampment.
Accordingly he got off the horse, and sat down on a log, while
Whispering Winds searched for a suitable place in which to erect a
temporary shelter.

Joe's wandering gaze was arrested by a tree with a huge knotty
formation near the ground. It was like many trees, but this
peculiarity was not what struck Joe. He had seen it before. He never
forgot anything in the woods that once attracted his attention. He
looked around on all sides. Just behind him was an opening in the
clump of trees. Within this was a perpendicular stone covered with
moss and lichens; above it a beech tree spread long, graceful
branches. He thrilled with the remembrance these familiar marks
brought. This was Beautiful Spring, the place where Wetzel rescued
Nell, where he had killed the Indians in that night attack he would
never forget.



Chapter XIX.

One evening a week or more after the disappearance of Jim and the
girls, George Young and David Edwards, the missionaries, sat on the
cabin steps, gazing disconsolately upon the forest scenery. Hard as
had been the ten years of their labor among the Indians, nothing had
shaken them as the loss of their young friends.

"Dave, I tell you your theory about seeing them again is absurd,"
asserted George. "I'll never forget that wretch, Girty, as he spoke
to Nell. Why, she just wilted like a flower blasted by fire. I can't
understand why he let me go, and kept Jim, unless the Shawnee had
something to do with it. I never wished until now that I was a
hunter. I'd go after Girty. You've heard as well as I of his many
atrocities. I'd rather have seen Kate and Nell dead than have them
fall into his power. I'd rather have killed them myself!"

Young had aged perceptibly in these last few days. The blue veins
showed at his temples; his face had become thinner and paler, his
eyes had a look of pain. The former expression of patience, which
had sat so well on him, was gone.

"George, I can't account for my fancies or feelings, else, perhaps,
I'd be easier in mind," answered Dave. His face, too, showed the
ravages of grief. "I've had queer thoughts lately, and dreams such
as I never had before. Perhaps it's this trouble which has made me
so nervous. I don't seem able to pull myself together. I can neither
preach nor work."

"Neither can I! This trouble has hit you as hard as it has me. But,
Dave, we've still our duty. To endure, to endure--that is our life.
Because a beam of sunshine brightened, for a brief time, the gray of
our lives, and then faded away, we must not shirk nor grow sour and
discontented."

"But how cruel is this border life!"

"Nature itself is brutal."

"Yes, I know, and we have elected to spend our lives here in the
midst of this ceaseless strife, to fare poorly, to have no pleasure,
never to feel the comfort of a woman's smiles, nor the joy of a
child's caress, all because out in the woods are ten or twenty or a
hundred savages we may convert."

"That is why, and it is enough. It is hard to give up the women you
love to a black-souled renegade, but that is not for my thought.
What kills me is the horror for her--for her."

"I, too, suffer with that thought; more than that, I am morbid and
depressed. I feel as if some calamity awaited us here. I have never
been superstitious, nor have I had presentiments, but of late there
are strange fears in my mind."

At this juncture Mr. Wells and Heckewelder came out of the adjoining
cabin.

"I had word from a trustworthy runner to-day. Girty and his captives
have not been seen in the Delaware towns," said Heckewelder.

"It is most unlikely that he will take them to the towns," replied
Edwards. "What do you make of his capturing Jim?"

"For Pipe, perhaps. The Delaware Wolf is snapping his teeth. Pipe is
particularly opposed to Christianity, and--what's that?"

A low whistle from the bushes near the creek bank attracted the
attention of all. The younger men got up to investigate, but
Heckewelder detained them.

"Wait," he added. "There is no telling what that signal may mean."

They waited with breathless interest. Presently the whistle was
repeated, and an instant later the tall figure of a man stepped from
behind a thicket. He was a white man, but not recognizable at that
distance, even if a friend. The stranger waved his hand as if asking
them to be cautious, and come to him.

They went toward the thicket, and when within a few paces of the man
Mr. Wells exclaimed:

"It's the man who guided my party to the village. It is Wetzel!"

The other missionaries had never seen the hunter though, of course,
they were familiar with his name, and looked at him with great
curiosity. The hunter's buckskin garments were wet, torn, and
covered with burrs. Dark spots, evidently blood stains, showed on
his hunting-shirt.

"Wetzel?" interrogated Heckewelder.

The hunter nodded, and took a step behind the bush. Bending over he
lifted something from the ground. It was a girl. It was Nell! She
was very white--but alive. A faint, glad smile lighted up her
features.

Not a word was spoken. With an expression of tender compassion Mr.
Wells received her into his arms. The four missionaries turned
fearful, questioning eyes upon the hunter, but they could not speak.

"She's well, an' unharmed," said Wetzel, reading their thoughts,
"only worn out. I've carried her these ten miles."

"God bless you, Wetzel!" exclaimed the old missionary. "Nellie,
Nellie, can you speak?"

"Uncle dear--I'm--all right," came the faint answer.

"Kate? What--of her?" whispered George Young with lips as dry as
corn husks.

"I did my best," said the hunter with a simple dignity. Nothing but
the agonized appeal in the young man's eyes could have made Wetzel
speak of his achievement.

"Tell us," broke in Heckewelder, seeing that fear had stricken
George dumb.

"We trailed 'em an' got away with the golden-haired lass. The last I
saw of Joe he was braced up agin a rock fightin' like a wildcat. I
tried to cut Jim loose as I was goin' by. I s'pect the wust fer the
brothers an' the other lass."

"Can we do nothing?" asked Mr. Wells.

"Nothin'!"

"Wetzel, has the capturing of James Downs any significance to you?"
inquired Heckewelder.

"I reckon so."

"What?"

"Pipe an' his white-redskin allies are agin Christianity."

"Do you think we are in danger?"

"I reckon so."

"What do you advise?"

"Pack up a few of your traps, take the lass, an' come with me. I'll
see you back in Fort Henry."

Heckewelder nervously walked up to the tree and back again. Young
and Edwards looked blankly at one another. They both remembered
Edward's presentiment. Mr. Wells uttered an angry exclamation.

"You ask us to fail in our duty? No, never! To go back to the white
settlements and acknowledge we were afraid to continue teaching the
Gospel to the Indians! You can not understand Christianity if you
advise that. You have no religion. You are a killer of Indians."

A shadow that might have been one of pain flitted over the hunter's
face.

"No, I ain't a Christian, an' I am a killer of Injuns," said Wetzel,
and his deep voice had a strange tremor. "I don't know nothin' much
'cept the woods an' fields, an' if there's a God fer me He's out
thar under the trees an' grass. Mr. Wells, you're the first man as
ever called me a coward, an' I overlook it because of your callin'.
I advise you to go back to Fort Henry, because if you don't go now
the chances are aginst your ever goin'. Christianity or no
Christianity, such men as you hev no bisness in these woods."

"I thank you for your advice, and bless you for your rescue of this
child; but I can not leave my work, nor can I understand why all
this good work we have done should be called useless. We have
converted Indians, saved their souls. Is that not being of some use,
of some good here?"

"It's accordin' to how you look at it. Now I know the bark of an oak
is different accordin' to the side we see from. I'll allow, hatin'
Injuns as I do, is no reason you oughtn't to try an' convert 'em.
But you're bringin' on a war. These Injuns won't allow this Village
of Peace here with its big fields of corn, an' shops an' workin'
redskins. It's agin their nature. You're only sacrificin' your
Christian Injuns."

"What do you mean?" asked Mr. Wells, startled by Wetzel's words.

"Enough. I'm ready to guide you to Fort Henry."

"I'll never go."

Wetzel looked at the other men. No one would have doubted him. No
one could have failed to see he knew that some terrible anger
hovered over the Village of Peace.

"I believe you, Wetzel, but I can not go," said Heckewelder, with
white face.

"I will stay," said George, steadily.

"And I," said Dave.

Wetzel nodded, and turned to depart when George grasped his arm. The
young missionary's face was drawn and haggard; he fixed an intense
gaze upon the hunter.

"Wetzel, listen;" his voice was low and shaken with deep feeling. "I
am a teacher of God's word, and I am as earnest in that purpose as
you are in your life-work. I shall die here; I shall fill an
unmarked grave; but I shall have done the best I could. This is the
life destiny has marked out for me, and I will live it as best I
may; but in this moment, preacher as I am, I would give all I have
or hope to have, all the little good I may have done, all my life,
to be such a man as you. For I would avenge the woman I loved. To
torture, to kill Girty! I am only a poor, weak fellow who would be
lost a mile from this village, and if not, would fall before the
youngest brave. But you with your glorious strength, your
incomparable woodcraft, you are the man to kill Girty. Rid the
frontier of this fiend. Kill him! Wetzel, kill him! I beseech you
for the sake of some sweet girl who even now may be on her way to
this terrible country, and who may fall into Girty's power--for her
sake, Wetzel, kill him. Trail him like a bloodhound, and when you
find him remember my broken heart, remember Nell, remember, oh, God!
remember poor Kate!"

Young's voice broke into dry sobs. He had completely exhausted
himself, so that he was forced to lean against the tree for support.

Wetzel spoke never a word. He stretched out his long, brawny arm and
gripped the young missionary's shoulder. His fingers clasped hard.
Simple, without words as the action was, it could not have been more
potent. And then, as he stood, the softer look faded slowly from his
face. A ripple seemed to run over his features, which froze, as it
subsided, into a cold, stone rigidity.

His arm dropped; he stepped past the tree, and, bounding lightly as
a deer, cleared the creek and disappeared in the bushes.

Mr. Wells carried Nell to his cabin where she lay for hours with wan
face and listless languor. She swallowed the nourishing drink an old
Indian nurse forced between her teeth; she even smiled weakly when
the missionaries spoke to her; but she said nothing nor seemed to
rally from her terrible shock. A dark shadow lay always before her,
conscious of nothing present, living over again her frightful
experience. Again she seemed sunk in dull apathy.

"Dave, we're going to loose Nell. She's fading slowly," said George,
one evening, several days after the girl's return. "Wetzel said she
was unharmed, yet she seems to have received a hurt more fatal than
a physical one. It's her mind--her mind. If we cannot brighten her
up to make her forget, she'll die."

"We've done all within our power. If she could only be brought out
of this trance! She lies there all day long with those staring eyes.
I can't look into them. They are the eyes of a child who has seen
murder."

"We must try in some way to get her out of this stupor, and I have
an idea. Have you noticed that Mr. Wells has failed very much in the
last few weeks?"

"Indeed I have, and I'm afraid he's breaking down. He has grown so
thin, eats very little, and doesn't sleep. He is old, you know, and,
despite his zeal, this border life is telling on him."

"Dave, I believe he knows it. Poor, earnest old man! He never says a
word about himself, yet he must know he is going down hill. Well, we
all begin, sooner or later, that descent which ends in the grave. I
believe we might stir Nellie by telling her Mr. Wells' health is
breaking."

"Let us try."

A hurried knock on the door interrupted their conversation.

"Come in," said Edwards.

The door opened to admit a man, who entered eagerly.

"Jim! Jim!" exclaimed both missionaries, throwing themselves upon
the newcomer.

It was, indeed, Jim, but no answering smile lighted his worn,
distressed face while he wrung his friends' hands.

"You're not hurt?" asked Dave.

"No, I'm uninjured."

"Tell us all. Did you escape? Did you see your brother? Did you know
Wetzel rescued Nell?"

"Wingenund set me free in spite of many demands for my death. He
kept Joe a prisoner, and intends to kill him, for the lad was
Wetzel's companion. I saw the hunter come into the glade where we
camped, break through the line of fighting Indians and carry Nell
off."

"Kate?" faltered Young, with ashen face.

"George, I wish to God I could tell you she is dead," answered Jim,
nervously pacing the room. "But she was well when I last saw her.
She endured the hard journey better than either Nell or I. Girty did
not carry her into the encampment, as Silvertip did Joe and me, but
the renegade left us on the outskirts of the Delaware town. There
was a rocky ravine with dense undergrowth where he disappeared with
his captive. I suppose he has his den somewhere in that ravine."

George sank down and buried his face in his arms; neither movement
nor sound betokened consciousness.

"Has Wetzel come in with Nell? Joe said he had a cave where he might
have taken her in case of illness or accident."

"Yes, he brought her back," answered Edwards, slowly.

"I want to see her," said Jim, his haggard face expressing a keen
anxiety. "She's not wounded? hurt? ill?"

"No, nothing like that. It's a shock which she can't get over, can't
forget."

"I must see her," cried Jim, moving toward the door.

"Don't go," replied Dave, detaining him. "Wait. We must see what's
best to be done. Wait till Heckewelder comes. He'll be here soon.
Nell thinks you're dead, and the surprise might be bad for her."

Heckewelder came in at that moment, and shook hands warmly with Jim.

"The Delaware runner told me you were here. I am overjoyed that
Wingenund freed you," said the missionary. "It is a most favorable
sign. I have heard rumors from Goshocking and Sandusky that have
worried me. This good news more than offsets the bad. I am sorry
about your brother. Are you well?"

"Well, but miserable. I want to see Nell. Dave tells me she is not
exactly ill, but something is wrong with her. Perhaps I ought not to
see her just yet."

"It'll be exactly the tonic for her," replied Heckewelder. "She'll
be surprised out of herself. She is morbid, apathetic, and, try as
we may, we can't interest her. Come at once."

Heckewelder had taken Jim's arm and started for the door when he
caught sight of Young, sitting bowed and motionless. Turning to Jim
he whispered:

"Kate?"

"Girty did not take her into the encampment," answered Jim, in a low
voice. "I hoped he would, because the Indians are kind, but he
didn't. He took her to his den."

Just then Young raised his face. The despair in it would have melted
a heart of stone. It had become the face of an old man.

"If only you'd told me she had died," he said to Jim, "I'd have been
man enough to stand it, but--this--this kills me--I can't breathe!"

He staggered into the adjoining room, where he flung himself upon a
bed.

"It's hard, and he won't be able to stand up under it, for he's not
strong," whispered Jim.

Heckewelder was a mild, pious man, in whom no one would ever expect
strong passion; but now depths were stirred within his heart that
had ever been tranquil. He became livid, and his face was distorted
with rage.

"It's bad enough to have these renegades plotting and working
against our religion; to have them sow discontent, spread lies, make
the Indians think we have axes to grind, to plant the only obstacle
in our path--all this is bad; but to doom an innocent white woman to
worse than death! What can I call it!"

"What can we do?" asked Jim.

"Do? That's the worst of it. We can do nothing, nothing. We dare not
move."

"Is there no hope of getting Kate back?"

"Hope? None. That villain is surrounded by his savages. He'll lie
low now for a while. I've heard of such deeds many a time, but it
never before came so close home. Kate Wells was a pure, loving
Christian woman. She'll live an hour, a day, a week, perhaps, in
that snake's clutches, and then she'll die. Thank God!"

"Wetzel has gone on Girty's trail. I know that from his manner when
he left us," said Edwards.

"Wetzel may avenge her, but he can never save her. It's too late.
Hello---"

The exclamation was called forth by the appearance of Young, who
entered with a rifle in his hands.

"George, where are you going with that gun?" asked Edwards, grasping
his friend by the arm.

"I'm going after her," answered George wildly. He tottered as he
spoke, but wrenched himself free from Dave.

"Come, George, listen, listen to reason," interposed Heckewelder,
laying hold of Young. "You are frantic with grief now. So are all of
us. But calm yourself. Why, man, you're a preacher, not a hunter.
You'd be lost, you'd starve in the woods before getting half way to
the Indian town. This is terrible enough; don't make it worse by
throwing your life away. Think of us, your friends; think of your
Indian pupils who rely so much on you. Think of the Village of
Peace. We can pray, but we can't prevent these border crimes. With
civilization, with the spread of Christianity, they will pass away.
Bear up under this blow for the sake of your work. Remember we alone
can check such barbarity. But we must not fight. We must sacrifice
all that men hold dear, for the sake of the future."

He took the rifle away from George, and led him back into the
little, dark room. Closing the door he turned to Jim and Dave.

"He is in a bad way, and we must carefully watch him for a few
days."

"Think of George starting out to kill Girty!" exclaimed Dave. "I
never fired a gun, but yet I'd go too."

"So would we all, if we did as our hearts dictate," retorted
Heckewelder, turning fiercely upon Dave as if stung. "Man! we have a
village full of Christians to look after. What would become of them?
I tell you we've all we can do here to outwit these border ruffians.
Simon Girty is plotting our ruin. I heard it to-day from the
Delaware runner who is my friend. He is jealous of our influence,
when all we desire is to save these poor Indians. And, Jim, Girty
has killed our happiness. Can we ever recover from the misery
brought upon us by poor Kate's fate?"

The missionary raised his hand as if to exhort some power above.

"Curse the Girty's!" he exclaimed in a sudden burst of
uncontrollable passion. "Having conquered all other obstacles, must
we fail because of wicked men of our own race? Oh, curse them!"

"Come," he said, presently, in a voice which trembled with the
effort he made to be calm. "We'll go in to Nellie."

The three men entered Mr. Wells' cabin. The old missionary, with
bowed head and hands clasped behind his back, was pacing to and fro.
He greeted Jim with glad surprise.

"We want Nellie to see him," whispered Heckewelder. "We think the
surprise will do her good."

"I trust it may," said Mr. Wells.

"Leave it to me."

They followed Heckewelder into an adjoining room. A torch flickered
over the rude mantle-shelf, lighting up the room with fitful flare.
It was a warm night, and the soft breeze coming in the window
alternately paled and brightened the flame.

Jim saw Nell lying on the bed. Her eyes were closed, and her long,
dark lashes seemed black against the marble paleness of her skin.

"Stand behind me," whispered Heckewelder to Jim.

"Nellie," he called softly, but only a faint flickering of her
lashes answered him.

"Nellie, Nellie," repeated Heckewelder, his deep, strong voice
thrilling.

Her eyes opened. They gazed at Mr. Wells on one side, at Edwards
standing at the foot of the bed, at Heckewelder leaning over her,
but there was no recognition or interest in her look.

"Nellie, can you understand me?" asked Heckewelder, putting into his
voice all the power and intensity of feeling of which he was
capable.

An almost imperceptible shadow of understanding shone in her eyes.

"Listen. You have had a terrible shock, and it has affected your
mind. You are mistaken in what you think, what you dream of all the
time. Do you understand? You are wrong!"

Nell's eyes quickened with a puzzled, questioning doubt. The
minister's magnetic, penetrating voice had pierced her dulled brain.

"See, I have brought you Jim!"

Heckewelder stepped aside as Jim fell on his knees by the bed. He
took her cold hands in his and bent over her. For the moment his
voice failed.

The doubt in Nell's eyes changed to a wondrous gladness. It was like
the rekindling of a smoldering fire.

"Jim?" she whispered.

"Yes, Nellie, it's Jim alive and well. It's Jim come back to you."

A soft flush stained her white face. She slipped her arm tenderly
around his neck, and held her cheek close to his.

"Jim," she murmured.

"Nellie, don't you know me?" asked Mr. Wells, trembling, excited.
This was the first word she had spoken in four days.

"Uncle!" she exclaimed, suddenly loosening her hold on Jim, and
sitting up in bed, then she gazed wildly at the others.

"Was it all a horrible dream?"

Mr. Wells took her hand soothingly, but he did not attempt to answer
her question. He looked helplessly at Heckewelder, but that
missionary was intently studying the expression on Nell's face.

"Part of it was a dream," he answered,impressively.

"Then that horrible man did take us away?"

"Yes."

"Oh-h! but we're free now? This is my room. Oh, tell me?"

"Yes, Nellie, you're safe at home now."

"Tell--tell me," she cried, shudderingly, as she leaned close to Jim
and raised a white, imploring face to his. "Where is Kate?--Oh!
Jim--say, say she wasn't left with Girty?"

"Kate is dead," answered Jim, quickly. He could not endure the
horror in her eyes. He deliberately intended to lie, as had
Heckewelder.

It was as if the tension of Nell's nerves was suddenly relaxed. The
relief from her worst fear was so great that her mind took in only
the one impression. Then, presently, a choking cry escaped her, to
be followed by a paroxysm of sobs.



Chapter XX.

Early on the following day Heckewelder, astride his horse, appeared
at the door of Edwards' cabin.

"How is George?" he inquired of Dave, when the latter had opened the
door.

"He had a bad night, but is sleeping now. I think he'll be all right
after a time," answered Dave.

"That's well. Nevertheless keep a watch on him for a few days."

"I'll do so."

"Dave, I leave matters here to your good judgment. I'm off to
Goshocking to join Zeisberger. Affairs there demand our immediate
attention, and we must make haste."

"How long do you intend to be absent?"

"A few days; possibly a week. In case of any unusual disturbance
among the Indians, the appearance of Pipe and his tribe, or any of
the opposing factions, send a fleet runner at once to warn me. Most
of my fears have been allayed by Wingenund's attitude toward us. His
freeing Jim in face of the opposition of his chiefs is a sure sign
of friendliness. More than once I have suspected that he was
interested in Christianity. His daughter, Whispering Winds,
exhibited the same intense fervor in religion as has been manifested
by all our converts. It may be that we have not appealed in vain to
Wingenund and his daughter; but their high position in the Delaware
tribe makes it impolitic for them to reveal a change of heart. If we
could win over those two we'd have every chance to convert the whole
tribe. Well, as it is we must be thankful for Wingenund's
friendship. We have two powerful allies now. Tarhe, the Wyandot
chieftain, remains neutral, to be sure, but that's almost as helpful
as his friendship."

"I, too, take a hopeful view of the situation," replied Edwards.

"We'll trust in Providence, and do our best," said Heckewelder, as
he turned his horse. "Good-by."

"Godspeed!" called Edwards, as his chief rode away.

The missionary resumed his work of getting breakfast. He remained in
doors all that day, except for the few moments when he ran over to
Mr. Wells' cabin to inquire regarding Nell's condition. He was
relieved to learn she was so much better that she had declared her
intention of moving about the house. Dave kept a close watch on
Young. He, himself, was suffering from the same blow which had
prostrated his friend, but his physical strength and fortitude were
such that he did not weaken. He was overjoyed to see that George
rallied, and showed no further indications of breaking down.

True it was, perhaps, that Heckewelder's earnest prayer on behalf of
the converted Indians had sunk deeply into George's heart and thus
kept it from breaking. No stronger plea could have been made than
the allusion to those gentle, dependent Christians. No one but a
missionary could realize the sweetness, the simplicity, the faith,
the eager hope for a good, true life which had been implanted in the
hearts of these Indians. To bear it in mind, to think of what he, as
a missionary and teacher, was to them, relieved him of half his
burden, and for strength to bear the remainder he went to God. For
all worry there is a sovereign cure, for all suffering there is a
healing balm; it is religious faith. Happiness had suddenly flashed
with a meteor-like radiance into Young's life only to be snuffed out
like a candle in a windy gloom, but his work, his duty remained. So
in his trial he learned the necessity of resignation. He chaffed no
more at the mysterious, seemingly brutal methods of nature; he
questioned no more. He wondered no more at the apparent indifference
of Providence. He had one hope, which was to be true to his faith,
and teach it to the end.

Nell mastered her grief by an astonishing reserve of strength.
Undoubtedly it was that marvelously merciful power which enables a
person, for the love of others, to bear up under a cross, or even to
fight death himself. As Young had his bright-eyed Indian boys and
girls, who had learned Christianity from him, and whose future
depended on him, so Nell had her aged and weakening uncle to care
for and cherish.

Jim's attentions to her before the deep affliction had not been
slight, but now they were so marked as to be unmistakable. In some
way Jim seemed changed since he had returned from the Delaware
encampment. Although he went back to the work with his old
aggressiveness, he was not nearly so successful as he had been
before. Whether or not this was his fault, he took his failure
deeply to heart. There was that in his tenderness which caused Nell
to regard him, in one sense, as she did her uncle. Jim, too, leaned
upon her, and she accepted his devotion where once she had repelled
it. She had unconsciously betrayed a great deal when she had turned
so tenderly to him in the first moments after her recognition, and
he remembered it. He did not speak of love to her; he let a thousand
little acts of kindness, a constant thoughtfulness of her plead his
cause.

The days succeeding Heckewelder's departure were remarkable for
several reasons. Although the weather was enticing, the number of
visiting Indians gradually decreased. Not a runner from any tribe
came into the village, and finally the day dawned when not a single
Indian from the outlying towns was present to hear the preaching.

Jim spoke, as usual. After several days had passed and none but
converted Indians made up the congregation, the young man began to
be uneasy in mind.

Young and Edwards were unable to account for the unusual absence
from worship, yet they did not see in it anything to cause especial
concern. Often there had been days without visitation to the Village
of Peace.

Finally Jim went to consult Glickhican. He found the Delaware at
work in the potato patch. The old Indian dropped his hoe and bowed
to the missionary. A reverential and stately courtesy always
characterized the attitude of the Indians toward the young white
father.

"Glickhican, can you tell me why no Indians have come here lately?"

The old chief shook his head.

"Does their absence signify ill to the Village of Peace?"

"Glickhican saw a blackbird flitting in the shadow of the moon. The
bird hovered above the Village of Peace, but sang no song."

The old Delaware vouchsafed no other than this strange reply.

Jim returned to his cabin decidedly worried. He did not at all like
Glickhican's answer. The purport of it seemed to be that a cloud was
rising on the bright horizon of the Christian village. He confided
his fears to Young and Edwards. After discussing the situation, the
three missionaries decided to send for Heckewelder. He was the
leader of the Mission; he knew more of Indian craft than any of
them, and how to meet it. If this calm in the heretofore busy life
of the Mission was the lull before a storm, Heckewelder should be
there with his experience and influence.

"For nearly ten years Heckewelder has anticipated trouble from
hostile savages," said Edwards, "but so far he has always averted
it. As you know, he has confined himself mostly to propitiating the
Indians, and persuading them to be friendly, and listen to us. We'll
send for him."

Accordingly they dispatched a runner to Goshocking. In due time the
Indian returned with the startling news that Heckewelder had left
the Indian village days before, as had, in fact, all the savages
except the few converted ones. The same held true in the case of
Sandusky, the adjoining town. Moreover, it had been impossible to
obtain any news in regard to Zeisberger.

The missionaries were now thoroughly alarmed, and knew not what to
do. They concealed the real state of affairs from Nell and her
uncle, desiring to keep them from anxiety as long as possible. That
night the three teachers went to bed with heavy hearts.

The following morning at daybreak, Jim was awakened from a sound
sleep by some one calling at his window. He got up to learn who it
was, and, in the gray light, saw Edwards standing outside.

"What's the matter?" questioned Jim, hurriedly.

"Matter enough. Hurry. Get into your clothes," replied Edwards.  "As
soon as you are dressed, quietly awaken Mr. Wells and Nellie, but do
not frighten them."

"But what's the trouble?" queried Jim, as he began to dress.

"The Indians are pouring into the village as thickly as flying
leaves in autumn."

Edwards' exaggerated assertion proved to be almost literally true.
No sooner had the rising sun dispelled the mist, than it shone on
long lines of marching braves, mounted warriors, hundreds of
packhorses approaching from the forests. The orderly procession was
proof of a concerted plan on the part of the invaders.

From their windows the missionaries watched with bated breath; with
wonder and fear they saw the long lines of dusky forms. When they
were in the clearing the savages busied themselves with their packs.
Long rows of teepees sprung up as if by magic. The savages had come
to stay! The number of incoming visitors did not lessen until noon,
when a few straggling groups marked the end of the invading host.
Most significant of all was the fact that neither child, maiden, nor
squaw accompanied this army.

Jim appraised the number at six or seven hundred, more than had ever
before visited the village at one time. They were mostly Delawares,
with many Shawnees, and a few Hurons among them. It was soon
evident, however, that for the present, at least, the Indians did
not intend any hostile demonstration. They were quiet in manner, and
busy about their teepees and camp-fires, but there was an absence of
the curiosity that had characterized the former sojourns of Indians
at the peaceful village.

After a brief consultation with his brother missionaries, who all
were opposed to his preaching that afternoon, Jim decided he would
not deviate from his usual custom. He held the afternoon service,
and spoke to the largest congregation that had ever sat before him.
He was surprised to find that the sermon, which heretofore so
strongly impressed the savages, did not now arouse the slightest
enthusiasm. It was followed by a brooding silence of a boding,
ominous import.

Four white men, dressed in Indian garb, had been the most attentive
listeners to Jim's sermon. He recognized three as Simon Girty,
Elliott and Deering, the renegades, and he learned from Edwards that
the other was the notorious McKee. These men went through the
village, stalking into the shops and cabins, and acting as do men
who are on a tour of inspection.

So intrusive was their curiosity that Jim hurried back to Mr. Well's
cabin and remained there in seclusion. Of course, by this time Nell
and her uncle knew of the presence of the hostile savages. They were
frightened, and barely regained their composure when the young man
assured them he was certain they had no real cause for fear.

Jim was sitting at the doorstep with Mr. Wells and Edwards when
Girty, with his comrades, came toward them. The renegade leader was
a tall, athletic man, with a dark, strong face. There was in it none
of the brutality and ferocity which marked his brother's visage.
Simon Girty appeared keen, forceful, authoritative, as, indeed, he
must have been to have attained the power he held in the
confederated tribes. His companions presented wide contrasts.
Elliott was a small, spare man of cunning, vindictive aspect; McKee
looked, as might have been supposed from his reputation, and Deering
was a fit mate for the absent Girty. Simon appeared to be a man of
some intelligence, who had used all his power to make that position
a great one. The other renegades were desperadoes.

"Where's Heckewelder?" asked Girty, curtly, as he stopped before the
missionaries.

"He started out for the Indian towns on the Muskingong," answered
Edwards. "But we have had no word from either him or Zeisberger."

"When d'ye expect him?"

"I can't say. Perhaps to-morrow, and then, again, maybe not for a
week."

"He is in authority here, ain't he?"

"Yes; but he left me in charge of the Mission. Can I serve you in
any way?"

"I reckon not," said the renegade, turning to his companions. They
conversed in low tones for a moment. Presently McKee, Elliott and
Deering went toward the newly erected teepees.

"Girty, do you mean us any ill will?" earnestly asked Edwards. He
had met the man on more than one occasion, and had no hesitation
about questioning him.

"I can't say as I do," answered the renegade, and those who heard
him believed him. "But I'm agin this redskin preachin', an' hev been
all along. The injuns are mad clear through, an' I ain't sayin' I've
tried to quiet 'em any. This missionary work has got to be stopped,
one way or another. Now what I waited here to say is this: I ain't
quite forgot I was white once, an' believe you fellars are honest.
I'm willin' to go outer my way to help you git away from here."

"Go away?" echoed Edwards.

"That's it," answered Girty, shouldering his rifle.

"But why? We are perfectly harmless; we are only doing good and hurt
no one. Why should we go?"

"'Cause there's liable to be trouble," said the renegade,
significantly.

Edwards turned slowly to Mr. Wells and Jim. The old missionary was
trembling visibly. Jim was pale; but more with anger than fear.

"Thank you, Girty, but we'll stay," and Jim's voice rang clear.



Chapter XXI.

"Jim, come out here," called Edwards at the window of Mr. Wells'
cabin.

The young man arose from the breakfast table, and when outside found
Edwards standing by the door with an Indian brave. He was a Wyandot
lightly built, lithe and wiry, easily recognizable as an Indian
runner. When Jim appeared the man handed him a small packet. He
unwound a few folds of some oily skin to find a square piece of
birch bark, upon which were scratched the following words:

"Rev. J. Downs. Greeting.

"Your brother is alive and safe. Whispering Winds rescued him by
taking him as her husband. Leave the Village of Peace. Pipe and Half
King have been influenced by Girty.

"Zane."

"Now, what do you think of that?" exclaimed Jim, handing the message
to Edwards. "Thank Heaven, Joe was saved!"

"Zane? That must be the Zane who married Tarhe's daughter," answered
Edwards, when he had read the note. "I'm rejoiced to hear of your
brother."

"Joe married to that beautiful Indian maiden! Well, of all wonderful
things," mused Jim. "What will Nell say?"

"We're getting warnings enough. Do you appreciate that?" asked
Edwards. "'Pipe and Half King have been influenced by Girty.'
Evidently the writer deemed that brief sentence of sufficient
meaning."

"Edwards, we're preachers. We can't understand such things. I am
learning, at least something every day. Colonel Zane advised us not
to come here. Wetzel said, 'Go back to Fort Henry.' Girty warned us,
and now comes this peremptory order from Isaac Zane."

"Well?"

"It means that these border men see what we will not admit. We
ministers have such hope and trust in God that we can not realize
the dangers of this life. I fear that our work has been in vain."

"Never. We have already saved many souls. Do not be discouraged."

All this time the runner had stood near at hand straight as an
arrow. Presently Edwards suggested that the Wyandot was waiting to
be questioned, and accordingly he asked the Indian if he had
anything further to communicate.

"Huron--go by--paleface." Here he held up both hands and shut his
fists several times, evidently enumerating how many white men he had
seen. "Here--when--high--sun."

With that he bounded lightly past them, and loped off with an even,
swinging stride.

"What did he mean?" asked Jim, almost sure he had not heard the
runner aright.

"He meant that a party of white men are approaching, and will be
here by noon. I never knew an Indian runner to carry unreliable
information. We have joyful news, both in regard to your brother,
and the Village of Peace. Let us go in to tell the others."

The Huron runner's report proved to be correct. Shortly before noon
signals from Indian scouts proclaimed the approach of a band of
white men. Evidently Girty's forces had knowledge beforehand of the
proximity of this band, for the signals created no excitement. The
Indians expressed only a lazy curiosity. Soon several Delaware
scouts appeared, escorting a large party of frontiersmen.

These men turned out to be Captain Williamson's force, which had
been out on an expedition after a marauding tribe of Chippewas. This
last named tribe had recently harried the remote settlers, and
committed depredations on the outskirts of the white settlements
eastward. The company was composed of men who had served in the
garrison at Fort Pitt, and hunters and backwoodsmen from Yellow
Creek and Fort Henry. The captain himself was a typical borderman,
rough and bluff, hardened by long years of border life, and, like
most pioneers, having no more use for an Indian than for a snake. He
had led his party after the marauders, and surprised and slaughtered
nearly all of them. Returning eastward he had passed through
Goshocking, where he learned of the muttering storm rising over the
Village of Peace, and had come more out of curiosity than hope to
avert misfortune.

The advent of so many frontiersmen seemed a godsend to the perplexed
and worried missionaries. They welcomed the newcomers most heartily.
Beds were made in several of the newly erected cabins; the village
was given over for the comfort of the frontiersmen. Edwards
conducted Captain Williamson through the shops and schools, and the
old borderman's weather-beaten face expressed a comical surprise.

"Wal, I'll be durned if I ever expected to see a redskin work," was
his only comment on the industries.

"We are greatly alarmed by the presence of Girty and his followers,"
said Edwards. "We have been warned to leave, but have not been
actually threatened. What do you infer from the appearance here of
these hostile savages?"

"It hardly 'pears to me they'll bother you preachers. They're agin
the Christian redskins, that's plain."

"Why have we been warned to go?"

"That's natural, seein' they're agin the preachin'."

"What will they do with the converted Indians?"

"Mighty onsartin. They might let them go back to the tribes, but
'pears to me these good Injuns won't go. Another thing, Girty is
afeered of the spread of Christianity."

"Then you think our Christians will be made prisoners?"

"'Pears likely."

"And you, also, think we'd do well to leave here."

"I do, sartin. We're startin' for Fort Henry soon. You'd better come
along with us."

"Captain Williamson, we're going to stick it out, Girty or no
Girty."

"You can't do no good stayin' here. Pipe and Half King won't stand
for the singin', prayin' redskins, especially when they've got all
these cattle and fields of grain."

"Wetzel said the same."

"Hev you seen Wetzel?"

"Yes; he rescued a girl from Jim Girty, and returned her to us."

"That so? I met Wetzel and Jack Zane back a few miles in the woods.
They're layin' for somebody, because when I asked them to come along
they refused, sayin' they had work as must be done. They looked like
it, too. I never hern tell of Wetzel advisin' any one before; but
I'll say if he told me to do a thing, by Gosh! I'd do it."

"As men, we might very well take the advice given us, but as
preachers we must stay here to do all we can for these Christian
Indians. One thing more: will you help us?"

"I reckon I'll stay here to see the thing out," answered Williamson.
Edwards made a mental note of the frontiersman's evasive answer.

Jim had, meanwhile, made the acquaintance of a young minister, John
Christy by name, who had lost his sweetheart in one of the Chippewa
raids, and had accompanied the Williamson expedition in the hope he
might rescue her.

"How long have you been out?" asked Jim.

"About four weeks now," answered Christy. "My betrothed was captured
five weeks ago yesterday. I joined Williamson's band, which made up
at Short Creek to take the trail of the flying Chippewas, in the
hope I might find her. But not a trace! The expedition fell upon a
band of redskins over on the Walhonding, and killed nearly all of
them. I learned from a wounded Indian that a renegade had made off
with a white girl about a week previous. Perhaps it was poor Lucy."

Jim related the circumstances of his own capture by Jim Girty, the
rescue of Nell, and Kate's sad fate.

"Could Jim Girty have gotten your girl?" inquired Jim, in
conclusion.

"It's fairly probable. The description doesn't tally with Girty's.
This renegade was short and heavy, and noted especially for his
strength. Of course, an Indian would first speak of some such
distinguishing feature. There are, however, ten or twelve renegades
on the border, and, excepting Jim Girty, one's as bad as another."

"Then it's a common occurrence, this abducting girls from the
settlements?"

"Yes, and the strange thing is that one never hears of such doings
until he gets out on the frontier."

"For that matter, you don't hear much of anything, except of the
wonderful richness and promise of the western country."

"You're right. Rumors of fat, fertile lands induce the colonist to
become a pioneer. He comes west with his family; two out of every
ten lose their scalps, and in some places the average is much
greater. The wives, daughters and children are carried off into
captivity. I have been on the border two years, and know that the
rescue of any captive, as Wetzel rescued your friend, is a
remarkable exception."

"If you have so little hope of recovering your sweetheart, what then
is your motive for accompanying this band of hunters?"

"Revenge!"

"And you are a preacher?" Jim's voice did not disguise his
astonishment.

"I was a preacher, and now I am thirsting for vengeance," answered
Christy, his face clouding darkly. "Wait until you learn what
frontier life means. You are young here yet; you are flushed with
the success of your teaching; you have lived a short time in this
quiet village, where, until the last few days, all has been serene.
You know nothing of the strife, of the necessity of fighting, of the
cruelty which makes up this border existence. Only two years have
hardened me so that I actually pant for the blood of the renegade
who has robbed me. A frontiersman must take his choice of succumbing
or cutting his way through flesh and bone. Blood will be spilled; if
not yours, then your foe's. The pioneers run from the plow to the
fight; they halt in the cutting of corn to defend themselves, and in
winter must battle against cold and hardship, which would be less
cruel if there was time in summer to prepare for winter, for the
savages leave them hardly an opportunity to plant crops. How many
pioneers have given up, and gone back east? Find me any who would
not return home to-morrow, if they could. All that brings them out
here is the chance for a home, and all that keeps them out here is
the poor hope of finally attaining their object. Always there is a
possibility of future prosperity. But this generation, if it
survives, will never see prosperity and happiness. What does this
border life engender in a pioneer who holds his own in it? Of all
things, not Christianity. He becomes a fighter, keen as the redskin
who steals through the coverts."

                *       *       *

The serene days of the Village of Peace had passed into history.
Soon that depraved vagabond, the French trader, with cheap trinkets
and vile whisky, made his appearance. This was all that was needed
to inflame the visitors. Where they had been only bold and impudent,
they became insulting and abusive. They execrated the Christian
indians for their neutrality; scorned them for worshiping this
unknown God, and denounced a religion which made women of strong
men.

The slaughtering of cattle commenced; the despoiling of maize
fields, and robbing of corn-cribs began with the drunkenness.

All this time it was seen that Girty and Elliott consulted often
with Pipe and Half King. The latter was the only Huron chief opposed
to neutrality toward the Village of Peace, and he was, if possible,
more fierce in his hatred than Pipe. The future of the Christian
settlement rested with these two chiefs. Girty and Elliott,
evidently, were the designing schemers, and they worked diligently
on the passions of these simple-minded, but fierce, warlike chiefs.

Greatly to the relief of the distracted missionaries, Heckewelder
returned to the village. Jaded and haggard, he presented a
travel-worn appearance. He made the astonishing assertions that he
had been thrice waylaid and assaulted on his way to Goshocking; then
detained by a roving band of Chippewas, and soon after his arrival
at their camping ground a renegade had run off with a white woman
captive, while the Indians west of the village were in an uproar.
Zeisberger, however, was safe in the Moravian town of Salem, some
miles west of Goshocking. Heckewelder had expected to find the same
condition of affairs as existed in the Village of Peace; but he was
bewildered by the great array of hostile Indians. Chiefs who had
once extended friendly hands to him, now drew back coldly, as they
said:

"Washington is dead. The American armies are cut to pieces. The few
thousands who had escaped the British are collecting at Fort Pitt to
steal the Indian's land."

Heckewelder vigorously denied all these assertions, knowing they had
been invented by Girty and Elliott. He exhausted all his skill and
patience in the vain endeavor to show Pipe where he was wrong. Half
King had been so well coached by the renegades that he refused to
listen. The other chiefs maintained a cold reserve that was baffling
and exasperating. Wingenund took no active part in the councils; but
his presence apparently denoted that he had sided with the others.
The outlook was altogether discouraging.

"I'm completely fagged out," declared Heckewelder, that night when
he returned to Edwards' cabin. He dropped into a chair as one whose
strength is entirely spent, whose indomitable spirit has at last
been broken.

"Lie down to rest," said Edwards.

"Oh, I can't. Matters look so black."

"You're tired out and discouraged. You'll feel better to-morrow. The
situation is not, perhaps, so hopeless. The presence of these
frontiersmen should encourage us."

"What will they do? What can they do?" cried Heckewelder, bitterly.
"I tell you never before have I encountered such gloomy, stony
Indians. It seems to me that they are in no vacillating state. They
act like men whose course is already decided upon, and who are only
waiting."

"For what?" asked Jim, after a long silence.

"God only knows! Perhaps for a time; possibly for a final decision,
and, it may be, for a reason, the very thought of which makes me
faint."

"Tell us," said Edwards, speaking quietly, for he had ever been the
calmest of the missionaries.

"Never mind. Perhaps it's only my nerves. I'm all unstrung, and
could suspect anything to-night."

"Heckewelder, tell us?" Jim asked, earnestly.

"My friends, I pray I am wrong. God help us if my fears are correct.
I believe the Indians are waiting for Jim Girty."



Chapter XXII.

Simon Girty lolled on a blanket in Half King's teepee. He was alone,
awaiting his allies. Rings of white smoke curled lazily from his
lips as he puffed on a long Indian pipe, and gazed out over the
clearing that contained the Village of Peace.

Still water has something in its placid surface significant of deep
channels, of hidden depths; the dim outline of the forest is dark
with meaning, suggestive of its wild internal character. So Simon
Girty's hard, bronzed face betrayed the man. His degenerate
brother's features were revolting; but his own were striking, and
fell short of being handsome only because of their craggy hardness.
Years of revolt, of bitterness, of consciousness of wasted life, had
graven their stern lines on that copper, masklike face. Yet despite
the cruelty there, the forbidding shade on it, as if a reflection
from a dark soul, it was not wholly a bad countenance. Traces still
lingered, faintly, of a man in whom kindlier feelings had once
predominated.

In a moment of pique Girty had deserted his military post at Fort
Pitt, and become an outlaw of his own volition. Previous to that
time he had been an able soldier, and a good fellow. When he
realized that his step was irrevocable, that even his best friends
condemned him, he plunged, with anger and despair in his heart, into
a war upon his own race. Both of his brothers had long been border
ruffians, whose only protection from the outraged pioneers lay in
the faraway camps of hostile tribes. George Girty had so sunk his
individuality into the savage's that he was no longer a white man.
Jim Girty stalked over the borderland with a bloody tomahawk, his
long arm outstretched to clutch some unfortunate white woman, and
with his hideous smile of death. Both of these men were far lower
than the worst savages, and it was almost wholly to their deeds of
darkness that Simon Girty owed his infamous name.

To-day White Chief, as Girty was called, awaited his men. A slight
tremor of the ground caused him to turn his gaze. The Huron chief,
Half King, resplendent in his magnificent array, had entered the
teepee. He squatted in a corner, rested the bowl of his great pipe
on his knee, and smoked in silence. The habitual frown of his black
brow, like a shaded, overhanging cliff; the fire flashing from his
eyes, as a shining light is reflected from a dark pool; his
closely-shut, bulging jaw, all bespoke a nature, lofty in its Indian
pride and arrogance, but more cruel than death.

Another chief stalked into the teepee and seated himself. It was
Pipe. His countenance denoted none of the intelligence that made
Wingenund's face so noble; it was even coarser than Half King's, and
his eyes, resembling live coals in the dark; the long, cruel lines
of his jaw; the thin, tightly-closed lips, which looked as if they
could relax only to utter a savage command, expressed fierce cunning
and brutality.

"White Chief is idle to-day," said Half King, speaking in the Indian
tongue.

"King, I am waiting. Girty is slow, but sure," answered the
renegade.

"The eagle sails slowly round and round, up and up," replied Half
King, with majestic gestures, "until his eye sees all, until he
knows his time; then he folds his wings and swoops down from the
blue sky like the forked fire. So does White Chief. But Half King is
impatient."

"To-day decides the fate of the Village of Peace," answered Girty,
imperturbably.

"Ugh!" grunted Pipe.

Half King vented his approval in the same meaning exclamation.

An hour passed; the renegade smoked in silence; the chiefs did
likewise.

A horseman rode up to the door of the teepee, dismounted, and came
in. It was Elliott. He had been absent twenty hours. His buckskin
suit showed the effect of hard riding through the thickets.

"Hullo, Bill, any sign of Jim?" was Girty's greeting to his
lieutenant.

"Nary. He's not been seen near the Delaware camp. He's after that
chap who married Winds."

"I thought so. Jim's roundin' up a tenderfoot who will be a bad man
to handle if he has half a chance. I saw as much the day he took his
horse away from Silver. He finally did fer the Shawnee, an' almost
put Jim out. My brother oughtn't to give rein to personal revenge at
a time like this." Girty's face did not change, but his tone was one
of annoyance.

"Jim said he'd be here to-day, didn't he?"

"To-day is as long as we allowed to wait."

"He'll come. Where's Jake and Mac?"

"They're here somewhere, drinkin' like fish, an' raisin' hell."

Two more renegades appeared at the door, and, entering the teepee,
squatted down in Indian fashion. The little wiry man with the
wizened face was McKee; the other was the latest acquisition to the
renegade force, Jake Deering, deserter, thief, murderer--everything
that is bad. In appearance he was of medium height, but very
heavily, compactly built, and evidently as strong as an ox. He had a
tangled shock of red hair, a broad, bloated face; big, dull eyes,
like the openings of empty furnaces, and an expression of
beastliness.

Deering and McKee were intoxicated.

"Bad time fer drinkin'," said Girty, with disapproval in his glance.

"What's that ter you?" growled Deering. "I'm here ter do your work,
an' I reckon it'll be done better if I'm drunk."

"Don't git careless," replied Girty, with that cool tone and dark
look such as dangerous men use. "I'm only sayin' it's a bad time fer
you, because if this bunch of frontiersmen happen to git onto you
bein' the renegade that was with the Chippewas an' got thet young
feller's girl, there's liable to be trouble."

"They ain't agoin' ter find out."

"Where is she?"

"Back there in the woods."

"Mebbe it's as well. Now, don't git so drunk you'll blab all you
know. We've lots of work to do without havin' to clean up
Williamson's bunch," rejoined Girty. "Bill, tie up the tent flaps
an' we'll git to council."

Elliott arose to carry out the order, and had pulled in the
deer-hide flaps, when one of them was jerked outward to disclose the
befrilled person of Jim Girty. Except for a discoloration over his
eye, he appeared as usual.

"Ugh!" grunted Pipe, who was glad to see his renegade friend.

Half King evinced the same feeling.

"Hullo," was Simon Girty's greeting.

"'Pears I'm on time fer the picnic," said Jim Girty, with his
ghastly leer.

Bill Elliott closed the flaps, after giving orders to the guard to
prevent any Indians from loitering near the teepee.

"Listen," said Simon Girty, speaking low in the Delaware language.
"The time is ripe. We have come here to break forever the influence
of the white man's religion. Our councils have been held; we shall
drive away the missionaries, and burn the Village of Peace."

He paused, leaning forward in his exceeding earnestness, with his
bronzed face lined by swelling veins, his whole person made rigid by
the murderous thought. Then he hissed between his teeth: "What shall
we do with these Christian Indians?"

Pipe raised his war-club, struck it upon the ground; then handed it
to Half King.

Half King took the club and repeated the action.

Both chiefs favored the death penalty.

"Feed 'em to ther buzzards," croaked Jim Girty.

Simon Girty knitted his brow in thought. The question of what to do
with the converted Indians had long perplexed him.

"No," said he; "let us drive away the missionaries, burn the
village, and take the Indians back to camp. We'll keep them there;
they'll soon forget."

"Pipe does not want them," declared the Delaware.

"Christian Indians shall never sit round Half King's fire," cried
the Huron.

Simon Girty knew the crisis had come; that but few moments were left
him to decide as to the disposition of the Christians; and he
thought seriously. Certainly he did not want the Christians
murdered. However cruel his life, and great his misdeeds, he was
still a man. If possible, he desired to burn the village and ruin
the religious influence, but without shedding blood. Yet, with all
his power, he was handicapped, and that by the very chiefs most
nearly under his control. He could not subdue this growing Christian
influence without the help of Pipe and Half King. To these savages a
thing was either right or wrong. He had sown the seed of unrest and
jealousy in the savage breasts, and the fruit was the decree of
death. As far as these Indians were concerned, this decision was
unalterable.

On the other hand, if he did not spread ruin over the Village of
Peace, the missionaries would soon get such a grasp on the tribes
that their hold would never be broken. He could not allow that, even
if he was forced to sacrifice the missionaries along with their
converts, for he saw in the growth of this religion his own
downfall. The border must be hostile to the whites, or it could no
longer be his home. To be sure, he had aided the British in the
Revolution, and could find a refuge among them; but this did not
suit him.

He became an outcast because of failure to win the military
promotion which he had so much coveted. He had failed among his own
people. He had won a great position in an alien race, and he loved
his power. To sway men--Indians, if not others--to his will; to
avenge himself for the fancied wrong done him; to be great, had been
his unrelenting purpose.

He knew he must sacrifice the Christians, or eventually lose his own
power. He had no false ideas about the converted Indians. He knew
they were innocent; that they were a thousand times better off than
the pagan Indians; that they had never harmed him, nor would they
ever do so; but if he allowed them to spread their religion there
was an end of Simon Girty.

His decision was characteristic of the man. He would sacrifice any
one, or all, to retain his supremacy. He knew the fulfillment of the
decree as laid down by Pipe and Half King would be known as his
work. His name, infamous now, would have an additional horror, and
ever be remembered by posterity in unspeakable loathing, in
unsoftening wrath. He knew this, and deep down in his heart awoke a
numbed chord of humanity that twinged with strange pain. What awful
work he must sanction to keep his vaunted power! More bitter than
all was the knowledge that to retain this hold over the indians he
must commit a deed which, so far as the whites were concerned, would
take away his great name, and brand him a coward.

He briefly reviewed his stirring life. Singularly fitted for a
leader, in a few years he had risen to the most powerful position on
the border. He wielded more influence than any chief. He had been
opposed to the invasion of the pioneers, and this alone, without his
sagacity or his generalship, would have given him control of many
tribes. But hatred for his own people, coupled with unerring
judgment, a remarkable ability to lead expeditions, and his
invariable success, had raised him higher and higher until he stood
alone. He was the most powerful man west of the Alleghenies. His
fame was such that the British had importuned him to help them, and
had actually, in more than one instance, given him command over
British subjects.

All of which meant that he had a great, even though an infamous
name. No matter what he was blamed for; no matter how many dastardly
deeds had been committed by his depraved brothers and laid to his
door, he knew he had never done a cowardly act. That which he had
committed while he was drunk he considered as having been done by
the liquor, and not by the man. He loved his power, and he loved his
name.

In all Girty's eventful, ignoble life, neither the alienation from
his people, the horror they ascribed to his power, nor the sacrifice
of his life to stand high among the savage races, nor any of the
cruel deeds committed while at war, hurt him a tithe as much as did
this sanctioning the massacre of the Christians.

Although he was a vengeful, unscrupulous, evil man, he had never
acted the coward.

Half King waited long for Girty to speak; since he remained silent,
the wily Huron suggested they take a vote on the question.

"Let us burn the Village of Peace, drive away the missionaries, and
take the Christians back to the Delaware towns--all without spilling
blood," said Girty, determined to carry his point, if possible.

"I say the same," added Elliott, refusing the war-club held out to
him by Half King.

"Me, too," voted McKee, not so drunk but that he understood the
lightninglike glance Girty shot at him.

"Kill 'em all; kill everybody," cried Deering in drunken glee. He
took the club and pounded with it on the ground.

Pipe repeated his former performance, as also did Half King, after
which he handed the black, knotted symbol of death to Jim Girty.

Three had declared for saving the Christians, and three for the
death penalty.

Six pairs of burning eyes were fastened on the Deaths-head.

Pipe and Half King were coldly relentless; Deering awoke to a brutal
earnestness; McKee and Elliott watched with bated breath. These men
had formed themselves into a tribunal to decide on the life or death
of many, and the situation, if not the greatest in their lives,
certainly was one of vital importance.

Simon Girty cursed all the fates. He dared not openly oppose the
voting, and he could not, before those cruel but just chiefs, try to
influence his brother's vote.

As Jim Girty took the war-club, Simon read in his brother's face the
doom of the converted Indians and he muttered to himself:

"Now tremble an' shrink, all you Christians!"

Jim was not in a hurry. Slowly he poised the war-club. He was
playing as a cat plays with a mouse; he was glorying in his power.
The silence was that of death. It signified the silence of death.
The war-club descended with violence.

"Feed the Christians to ther buzzards!"



Chapter XXIII.

"I have been here before," said Joe to Whispering Winds. "I remember
that vine-covered stone. We crawled over it to get at Girty and
Silvertip. There's the little knoll; here's the very spot where I
was hit by a flying tomahawk. Yes, and there's the spring. Let me
see, what did Wetzel call this spot?"

"Beautiful Spring," answered the Indian girl.

"That's it, and it's well named. What a lovely place!"

Nature had been lavish in the beautifying of this inclosed dell. It
was about fifty yards wide, and nestled among little, wooded knolls
and walls of gray, lichen-covered stone. Though the sun shone
brightly into the opening, and the rain had free access to the mossy
ground, no stormy winds ever entered this well protected glade.

Joe reveled in the beauty of the scene, even while he was too weak
to stand erect. He suffered no pain from his wound, although he had
gradually grown dizzy, and felt as if the ground was rising before
him. He was glad to lie upon the mossy ground in the little cavern
under the cliff.

Upon examination his wound was found to have opened, and was
bleeding. His hunting coat was saturated with blood. Whispering
Winds washed the cut, and dressed it with cooling leaves. Then she
rebandaged it tightly with Joe's linsey handkerchiefs, and while he
rested comfortable she gathered bundles of ferns, carrying them to
the little cavern. When she had a large quantity of these she sat
down near Joe, and began to weave the long stems into a kind of
screen. The fern stalks were four feet long and half a foot wide;
these she deftly laced together, making broad screens which would
serve to ward off the night dews. This done, she next built a
fireplace with flat stones. She found wild apples, plums and turnips
on the knoll above the glade. Then she cooked strips of meat which
had been brought with them. Lance grazed on the long grass just
without the glade, and Mose caught two rabbits. When darkness
settled down Whispering Winds called the dog within the cavern, and
hung the screens before the opening.

Several days passed. Joe rested quietly, and began to recover
strength. Besides the work of preparing their meals, Whispering
Winds had nothing to do save sit near the invalid and amuse or
interest him so that he would not fret or grow impatient, while his
wound was healing.

They talked about their future prospects. After visiting the Village
of Peace, they would go to Fort Henry, where Joe could find
employment. They dwelt upon the cabin they would build, and passed
many happy moments planning a new home. Joe's love of the wilderness
had in no wise diminished; but a blow on his head from a heavy
tomahawk, and a vicious stab in the back, had lessened his zeal so
far that he understood it was not wise to sacrifice life for the
pleasures of the pathless woods. He could have the last without the
danger of being shot at from behind every tree. He reasoned that it
would be best for him to take his wife to Fort Henry, there find
employment, and devote his leisure time to roaming in the forest.

"Will the palefaces be kind to an Indian who has learned to love
them?" Whispering Winds asked wistfully of Joe.

"Indeed they will," answered Joe, and he told her the story of Isaac
Zane; how he took his Indian bride home; how her beauty and
sweetness soon won all the white people's love. "It will be so with
you, my wife."

"Whispering Winds knows so little," she murmured.

"Why, you are learning every day, and even if such was not the case,
you know enough for me."

"Whispering Winds will be afraid; she fears a little to go."

"I'll be glad when we can be on the move," said Joe, with his old
impatient desire for action. "How soon, Winds, can we set off?"

"As many days," answered the Indian girl, holding up five fingers.

"So long? I want to leave this place."

"Leave Beautiful Spring?"

"Yes, even this sweet place. It has a horror for me. I'll never
forget the night I first saw that spring shining in the moonlight.
It was right above the rock that I looked into the glade. The moon
was reflected in the dark pool, and as I gazed into the shadowy
depths of the dark water I suddenly felt an unaccountable terror;
but I oughtn't to have the same feeling now. We are safe, are we
not?"

"We are safe," murmured Whispering Winds.

"Yet I have the same chill of fear whenever I look at the beautiful
spring, and at night as I awake to hear the soft babble of running
water, I freeze until my heart feels like cold lead. Winds, I'm not
a coward; but I can't help this feeling. Perhaps, it's only the
memory of that awful night with Wetzel."

"An Indian feels so when he passes to his unmarked grave," answered
Winds, gazing solemnly at him. "Whispering Winds does not like this
fancy of yours. Let us leave Beautiful Spring. You are almost well.
Ah! if Whispering Winds should lose you! I love you!"

"And I love you, my beautiful wild flower," answered Joe, stroking
the dark head so near his own.

A tender smile shone on his face. He heard a slight noise without
the cave, and, looking up, saw that which caused the smile to fade
quickly.

"Mose!" he called, sharply. The dog was away chasing rabbits.

Whispering Winds glanced over her shoulder with a startled cry,
which ended in a scream.

Not two yards behind her stood Jim Girty.

Hideous was his face in its triumphant ferocity. He held a long
knife in his hand, and, snarling like a mad wolf, he made a forward
lunge.

Joe raised himself quickly; but almost before he could lift his hand
in defense, the long blade was sheathed in his breast.

Slowly he sank back, his gray eyes contracting with the old steely
flash. The will to do was there, but the power was gone forever.

"Remember, Girty, murderer! I am Wetzel's friend," he cried, gazing
at his slayer with unutterable scorn.

Then the gray eyes softened, and sought the blanched face of the
stricken maiden.

"Winds," he whispered faintly.

She was as one frozen with horror.

The gray eyes gazed into hers with lingering tenderness; then the
film of death came upon them.

The renegade raised his bloody knife, and bent over the prostrate
form.

Whispering Winds threw herself upon Girty with the blind fury of a
maddened lioness. Cursing fiercely, he stabbed her once, twice,
three times. She fell across the body of her lover, and clasped it
convulsively.

Girty gave one glance at his victims; deliberately wiped the gory
knife on Wind's leggins, and, with another glance, hurried and
fearful, around the glade, he plunged into the thicket.

An hour passed. A dark stream crept from the quiet figures toward
the spring. It dyed the moss and the green violet leaves. Slowly it
wound its way to the clear water, dripping between the pale blue
flowers. The little fall below the spring was no longer snowy white;
blood had tinged it red.

A dog came bounding into the glade. He leaped the brook, hesitated
on the bank, and lowered his nose to sniff at the water. He bounded
up the bank to the cavern.

A long, mournful howl broke the wilderness's quiet.

Another hour passed. The birds were silent; the insects still. The
sun sank behind the trees, and the shades of evening gathered.

The ferns on the other side of the glade trembled. A slight rustle
of dead leaves disturbed the stillness. The dog whined, then barked.
The tall form of a hunter rose out of the thicket, and stepped into
the glade with his eyes bent upon moccasin tracks in the soft moss.

The trail he had been following led him to this bloody spring.

"I might hev knowed it," he muttered.

Wetzel, for it was he, leaned upon his long rifle while his keen
eyes took in the details of the tragedy. The whining dog, the bloody
water, the motionless figures lying in a last embrace, told the sad
story.

"Joe an' Winds," he muttered.

Only a moment did he remain lost in sad reflection. A familiar
moccasin-print in the sand on the bank pointed westward. He examined
it carefully.

"Two hours gone," he muttered. "I might overtake him."

Then his motions became swift. With two blows of his tomahawk he
secured a long piece of grapevine. He took a heavy stone from the
bed of the brook. He carried Joe to the spring, and, returning for
Winds, placed her beside her lover. This done, he tied one end of
the grapevine around the stone, and wound the other about the dead
bodies.

He pushed them off the bank into the spring. As the lovers sank into
the deep pool they turned, exposing first Winds' sad face, and then
Joe's. Then they sank out of sight. Little waves splashed on the
shore of the pool; the ripple disappeared, and the surface of the
spring became tranquil.

Wetzel stood one moment over the watery grave of the maiden who had
saved him, and the boy who had loved him. In the gathering gloom his
stalwart form assumed gigantic proportions, and when he raised his
long arm and shook his clenched fist toward the west, he resembled a
magnificent statue of dark menace.

With a single bound he cleared the pool, and then sped out of the
glade. He urged the dog on Girty's trail, and followed the eager
beast toward the west. As he disappeared, a long, low sound like the
sigh of the night wind swelled and moaned through the gloom.



Chapter XXIV.

When the first ruddy rays of the rising sun crimsoned the eastern
sky, Wetzel slowly wound his way down a rugged hill far west of
Beautiful Spring. A white dog, weary and footsore, limped by his
side. Both man and beast showed evidence of severe exertion.

The hunter stopped in a little cave under a projecting stone, and,
laying aside his rifle, began to gather twigs and sticks. He was
particular about selecting the wood, and threw aside many pieces
which would have burned well; but when he did kindle a flame it
blazed hotly, yet made no smoke.

He sharpened a green stick, and, taking some strips of meat from his
pocket, roasted them over the hot flame. He fed the dog first. Mose
had crouched close on the ground with his head on his paws, and his
brown eyes fastened upon the hunter.

"He had too big a start fer us," said Wetzel, speaking as if the dog
were human. It seemed that Wetzel's words were a protest against the
meaning in those large, sad eyes.

Then the hunter put out the fire, and, searching for a more secluded
spot, finally found one on top of the ledge, where he commanded a
good view of his surroundings. The weary dog was asleep. Wetzel
settled himself to rest, and was soon wrapped in slumber.

About noon he awoke. He arose, stretched his limbs, and then took an
easy position on the front of the ledge, where he could look below.
Evidently the hunter was waiting for something. The dog slept on. It
was the noonday hour, when the stillness of the forest almost
matched that of midnight. The birds were more quiet than at any
other time during daylight.

Wetzel reclined there with his head against the stone, and his rifle
resting across his knees.

He listened now to the sounds of the forest. The soft breeze
fluttering among the leaves, the rain-call of the tree frog, the caw
of crows from distant hilltops, the sweet songs of the thrush and
oriole, were blended together naturally, harmoniously.

But suddenly the hunter raised his head. A note, deeper than the
others, a little too strong, came from far down the shaded hollow.
To Wetzel's trained ear it was a discord. He manifested no more than
this attention, for the birdcall was the signal he had been
awaiting. He whistled a note in answer that was as deep and clear as
the one which had roused him.

Moments passed. There was no repetition of the sound. The songs of
the other birds had ceased. Besides Wetzel there was another
intruder in the woods.

Mose lifted his shaggy head and growled. The hunter patted the dog.
In a few minutes the figure of a tall man appeared among the laurels
down the slope. He stopped while gazing up at the ledge. Then, with
noiseless step, he ascended the ridge, climbed the rocky ledge, and
turned the corner of the stone to face Wetzel. The newcomer was
Jonathan Zane.

"Jack, I expected you afore this," was Wetzel's greeting.

"I couldn't make it sooner," answered Zane. "After we left
Williamson and separated, I got turned around by a band of several
hundred redskins makin' for the Village of Peace. I went back again,
but couldn't find any sign of the trail we're huntin'. Then I makes
for this meetin' place. I've been goin' for some ten hours, and am
hungry."

"I've got some bar ready cooked," said Wetzel, handing Zane several
strips of meat.

"What luck did you have?"

"I found Girty's trail, an old one, over here some eighteen or
twenty miles, an' follered it until I went almost into the Delaware
town. It led to a hut in a deep ravine. I ain't often surprised, but
I wus then. I found the dead body of that girl, Kate Wells, we
fetched over from Fort Henry. Thet's sad, but it ain't the
surprisin' part. I also found Silvertip, the Shawnee I've been
lookin' fer. He was all knocked an' cut up, deader'n a stone.
There'd been somethin' of a scrap in the hut. I calkilate Girty
murdered Kate, but I couldn't think then who did fer Silver, though
I allowed the renegade might hev done thet, too. I watched round an'
seen Girty come back to the hut. He had ten Injuns with him, an'
presently they all made fer the west. I trailed them, but didn't
calkilate it'd be wise to tackle the bunch single-handed, so laid
back. A mile or so from the hut I came across hoss tracks minglin'
with the moccasin-prints. About fifteen mile or from the Delaware
town, Girty left his buckskins, an' they went west, while he stuck
to the hoss tracks. I was onto his game in a minute. I cut across
country fer Beautiful Spring, but I got there too late. I found the
warm bodies of Joe and thet Injun girl, Winds. The snake hed
murdered them."

"I allow Joe won over Winds, got away from the Delaware town with
her, tried to rescue Kate, and killed Silver in the fight. Girty
probably was surprised, an' run after he had knifed the girl."

"'Pears so to me. Joe had two knife cuts, an' one was an old wound."

"You say it was a bad fight?"

"Must hev been. The hut was all knocked in, an' stuff scattered
about. Wal, Joe could go some if he onct got started."

"I'll bet he could. He was the likeliest lad I've seen for many a
day."

"If he'd lasted, he'd been somethin' of a hunter an' fighter."

"Too bad. But Lord! you couldn't keep him down, no more than you can
lots of these wild young chaps that drift out here."

"I'll allow he had the fever bad."

"Did you hev time to bury them?"

"I hedn't time fer much. I sunk them in the spring."

"It's a pretty deep hole," said Zane, reflectively. "Then, you and
the dog took Girty's trail, but couldn't catch up with him. He's now
with the renegade cutthroats and hundreds of riled Indians over
there in the Village of Peace."

"I reckon you're right."

A long silence ensued. Jonathan finished his simple repast, drank
from the little spring that trickled under the stone, and, sitting
down by the dog, smoothed out his long silken hair.

"Lew, we're pretty good friends, ain't we?" he asked, thoughtfully.

"Jack, you an' the colonel are all the friends I ever hed, 'ceptin'
that boy lyin' quiet back there in the woods."

"I know you pretty well, and ain't sayin' a word about your runnin'
off from me on many a hunt, but I want to speak plain about this
fellow Girty."

"Wal?" said Wetzel, as Zane hesitated.

"Twice in the last few years you and I have had it in for the same
men, both white-livered traitors. You remember? First it was Miller,
who tried to ruin my sister Betty, and next it was Jim Girty, who
murdered our old friend, as good an old man as ever wore moccasins.
Wal, after Miller ran off from the fort, we trailed him down to the
river, and I points across and says, 'You or me?' and you says,
'Me.' You was Betty's friend, and I knew she'd be avenged. Miller is
lyin' quiet in the woods, and violets have blossomed twice over his
grave, though you never said a word; but I know it's true because I
know you."

Zane looked eagerly into the dark face of his friend, hoping perhaps
to get some verbal assurance there that his belief was true. But
Wetzel did not speak, and he continued:

"Another day not so long ago we both looked down at an old friend,
and saw his white hair matted with blood. He'd been murdered for
nothin'. Again you and me trailed a coward and found him to be Jim
Girty. I knew you'd been huntin' him for years, and so I says, 'Lew,
you or me?' and you says, 'Me.' I give in to you, for I knew you're
a better man than me, and because I wanted you to have the
satisfaction. Wal, the months have gone by, and Jim Girty's still
livin' and carryin' on. Now he's over there after them poor
preachers. I ain't sayin', Lew, that you haven't more agin him than
me, but I do say, let me in on it with you. He always has a gang of
redskins with him; he's afraid to travel alone, else you'd had him
long ago. Two of us'll have more chance to get him. Let me go with
you. When it comes to a finish, I'll stand aside while you give it
to him. I'd enjoy seein' you cut him from shoulder to hip. After he
leaves the Village of Peace we'll hit his trail, camp on it, and
stick to it until it ends in his grave."

The earnest voice of the backwoodsman ceased. Both men rose and
stood facing each other. Zane's bronzed face was hard and tense,
expressive of an indomitable will; Wetzel's was coldly dark, with
fateful resolve, as if his decree of vengeance, once given, was as
immutable as destiny. The big, horny hands gripped in a viselike
clasp born of fierce passion, but no word was spoken.

Far to the west somewhere, a befrilled and bedizened renegade
pursued the wild tenor of his ways; perhaps, even now steeping his
soul in more crime, or staining his hands a deeper red, but sleeping
or waking, he dreamed not of this deadly compact that meant his
doom.

The two hunters turned their stern faces toward the west, and passed
silently down the ridge into the depths of the forest. Darkness
found them within rifle-shot of the Village of Peace. With the dog
creeping between them, they crawled to a position which would, in
daylight, command a view of the clearing. Then, while one stood
guard, the other slept.

When morning dawned they shifted their position to the top of a low,
fern-covered cliff, from which they could see every movement in the
village. All the morning they watched with that wonderful patience
of men who knew how to wait. The visiting savages were quiet, the
missionaries moved about in and out of the shops and cabins; the
Christian indians worked industriously in the fields, while the
renegades lolled before a prominent teepee.

"This quiet looks bad," whispered Jonathan to Wetzel. No shouts were
heard; not a hostile Indian was seen to move.

"They've come to a decision," whispered Jonathan, and Wetzel
answered him:

"If they hev, the Christians don't know it."

An hour later the deep pealing of the church bell broke the silence.
The entire band of Christian Indians gathered near the large log
structure, and then marched in orderly form toward the maple grove
where the service was always held in pleasant weather. This movement
brought the Indians within several hundred yards of the cliff where
Zane and Wetzel lay concealed.

"There's Heckewelder walking with old man Wells," whispered
Jonathan. "There's Young and Edwards, and, yes, there's the young
missionary, brother of Joe. 'Pears to me they're foolish to hold
service in the face of all those riled Injuns."

"Wuss'n foolish," answered Wetzel.

"Look! By gum! As I'm a livin' sinner there comes the whole crowd of
hostile redskins. They've got their guns, and--by Gum! they're
painted. Looks bad, bad! Not much friendliness about that bunch!"

"They ain't intendin' to be peaceable."

"By gum! You're right. There ain't one of them settin' down. 'Pears
to me I know some of them redskins. There's Pipe, sure enough, and
Kotoxen. By gum! If there ain't Shingiss; he was friendly once."

"None of them's friendly."

"Look! Lew, look! Right behind Pipe. See that long war-bonnet. As
I'm a born sinner, that's your old friend, Wingenund. 'Pears to me
we've rounded up all our acquaintances."

The two bordermen lay close under the tall ferns and watched the
proceedings with sharp eyes. They saw the converted Indians seat
themselves before the platform. The crowd of hostile Indians
surrounded the glade on all sides, except on, which, singularly
enough, was next to the woods.

"Look thar!" exclaimed Wetzel, under his breath. He pointed off to
the right of the maple glade. Jonathan gazed in the direction
indicated, and saw two savages stealthily slipping through the
bushes, and behind trees. Presently these suspicious acting spies,
or scouts, stopped on a little knoll perhaps an hundred yards from
the glade.

Wetzel groaned.

"This ain't comfortable," growled Zane, in a low whisper. "Them red
devils are up to somethin' bad. They'd better not move round over
here."

The hunters, satisfied that the two isolated savages meant mischief,
turned their gaze once more toward the maple grove.

"Ah! Simon you white traitor! See him, Lew, comin' with his precious
gang," said Jonathan. "He's got the whole thing fixed, you can
plainly see that. Bill Elliott, McKee; and who's that renegade with
Jim Girty? I'll allow he must be the fellar we heard was with the
Chippewas. Tough lookin' customer; a good mate fer Jim Girty! A fine
lot of border-hawks!"

"Somethin' comin' off," whispered Wetzel, as Zane's low growl grew
unintelligible.

Jonathan felt, rather than saw, Wetzel tremble.

"The missionaries are consultin'. Ah! there comes one! Which? I
guess it's Edwards. By gum! who's that Injun stalkin' over from the
hostile bunch. Big chief, whoever he is. Blest if it ain't Half
King!"

The watchers saw the chief wave his arm and speak with evident
arrogance to Edwards, who, however, advanced to the platform and
raised his hand to address the Christians.

"Crack!"

A shot rang out from the thicket. Clutching wildly at his breast,
the missionary reeled back, staggered, and fell.

"One of those skulkin' redskins has killed Edwards," said Zane.
"But, no; he's not dead! He's gettin' up. Mebbe he ain't hurt bad.
By gum! there's Young comin' forward. Of all the fools!"

It was indeed true that Young had faced the Indians. Half King
addressed him as he had the other; but Young raised his hand and
began speaking.

"Crack!"

Another shot rang out. Young threw up his hands and fell heavily.
The missionaries rushed toward him. Mr. Wells ran round the group,
wringing his hands as if distracted.

"He's hard hit," hissed Zane, between his teeth. "You can tell that
by the way he fell."

Wetzel did not answer. He lay silent and motionless, his long body
rigid, and his face like marble.

"There comes the other young fellar--Joe's brother. He'll get
plugged, too," continued Zane, whispering rather to himself than to
his companion. "Oh, I hoped they'd show some sense! It's noble for
them to die for Christianity, but it won't do no good. By gum!
Heckewelder has pulled him back. Now, that's good judgment!"

Half King stepped before the Christians and addressed them. He held
in his hand a black war-club, which he wielded as he spoke.

Jonathan's attention was now directed from the maple grove to the
hunter beside him. He had heard a slight metallic click, as Wetzel
cocked his rifle. Then he saw the black barrel slowly rise.

"Listen, Lew. Mebbe it ain't good sense. We're after Girty, you
remember; and it's a long shot from here--full three hundred yards."

"You're right, Jack, you're right," answered Wetzel, breathing hard.

"Let's wait, and see what comes off."

"Jack, I can't do it. It'll make our job harder; but I can't help
it. I can put a bullet just over the Huron's left eye, an' I'm goin'
to do it."

"You can't do it, Lew; you can't! It's too far for any gun. Wait!
Wait!" whispered Jonathan, laying his hand on Wetzel's shoulder.

"Wait? Man, can't you see what the unnamable villain is doin'?"

"What?" asked Zane, turning his eyes again to the glade.

The converted Indians sat with bowed heads. Half King raised his
war-club, and threw it on the ground in front of them.

"He's announcin' the death decree!" hissed Wetzel.

"Well! if he ain't!"

Jonathan looked at Wetzel's face. Then he rose to his knees, as had
Wetzel, and tightened his belt. He knew that in another instant they
would be speeding away through the forest.

"Lew, my rifle's no good fer that distance. But mebbe yours is. You
ought to know. It's not sense, because there's Simon Girty, and
there's Jim, the men we're after. If you can hit one, you can
another. But go ahead, Lew. Plug that cowardly redskin!"

Wetzel knelt on one knee, and thrust the black rifle forward through
the fern leaves. Slowly the fatal barrel rose to a level, and became
as motionless as the immovable stones.

Jonathan fixed his keen gaze on the haughty countenance of Half King
as he stood with folded arms and scornful mien in front of the
Christians he had just condemned.

Even as the short, stinging crack of Wetzel's rifle broke the
silence, Jonathan saw the fierce expression of Half King's dark face
change to one of vacant wildness. His arms never relaxed from their
folded position. He fell, as falls a monarch of the forest trees, a
dead weight.



Chapter XXV.

"Please do not preach to-day," said Nell, raising her eyes
imploringly to Jim's face.

"Nellie, I must conduct the services as usual. I can not shirk my
duty, nor let these renegades see I fear to face them."

"I have such a queer feeling. I am afraid. I don't want to be left
alone. Please do not leave me."

Jim strode nervously up and down the length of the room. Nell's worn
face, her beseeching eyes and trembling hands touched his heart.
Rather than almost anything else, he desired to please her, to
strengthen her; yet how could he shirk his duty?

"Nellie, what is it you fear?" he asked, holding her hands tightly.

"Oh, I don't know what--everything. Uncle is growing weaker every
day. Look at Mr. Young; he is only a shadow of his former self, and
this anxiety is wearing Mr. Heckewelder out. He is more concerned
than he dares admit. You needn't shake your head, for I know it.
Then those Indians who are waiting, waiting--for God only knows
what! Worse than all to me, I saw that renegade, that fearful beast
who made way with poor dear Kate!"

Nell burst into tears, and leaned sobbing on Jim's shoulder.

"Nell, I've kept my courage only because of you," replied Jim, his
voice trembling slightly.

She looked up quickly. Something in the pale face which was bent
over her told that now, if ever, was the time for a woman to forget
herself, and to cheer, to inspire those around her.

"I am a silly baby, and selfish!" she cried, freeing herself from
his hold. "Always thinking of myself." She turned away and wiped the
tears from her eyes. "Go, Jim, do you duty; I'll stand by and help
you all a woman can."

                *       *       *

The missionaries were consulting in Heckewelder's cabin. Zeisberger
had returned that morning, and his aggressive, dominating spirit was
just what they needed in an hour like this. He raised the downcast
spirits of the ministers.

"Hold the service? I should say we will," he declared, waving his
hands. "What have we to be afraid of?"

"I do not know," answered Heckewelder, shaking his head doubtfully.
"I do not know what to fear. Girty himself told me he bore us no ill
will; but I hardly believe him. All this silence, this ominous
waiting perplexes, bewilders me."

"Gentlemen, our duty at least is plain," said Jim, impressively.
"The faith of these Christian Indians in us is so absolute that they
have no fear. They believe in God, and in us. These threatening
savages have failed signally to impress our Christians. If we do not
hold the service they will think we fear Girty, and that might have
a bad influence."

"I am in favor of postponing the preaching for a few days. I tell
you I am afraid of Girty's Indians, not for myself, but for these
Christians whom we love so well. I am afraid." Heckewelder's face
bore testimony to his anxious dread.

"You are our leader; we have but to obey," said Edwards. "Yet I
think we owe it to our converts to stick to our work until we are
forced by violence to desist."

"Ah! What form will that violence take?" cried Heckewelder, his face
white. "You cannot tell what these savages mean. I fear! I fear!"

"Listen, Heckewelder, you must remember we had this to go through
once before," put in Zeisberger earnestly. "In '78 Girty came down
on us like a wolf on the fold. He had not so many Indians at his
beck and call as now; but he harangued for days, trying to scare us
and our handful of Christians. He set his drunken fiends to frighten
us, and he failed. We stuck it out and won. He's trying the same
game. Let us stand against him, and hold our services as usual. We
should trust in God!"

"Never give up!" cried Jim.

"Gentlemen, you are right; you shame me, even though I feel that I
understand the situation and its dread possibilities better than any
one of you. Whatever befalls we'll stick to our post. I thank you
for reviving the spirit in my cowardly heart. We will hold the
service to-day as usual and to make it more impressive, each shall
address the congregation in turn."

"And, if need be, we will give our lives for our Christians," said
Young, raising his pale face.

                *       *       *

The deep mellow peals of the church bell awoke the slumbering
echoes. Scarcely had its melody died away in the forest when a line
of Indians issued from the church and marched toward the maple
grove. Men, women, youths, maidens and children.

Glickhican, the old Delaware chief, headed the line. His step was
firm, his head erect, his face calm in its noble austerity. His
followers likewise expressed in their countenances the steadfastness
of their belief. The maidens' heads were bowed, but with shyness,
not fear. The children were happy, their bright faces expressive of
the joy they felt in the anticipation of listening to their beloved
teachers.

This procession passed between rows of painted savages, standing
immovable, with folded arms, and somber eyes.

No sooner had the Christians reached the maple grove, when from all
over the clearing appeared hostile Indians, who took positions near
the knoll where the missionaries stood.

Heckewelder's faithful little band awaited him on the platform. The
converted Indians seated themselves as usual at the foot of the
knoll. The other savages crowded closely on both sides. They carried
their weapons, and maintained the same silence that had so
singularly marked their mood of the last twenty-four hours. No human
skill could have divined their intention. This coldness might be
only habitual reserve, and it might be anything else.

Heckewelder approached at the same time that Simon Girty and his
band of renegades appeared. With the renegades were Pipe and Half
King. These two came slowly across the clearing, passed through the
opening in the crowd, and stopped close to the platform.

Heckewelder went hurriedly up to his missionaries. He seemed beside
himself with excitement, and spoke with difficulty.

"Do not preach to-day. I have been warned again," he said, in a low
voice.

"Do you forbid it?" inquired Edwards.

"No, no. I have not that authority, but I implore it. Wait, wait
until the Indians are in a better mood."

Edwards left the group, and, stepping upon the platform, faced the
Christians.

At the same moment Half King stalked majestically from before his
party. He carried no weapon save a black, knotted war-club. A
surging forward of the crowd of savages behind him showed the
intense interest which his action had aroused. He walked forward
until he stood half way between the platform and the converts. He
ran his evil glance slowly over the Christians, and then rested it
upon Edwards.

"Half King's orders are to be obeyed. Let the paleface keep his
mouth closed," he cried in the Indian tongue. The imperious command
came as a thunderbolt from a clear sky. The missionaries behind
Edwards stood bewildered, awaiting the outcome.

But Edwards, without a moment's hesitation, calmly lifted his hand
and spoke.

"Beloved Christians, we meet to-day as we have met before, as we
hope to meet in---"

"Spang!"

The whistling of a bullet over the heads of the Christians
accompanied the loud report of a rifle. All presently plainly heard
the leaden missile strike. Edwards wheeled, clutching his side,
breathed hard, and then fell heavily without uttering a cry. He had
been shot by an Indian concealed in the thicket.

For a moment no one moved, nor spoke. The missionaries were stricken
with horror; the converts seemed turned to stone, and the hostile
throng waited silently, as they had for hours.

"He's shot! He's shot! Oh, I feared this!" cried Heckewelder,
running forward. The missionaries followed him. Edwards was lying on
his back, with a bloody hand pressed to his side.

"Dave, Dave, how is it with you?" asked Heckewelder, in a voice low
with fear.

"Not bad. It's too far out to be bad, but it knocked me over,"
answered Edwards, weakly. "Give me--water."

They carried him from the platform, and laid him on the grass under
a tree.

Young pressed Edwards' hand; he murmured something that sounded like
a prayer, and then walked straight upon the platform, as he raised
his face, which was sublime with a white light.

"Paleface! Back!" roared Half King, as he waved his war-club.

"You Indian dog! Be silent!"

Young's clear voice rolled out on the quiet air so imperiously, so
powerful in its wonderful scorn and passion, that the hostile
savages were overcome by awe, and the Christians thrilled anew with
reverential love.

Young spoke again in a voice which had lost its passion, and was
singularly sweet in its richness.

"Beloved Christians, if it is God's will that we must die to prove
our faith, then as we have taught you how to live, so we can show
you how to die---"

"Spang!"

Again a whistling sound came with the bellow of an overcharged
rifle; again the sickening thud of a bullet striking flesh.

Young fell backwards from the platform.

The missionaries laid him beside Edwards, and then stood in
shuddering silence. A smile shone on Young's pale face; a stream of
dark blood welled from his breast. His lips moved; he whispered:

"I ask no more--God's will."

Jim looked down once at his brother missionaries; then with blanched
face, but resolute and stern, he marched toward the platform.

Heckewelder ran after him, and dragged him back.

"No! no! no! My God! Would you be killed? Oh! I tried to prevent
this!" cried Heckewelder, wringing his hands.

One long, fierce, exultant yell pealed throughout the grove. It came
from those silent breasts in which was pent up hatred; it greeted
this action which proclaimed victory over the missionaries.

All eyes turned on Half King. With measured stride he paced to and
fro before the Christian Indians.

Neither cowering nor shrinking marked their manner; to a man, to a
child, they rose with proud mien, heads erect and eyes flashing.
This mighty chief with his blood-thirsty crew could burn the Village
of Peace, could annihilate the Christians, but he could never change
their hope and trust in God.

"Blinded fools!" cried Half King. "The Huron is wise; he tells no
lies. Many moons ago he told the Christians they were sitting half
way between two angry gods, who stood with mouths open wide and
looking ferociously at each other. If they did not move back out of
the road they would be ground to powder by the teeth of one or the
other, or both. Half King urged them to leave the peaceful village,
to forget the paleface God; to take their horses, and flocks, and
return to their homes. The Christians scorned the Huron King's
counsel. The sun has set for the Village of Peace. The time has
come. Pipe and the Huron are powerful. They will not listen to the
paleface God. They will burn the Village of Peace. Death to the
Christians!"

Half King threw the black war-club with a passionate energy on the
grass before the Indians.

They heard this decree of death with unflinching front. Even the
children were quiet. Not a face paled, not an eye was lowered.

Half King cast their doom in their teeth. The Christians eyed him
with unspoken scorn.

"My God! My God! It is worse than I thought!" moaned Heckewelder.
"Utter ruin! Murder! Murder!"

In the momentary silence which followed his outburst, a tiny cloud
of blue-white smoke came from the ferns overhanging a cliff.

Crack!

All heard the shot of a rifle; all noticed the difference between
its clear, ringing intonation and the loud reports of the other two.
All distinctly heard the zip of a bullet as it whistled over their
heads.

All? No, not all. One did not hear that speeding bullet. He who was
the central figure in this tragic scene, he who had doomed the
Christians might have seen that tiny puff of smoke which heralded
his own doom, but before the ringing report could reach his ears a
small blue hole appeared, as if by magic, over his left eye, and
pulse, and sense, and life had fled forever.

Half King, great, cruel chieftain, stood still for an instant as if
he had been an image of stone; his haughty head lost its erect
poise, the fierceness seemed to fade from his dark face, his proud
plume waved gracefully as he swayed to and fro, and then fell before
the Christians, inert and lifeless.

No one moved; it was as if no one breathed. The superstitious
savages awaited fearfully another rifle shot; another lightning
stroke, another visitation from the paleface's God.

But Jim Girty, with a cunning born of his terrible fear, had
recognized the ring of that rifle. He had felt the zip of a bullet
which could just as readily have found his brain as Half King's. He
had stood there as fair a mark as the cruel Huron, yet the Avenger
had not chosen him. Was he reserved for a different fate? Was not
such a death too merciful for the frontier Deathshead? He yelled in
his craven fear:

"Le vent de la Mort!"

The well known, dreaded appellation aroused the savages from a
fearful stupor into a fierce manifestation of hatred. A tremendous
yell rent the air. Instantly the scene changed.



Chapter XXVI.

In the confusion the missionaries carried Young and Edwards into Mr.
Wells' cabin. Nell's calm, white face showed that she had expected
some such catastrophe as this, but she of all was the least excited.
Heckewelder left them at the cabin and hurried away to consult
Captain Williamson. While Zeisberger, who was skilled in surgery,
attended to the wounded men, Jim barred the heavy door, shut the
rude, swinging windows, and made the cabin temporarily a refuge from
prowling savages.

Outside the clamor increased. Shrill yells rent the air, long,
rolling war-cries sounded above all the din. The measured stamp of
moccasined feet, the rush of Indians past the cabin, the dull thud
of hatchets struck hard into the trees--all attested to the
excitement of the savages, and the imminence of terrible danger.

In the front room of Mr. Wells' cabin Edwards lay on a bed, his face
turned to the wall, and his side exposed. There was a bloody hole in
his white skin. Zeisberger was probing for the bullet. He had no
instruments, save those of his own manufacture, and they were
darning needles with bent points, and a long knife-blade ground
thin.

"There, I have it," said Zeisberger. "Hold still, Dave. There!" As
Edwards moaned Zeisberger drew forth the bloody bullet. "Jim, wash
and dress this wound. It isn't bad. Dave will be all right in a
couple of days. Now I'll look at George."

Zeisberger hurried into the other room. Young lay with quiet face
and closed eyes, breathing faintly. Zeisberger opened the wounded
man's shirt and exposed the wound, which was on the right side,
rather high up. Nell, who had followed Zeisberger that she might be
of some assistance if needed, saw him look at the wound and then
turn a pale face away for a second. That hurried, shuddering
movement of the sober, practical missionary was most significant.
Then he bent over Young and inserted on of the probes into the
wound. He pushed the steel an inch, two, three, four inches into
Young's breast, but the latter neither moved nor moaned. Zeisberger
shook his head, and finally removed the instrument. He raised the
sufferer's shoulder to find the bed saturated with blood. The bullet
wound extended completely through the missionary's body, and was
bleeding from the back. Zeisberger folded strips of linsey cloth
into small pads and bound them tightly over both apertures of the
wound.

"How is he?" asked Jim, when the amateur surgeon returned to the
other room, and proceeded to wash the blood from his hands.

Zeisberger shook his head gloomily.

"How is George?" whispered Edwards, who had heard Jim's question.

"Shot through the right lung. Human skill can not aid him! Only God
can save."

"Didn't I hear a third shot?" whispered Dave, gazing round with sad,
questioning eyes. "Heckewelder?"

"Is safe. He has gone to see Williamson. You did hear a third shot.
Half King fell dead with a bullet over his left eye. He had just
folded his arms in a grand pose after his death decree to the
Christians."

"A judgment of God!"

"It does seem so, but it came in the form of leaden death from
Wetzel's unerring rifle. Do you hear all that yelling? Half King's
death has set the Indians wild."

There was a gentle knock at the door, and then the word, "Open," in
Heckewelder's voice.

Jim unbarred the door. Heckewelder came in carrying over his
shoulder what apparently was a sack of meal. He was accompanied by
young Christy. Heckewelder put the bag down, opened it, and lifted
out a little Indian boy. The child gazed round with fearful eyes.

"Save Benny! Save Benny!" he cried, running to Nell, and she clasped
him closely in her arms.

Heckewelder's face was like marble as he asked concerning Edwards'
condition.

"I'm not badly off," said the missionary with a smile.

"How's George?" whispered Heckewelder.

No one answered him. Zeisberger raised his hands. All followed
Heckewelder into the other room, where Young lay in the same
position as when first brought in. Heckewelder stood gazing down
into the wan face with its terribly significant smile.

"I brought him out here. I persuaded him to come!" whispered
Heckewelder. "Oh, Almighty God!" he cried. His voice broke, and his
prayer ended with the mute eloquence of clasped hands and uplifted,
appealing face.

"Come out," said Zeisberger, leading him into the larger room. The
others followed, and Jim closed the door.

"What's to be done?" said Zeisberger, with his practical common
sense. "What did Williamson say? Tell us what you learned?"

"Wait--directly," answered Heckewelder, sitting down and covering
his face with his hands. There was a long silence. At length he
raised his white face and spoke calmly:

"Gentlemen, the Village of Peace is doomed. I entreated Captain
Williamson to help us, but he refused. Said he dared not interfere.
I prayed that he would speak at least a word to Girty, but he denied
my request."

"Where are the converts?"

"Imprisoned in the church, every one of them except Benny. Mr.
Christy and I hid the child in the meal sack and were thus able to
get him here. We must save him."

"Save him?" asked Nell, looking from Heckewelder to the trembling
Indian boy.

"Nellie, the savages have driven all our Christians into the church,
and shut them up there, until Girty and his men shall give the word
to complete their fiendish design. The converts asked but one
favor--an hour in which to pray. It was granted. The savages intend
to murder them all."

"Oh! Horrible! Monstrous!" cried Nell. "How can they be so inhuman?"
She lifted Benny up in her arms. "They'll never get you, my boy.
We'll save you--I'll save you!" The child moaned and clung to her
neck.

"They are scouring the clearing now for Christians, and will search
all the cabins. I'm positive."

"Will they come here?" asked Nell, turning her blazing eyes on
Heckewelder.

"Undoubtedly. We must try to hide Benny. Let me think; where would
be a good place? We'll try a dark corner of the loft."

"No, no," cried Nell.

"Put Benny in Young's bed," suggested Jim.

"No, no," cried Nell.

"Put him in a bucket and let him down in the well," whispered
Edwards, who had listened intently to the conversation.

"That's a capital place," said Heckewelder. "But might he not fall
out and drown?"

"Tie him in the bucket," said Jim.

"No, no, no," cried Nell.

"But Nellie, we must decide upon a hiding place, and in a hurry."

"I'll save Benny."

"You? Will you stay here to face those men? Jim Girty and Deering
are searching the cabins. Could you bear it to see them? You
couldn't."

"Oh! No, I believe it would kill me! That man! that beast! will he
come here?" Nell grew ghastly pale, and looked as if about to faint.
She shrunk in horror at the thought of again facing Girty. "For
God's sake, Heckewelder, don't let him see me! Don't let him come
in! Don't!"

Even as the imploring voice ceased a heavy thump sounded on the
door.

"Who's there?" demanded Heckewelder.

Thump! Thump!

The heavy blows shook the cabin. The pans rattled on the shelves. No
answer came from without.

"Quick! Hide Benny! It's as much as our lives are worth to have him
found here," cried Heckewelder in a fierce whisper, as he darted
toward the door.

"All right, all right, in a moment," he called out, fumbling over
the bar.

He opened the door a moment later and when Jim Girty and Deering
entered he turned to his friends with a dread uncertainty in his
haggard face.

Edwards lay on the bed with wide-open eyes staring at the intruders.
Mr. Wells sat with bowed head. Zeisberger calmly whittled a stick,
and Jim stood bolt upright, with a hard light in his eyes.

Nell leaned against the side of a heavy table. Wonderful was the
change that had transformed her from a timid, appealing,
fear-agonized girl to a woman whose only evidence of unusual
excitement were the flame in her eyes and the peculiar whiteness of
her face.

Benny was gone!

Heckewelder's glance returned to the visitors. He thought he had
never seen such brutal, hideous men.

"Wal, I reckon a preacher ain't agoin' to lie. Hev you seen any
Injun Christians round here?" asked Girty, waving a heavy
sledge-hammer.

"Girty, we have hidden no Indians here," answered Heckewelder,
calmly.

"Wal, we'll hev a look, anyway," answered the renegade.

Girty surveyed the room with wolfish eyes. Deering was so drunk that
he staggered. Both men, in fact, reeked with the vile fumes of rum.
Without another word they proceeded to examine the room, by looking
into every box, behind a stone oven, and in the cupboard. They drew
the bedclothes from the bed, and with a kick demolished a pile of
stove wood. Then the ruffians passed into the other apartments,
where they could be heard making thorough search. At length both
returned to the large room, when Girty directed Deering to climb a
ladder leading to the loft, but because Deering was too much under
the influence of liquor to do so, he had to go himself. He rummaged
around up there for a few minutes, and then came down.

"Wal, I reckon you wasn't lyin' about it," said Girty, with his
ghastly leer.

He and his companion started to go out. Deering had stood with
bloodshot eyes fixed on Nell while Girty searched the loft, and as
they passed the girl on their way to the open air, the renegade
looked at Girty as he motioned with his head toward her. His
besotted face expressed some terrible meaning.

Girty had looked at Nell when he first entered, but had not glanced
twice at her. As he turned now, before going out of the door, he
fixed on her his baleful glance. His aspect was more full of meaning
than could have been any words. A horrible power, of which he was
boastfully conscious, shone from his little, pointed eyes. His mere
presence was deadly. Plainly as if he had spoken was the
significance of his long gaze. Any one could have translated that
look.

Once before Nell had faced it, and fainted when its dread meaning
grew clear to her. But now she returned his gaze with one in which
flashed lightning scorn, and repulsion, in which glowed a wonderful
defiance.

The cruel face of this man, the boastful barbarity of his manner,
the long, dark, bloody history which his presence recalled, was,
indeed, terrifying without the added horror of his intent toward
her, but now the self-forgetfulness of a true woman sustained her.

Girty and Deering backed out of the door. Heckewelder closed it, and
dropped the bar in place.

Nell fell over the table with a long, low gasp. Then with one hand
she lifted her skirt. Benny walked from under it. His big eyes were
bright. The young woman clasped him again in her arms. Then she
released him, and, laboring under intense excitement, ran to the
window.

"There he goes! Oh, the horrible beast! If I only had a gun and
could shoot! Oh, if only I were a man! I'd kill him. To think of
poor Kate! Ah! he intends the same for me!"

Suddenly she fell upon the floor in a faint. Mr. Wells and Jim
lifted her on the bed beside Edwards, where they endeavored to
revive her. It was some moments before she opened her eyes.

Jim sat holding Nell's hand. Mr. Wells again bowed his head.
Zeisberger continued to whittle a stick, and Heckewelder paced the
floor. Christy stood by with every evidence of sympathy for this
distracted group. Outside the clamor increased.

"Just listen!" cried Heckewelder. "Did you ever hear the like? All
drunk, crazy, fiendish! They drank every drop of liquor the French
traders had. Curses on the vagabond dealers! Rum has made these
renegades and savages wild. Oh! my poor, innocent Christians!"

Heckewelder leaned his head against the mantle-shelf. He had broken
down at last. Racking sobs shook his frame.

"Are you all right again?" asked Jim of Nell.

"Yes."

"I am going out, first to see Williamson, and then the Christians,"
he said, rising very pale, but calm.

"Don't go!" cried Heckewelder. "I have tried everything. It was all
of no use."

"I will go," answered Jim.

"Yes, Jim, go," whispered Nell, looking up into his eyes. It was an
earnest gaze in which a faint hope shone.

Jim unbarred the door and went out.

"Wait, I'll go along," cried Zeisberger, suddenly dropping his knife
and stick.

As the two men went out a fearful spectacle met their eyes. The
clearing was alive with Indians. But such Indians! They were painted
demons, maddened by rum. Yesterday they had been silent; if they
moved at all it had been with deliberation and dignity. To-day they
were a yelling, running, blood-seeking mob.

"Awful! Did you ever see human beings like these?" asked Zeisberger.

"No, no!"

"I saw such a frenzy once before, but, of course, only in a small
band of savages. Many times have I seen Indians preparing for the
war-path, in search of both white men and redskins. They were fierce
then, but nothing like this. Every one of these frenzied fiends is
honest. Think of that! Every man feels it his duty to murder these
Christians. Girty has led up to this by cunning, and now the time is
come to let them loose."

"It means death for all."

"I have given up any thought of escaping," said Zeisberger, with the
calmness that had characterized his manner since he returned to the
village. "I shall try to get into the church."

"I'll join you there as soon as I see Williamson."

Jim walked rapidly across the clearing to the cabin where Captain
Williamson had quarters. The frontiersmen stood in groups, watching
the savages with an interest which showed little or no concern.

"I want to see Captain Williamson," said Jim to a frontiersman on
guard at the cabin door.

"Wal, he's inside," drawled the man.

Jim thought the voice familiar, and he turned sharply to see the
sun-burnt features of Jeff Lynn, the old riverman who had taken Mr.
Wells' party to Fort Henry.

"Why, Lynn! I'm glad to see you," exclaimed Jim.

"Purty fair to middlin'," answered Jeff, extending his big hand.
"Say, how's the other one, your brother as wus called Joe?"

"I don't know. He ran off with Wetzel, was captured by Indians, and
when I last heard of him he had married Wingenund's daughter."

"Wal, I'll be dog-goned!" Jeff shook his grizzled head and slapped
his leg. "I jest knowed he'd raise somethin'."

"I'm in a hurry. Do you think Captain Williamson will stand still
and let all this go on?"

"I'm afeerd so."

Evidently the captain heard the conversation, for he appeared at the
cabin door, smoking a long pipe.

"Captain Williamson, I have come to entreat you to save the
Christians from this impending massacre."

"I can't do nuthin'," answered Williamson, removing his pipe to puff
forth a great cloud of smoke.

"You have eighty men here!"

"If we interfered Pipe would eat us alive in three minutes. You
preacher fellows don't understand this thing. You've got Pipe and
Girty to deal with. If you don't know them, you'll be better
acquainted by sundown."

"I don't care who they are. Drunken ruffians and savages! That's
enough. Will you help us? We are men of your own race, and we come
to you for help. Can you withhold it?"

"I won't hev nuthin' to do with this bizness. The chiefs hev
condemned the village, an' it'll hev to go. If you fellars hed been
careful, no white blood would hev been spilled. I advise you all to
lay low till it's over."

"Will you let me speak to your men, to try and get them to follow
me?"

"Heckewelder asked that same thing. He was persistent, and I took a
vote fer him just to show how my men stood. Eighteen of them said
they'd follow him; the rest wouldn't interfere."

"Eighteen! My God!" cried Jim, voicing the passion which consumed
him. "You are white men, yet you will stand by and see these
innocent people murdered! Man, where's your humanity? Your manhood?
These converted Indians are savages no longer, they are Christians.
Their children are as good, pure, innocent as your own. Can you
remain idle and see these little ones murdered?"

Williamson made no answer, the men who had crowded round were
equally silent. Not one lowered his head. Many looked at the
impassioned missionary; others gazed at the savages who were
circling around the trees brandishing their weapons. If any pitied
the unfortunate Christians, none showed it. They were indifferent,
with the indifference of men hardened to cruel scenes.

Jim understood, at last, as he turned from face to face to find
everywhere that same imperturbability. These bordermen were like
Wetzel and Jonathan Zane. The only good Indian was a dead Indian.
Years of war and bloodshed, of merciless cruelty at the hands of
redmen, of the hard, border life had rendered these frontiersmen
incapable of compassion for any savage.

Jim no longer restrained himself.

"Bordermen you may be, but from my standpoint, from any man's, from
God's, you are a lot of coldly indifferent cowards!" exclaimed Jim,
with white, quivering lips. "I understand now. Few of you will risk
anything for Indians. You will not believe a savage can be a
Christian. You don't care if they are all murdered. Any man among
you--any man, I say--would step out before those howling fiends and
boldly demand that there be no bloodshed. A courageous leader with a
band of determined followers could avert this tragedy. You might
readily intimidate yonder horde of drunken demons. Captain
Williamson, I am only a minister, far removed from a man of war and
leader, as you claim to be, but, sir, I curse you as a miserable
coward. If I ever get back to civilization I'll brand this inhuman
coldness of yours, as the most infamous and dastardly cowardice that
ever disgraced a white man. You are worse than Girty!"

Williamson turned a sickly yellow; he fumbled a second with the
handle of his tomahawk, but made no answer. The other bordermen
maintained the same careless composure. What to them was the raving
of a mad preacher?

Jim saw it and turned baffled, fiercely angry, and hopeless. As he
walked away Jeff Lynn took his arm, and after they were clear of the
crowd of frontiersmen he said:

"Young feller, you give him pepper, an' no mistake. An' mebbe you're
right from your side the fence. But you can't see the Injuns from
our side. We hunters hevn't much humanity--I reckon that's what you
called it--but we've lost so many friends an' relatives, an' hearn
of so many murders by the reddys that we look on all of 'em as wild
varmints that should be killed on sight. Now, mebbe it'll interest
you to know I was the feller who took the vote Williamson told you
about, an' I did it 'cause I had an interest in you. I wus watchin'
you when Edwards and the other missionary got shot. I like grit in a
man, an' I seen you had it clear through. So when Heckewelder comes
over I talked to the fellers, an' all I could git interested was
eighteen, but they wanted to fight simply fer fightin' sake. Now,
ole Jeff Lynn is your friend. You just lay low until this is over."

Jim thanked the old riverman and left him. He hardly knew which way
to turn. He would make one more effort. He crossed the clearing to
where the renegades' teepee stood. McKee and Elliott were sitting on
a log. Simon Girty stood beside them, his hard, keen, roving eyes on
the scene. The missionary was impressed by the white leader. There
was a difference in his aspect, a wilder look than the others wore,
as if the man had suddenly awakened to the fury of his Indians.
Nevertheless the young man went straight toward him.

"Girty, I come---"

"Git out! You meddlin' preacher!" yelled the renegade, shaking his
fist at Jim.

Simon Girty was drunk.

Jim turned from the white fiends. He knew his life to them was not
worth a pinch of powder.

"Lost! Lost! All lost!" he exclaimed in despair.

As he went toward the church he saw hundreds of savages bounding
over the grass, brandishing weapons and whooping fiendishly. They
were concentrating around Girty's teepee, where already a great
throng had congregated. Of all the Indians to be seen not one
walked. They leaped by Jim, and ran over the grass nimble as deer.

He saw the eager, fire in their dusky eyes, and the cruelly clenched
teeth like those of wolves when they snarl. He felt the hissing
breath of many savages as they raced by him. More than one whirled a
tomahawk close to Jim's head, and uttered horrible yells in his ear.
They were like tigers lusting for blood.

Jim hurried to the church. Not an Indian was visible near the log
structure. Even the savage guards had gone. He entered the open door
to be instantly struck with reverence and awe.

The Christians were singing.

Miserable and full of sickening dread though Jim was, he could not
but realize that the scene before him was one of extraordinary
beauty and pathos. The doomed Indians lifted up their voices in
song. Never had they sung so feelingly, so harmoniously.

When the song ended Zeisberger, who stood upon a platform, opened
his Bible and read:

"In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord, thy
Redeemer."

In a voice low and tremulous the venerable missionary began his
sermon.

The shadow of death hovered over these Christian martyrs; it was
reflected in their somber eyes, yet not one was sullen or sad. The
children who were too young to understand, but instinctively feeling
the tragedy soon to be enacted there, cowered close to their
mothers.

Zeisberger preached a touching and impressive, though short, sermon.
At its conclusion the whole congregation rose and surrounded the
missionary. The men shook his hands, the women kissed them, the
children clung to his legs. It was a wonderful manifestation of
affection.

Suddenly Glickhican, the old Delaware chief, stepped on the
platform, raised his hand and shouted one Indian word.

A long, low wail went up from the children and youths; the women
slowly, meekly bowed their heads. The men, due to the stoicism of
their nature and the Christianity they had learned, stood proudly
erect awaiting the death that had been decreed.

Glickhican pulled the bell rope.

A deep, mellow tone pealed out.

The sound transfixed all the Christians. No one moved.

Glickhican had given the signal which told the murderers the
Christians were ready.

"Come, man, my God! We can't stay here!" cried Jim to Zeisberger.

As they went out both men turned to look their last on the martyrs.
The death knell which had rung in the ears of the Christians, was to
them the voice of God. Stern, dark visages of men and the sweet,
submissive faces of women were uplifted with rapt attention. A light
seemed to shine from these faces as if the contemplation of God had
illumined them.

As Zeisberger and Jim left the church and hurried toward the cabins,
they saw the crowd of savages in a black mass round Girty's teepee.
The yelling and leaping had ceased.

Heckewelder opened the door. Evidently he had watched for them.

"Jim! Jim!" cried Nell, when he entered the cabin. "Oh-h! I was
afraid. Oh! I am glad you're back safe. See, this noble Indian has
come to help us."

Wingenund stood calm and erect by the door.

"Chief, what will you do?"

"Wingenund will show you the way to the big river," answered the
chieftain, in his deep bass.

"Run away? No, never! That would be cowardly. Heckewelder, you would
not go? Nor you, Zeisberger? We may yet be of use, we may yet save
some of the Christians."

"Save the yellow-hair," sternly said Wingenund.

"Oh, Jim, you don't understand. The chief has come to warn me of
Girty. He intends to take me as he has others, as he did poor Kate.
did you not see the meaning in his eyes to-day? How they scorched
me! Ho! Jim, take me away! Save me! Do not leave me here to that
horrible fate? Oh! Jim, take me away!"

"Nell, I will take you," cried Jim, grasping her hands.

"Hurry! There's a blanket full of things I packed for you," said
Heckewelder. "Lose no time. Ah! hear that! My Heavens! what a yell!"
Heckewelder rushed to the door and looked out. "There they go, a
black mob of imps; a pack of hungry wolves! Jim Girty is in the
lead. How he leaps! How he waves his sledge! He leads the savages
toward the church. Oh! it's the end!"

"Benny? Where's Benny?" cried Jim, hurriedly lacing the hunting coat
he had flung about him.

"Benny's safe. I've hidden him. I'll get him away from here,"
answered young Christy. "Go! Now's your time. Godspeed you!"

"I'm ready," declared Mr. Wells. "I--have--finished!"

"There goes Wingenund! He's running. Follow him, quick! Good-by!
Good-by! God be with you!" cried Heckewelder.

"Good-by! Good-by!"

Jim hurried Nell toward the bushes where Wingenund's tall form could
dimly be seen. Mr. Wells followed them. On the edge of the clearing
Jim and Nell turned to look back.

They saw a black mass of yelling, struggling, fighting savages
crowding around the church.

"Oh! Jim, look back! Look back!" cried Nell, holding hard to his
hand. "Look back! See if Girty is coming!"



Chapter XXVII.

At last the fugitives breathed free under the gold and red cover of
the woods. Never speaking, never looking back, the guide hurried
eastward with long strides. His followers were almost forced to run
in order to keep him in sight. He had waited at the edge of the
clearing for them, and, relieving Jim of the heavy pack, which he
swung slightly over his shoulder, he set a pace that was most
difficult to maintain. The young missionary half led, half carried
Nell over the stones and rough places. Mr. Wells labored in the
rear.

"Oh! Jim! Look back! Look back! See if we are pursued!" cried Nell
frequently, with many a earful glance into the dense thickets.

The Indian took a straight course through the woods. He leaped the
brooks, climbed the rough ridges, and swiftly trod the glades that
were free of windfalls. His hurry and utter disregard for the plain
trail left behind, proved his belief in the necessity of placing
many miles between the fugitives and the Village of Peace. Evidently
they would be followed, and it would be a waste of valuable time to
try to conceal their trail. Gradually the ground began to rise, the
way become more difficult, but Wingenund never slackened his pace.
Nell was strong, supple, and light of foot. She held her own with
Jim, but time and time again they were obliged to wait for her
uncle. Once he was far behind. Wingenund halted for them at the
height of a ridge where the forest was open.

"Ugh!" exclaimed the chieftain, as they finished the ascent. He
stretched a long arm toward the sun; his falcon eye gleamed.

Far in the west a great black and yellow cloud of smoke rolled
heavenward. It seemed to rise from out the forest, and to hang low
over the trees; then it soared aloft and grew thinner until it lost
its distinct line far in the clouds. The setting sun stood yet an
hour high over a distant hill, and burned dark red through the great
pall of smoke.

"Is it a forest fire?" asked Nell, fearfully.

"Fire, of course, but---" Jim did not voice his fear; he looked
closely at Wingenund.

The chieftain stood silent a moment as was his wont when addressed.
The dull glow of the sun was reflected in the dark eyes that gazed
far away over forest and field.

"Fire," said Wingenund, and it seemed that as he spoke a sterner
shadow flitted across his bronzed face. "The sun sets to-night over
the ashes of the Village of Peace."

He resumed his rapid march eastward. With never a backward glance
the saddened party followed. Nell kept close beside Jim, and the old
man tramped after them with bowed head. The sun set, but Wingenund
never slackened his stride. Twilight deepened, yet he kept on.

"Indian, we can go no further to-night, we must rest," cried Jim, as
Nell stumbled against him, and Mr. Wells panted wearily in the rear.

"Rest soon," replied the chief, and kept on.

Darkness had settled down when Wingenund at last halted. The
fugitives could see little in the gloom, but they heard the music of
running water, and felt soft moss beneath their feet.

They sank wearily down upon a projecting stone. The moss was restful
to their tired limbs. Opening the pack they found food with which to
satisfy the demands of hunger. Then, close under the stone, the
fugitives sank into slumber while the watchful Indian stood silent
and motionless.

Jim thought he had but just closed his eyes when he felt a gentle
pressure on his arm.

"Day is here," said the Indian.

Jim opened his eyes to see the bright red sun crimsoning the eastern
hills, and streaming gloriously over the colored forests. He raised
himself on his elbow to look around. Nell was still asleep. The
blanket was tucked close to her chin. Her chestnut hair was tumbled
like a schoolgirl's; she looked as fresh and sweet as the morning.

"Nell, Nell, wake up," said Jim, thinking the while how he would
love to kiss those white eyelids.

Nell's eyes opened wide; a smile lay deep in their hazel shadows.

"Where a I? Oh, I remember," she cried, sitting up. "Oh, Jim, I had
such a sweet dream. I was at home with mother and Kate. Oh, to wake
and find it all a dream! I am fleeing for life. But, Jim, we are
safe, are we not?"

"Another day, and we'll be safe."

"Let us fly," she cried, leaping up and shaking out her crumpled
skirt. "Uncle, come!"

Mr. Wells lay quietly with his mild blue eyes smiling up at her. He
neither moved nor spoke.

"Eat, drink," said the chief, opening the pack.

"What a beautiful place," exclaimed Nell, taking the bread and meat
handed to her. "This is a lovely little glade. Look at those golden
flowers, the red and purple leaves, the brown shining moss, and
those lichen-covered stones. Why! Some one has camped here. See the
little cave, the screens of plaited ferns, and the stone fireplace."

"It seems to me this dark spring and those gracefully spreading
branches are familiar," said Jim.

"Beautiful Spring," interposed Wingenund.

"Yes, I know this place," cried Nell excitedly. "I remember this
glade though it was moonlight when I saw it. Here Wetzel rescued me
from Girty."

"Nell, you're right," replied Jim. "How strange we should run across
this place again."

Strange fate, indeed, which had brought them again to Beautiful
Spring! It was destined that the great scenes of their lives were to
be enacted in this mossy glade.

"Come, uncle, you are lazy," cried Nell, a touch of her old
roguishness making playful her voice.

Mr. Wells lay still, and smiled up at them.

"You are not ill?" cried Nell, seeing for the first time how pallid
was his face.

"Dear Nellie, I am not ill. I do not suffer, but I am dying," he
answered, again with that strange, sweet smile.

"Oh-h-h!" breathed Nell, falling on her knees.

"No, no, Mr. Wells, you are only weak; you will be all right again
soon," cried Jim.

"Jim, Nellie, I have known all night. I have lain here wakeful. My
heart never was strong. It gave out yesterday, and now it is slowly
growing weaker. Put your hand on my breast. Feel. Ah! you see! My
life is flickering. God's will be done. I am content. My work is
finished. My only regret is that I brought you out to this terrible
borderland. But I did not know. If only I could see you safe from
the peril of this wilderness, at home, happy, married."

Nell bent over him blinded by her tears, unable to see or speak,
crushed by this last overwhelming blow. Jim sat on the other side of
the old missionary, holding his hand. For many moments neither
spoke. They glanced at the pale face, watching with eager, wistful
eyes for a smile, or listening for a word.

"Come," said the Indian.

Nell silently pointed toward her uncle.

"He is dying," whispered Jim to the Indian.

"Go, leave me," murmured Mr. Wells. "You are still in danger."

"We'll not leave you," cried Jim.

"No, no, no," sobbed Nell, bending over to kiss him.

"Nellie, may I marry you to Jim?" whispered Mr. Wells into her ear.
"He has told me how it is with him. He loves you, Nellie. I'd die
happier knowing I'd left you with him."

Even at that moment, with her heart almost breaking, Nell's fair
face flushed.

"Nell, will you marry me?" asked Jim, softly. Low though it was, he
had heard Mr. Wells' whisper.

Nell stretched a little trembling hand over her uncle to Jim, who
inclosed it in his own. Her eyes met his. Through her tears shone
faintly a light, which, but for the agony that made it dim, would
have beamed radiant.

"Find the place," said Mr. Wells, handing Jim a Bible. It was the
one he always carried in his pocket.

With trembling hand Jim turned the leaves. At last he found the
lines, and handed the book back to the old man.

Simple, sweet and sad was that marriage service. Nell and Jim knelt
with hands clasped over Mr. Wells. The old missionary's voice was
faint; Nell's responses were low, and Jim answered with deep and
tender feeling. Beside them stood Wingenund, a dark, magnificent
figure.

"There! May God bless you!" murmured Mr. Wells, with a happy smile,
closing the Bible.

"Nell, my wife!" whispered Jim, kissing her hand.

"Come!" broke in Wingenund's voice, deep, strong, like that of a
bell.

Not one of them had observed the chief as he stood erect,
motionless, poised like a stag scenting the air. His dark eyes
seemed to pierce the purple-golden forest, his keen ear seemed to
drink in the singing of the birds and the gentle rustling of leaves.
Native to these haunts as were the wild creatures, they were no
quicker than the Indian to feel the approach of foes. The breeze had
borne faint, suspicious sounds.

"Keep--the--Bible," said Mr. Wells, "remember--its--word." His hand
closely clasped Nell's, and then suddenly loosened. His pallid face
was lighted by a meaning, tender smile which slowly faded--faded,
and was gone. The venerable head fell back. The old missionary was
dead.

Nell kissed the pale, cold brow, and then rose, half dazed and
shuddering. Jim was vainly trying to close the dead man's eyes. She
could no longer look. On rising she found herself near the Indian
chief. He took her fingers in his great hand, and held them with a
strong, warm pressure. Strangely thrilled, she looked up at
Wingenund. His somber eyes, fixed piercingly on the forest, and his
dark stern face, were, as always, inscrutable. No compassion shone
there; no emotion unbefitting a chieftain would ever find expression
in that cold face, but Nell felt a certain tenderness in this
Indian, a response in his great heart. Felt it so surely, so
powerfully that she leaned her head against him. She knew he was her
friend.

"Come," said the chief once more. He gently put Nell aside before
Jim arose from his sad task.

"We can not leave him unburied," expostulated Jim.

Wingenund dragged aside a large stone which formed one wall of the
cavern. Then he grasped a log which was half covered by dirt, and,
exerting his great strength, pulled it from its place. There was a
crash, a rumble, the jar of a heavy weight striking the earth, then
the rattling of gravel, and, before Nell and Jim realized what had
happened, the great rock forming the roof of the cavern slipped down
the bank followed by a small avalanche. The cavern was completely
covered. Mr. Wells was buried. A mossy stone marked the old
missionary's grave.

Nell and Jim were lost in wonder and awe.

"Ugh!" cried the chief, looking toward the opening in the glade.

Fearfully Nell and Jim turned, to be appalled by four naked, painted
savages standing with leveled rifles. Behind them stood Deering and
Jim Girty.

"Oh, God! We are lost! Lost! Lost!" exclaimed Jim, unable to command
himself. Hope died in his heart.

No cry issued from Nell's white lips. She was dazed by this final
blow. Having endured so much, this last misfortune, apparently the
ruin of her life, brought no added suffering, only a strange, numb
feeling.

"Ah-huh! Thought you'd give me the slip, eh?" croaked Girty,
striding forward, and as he looked at Wingenund his little, yellow
eyes flared like flint. "Does a wolf befriend Girty's captives?
Chief you hev led me a hard chase."

Wingenund deigned no reply. He stood as he did so often, still and
silent, with folded arms, and a look that was haughty, unresponsive.

The Indians came forward into the glade, and one of them quickly
bound Jim's hands behind his back. The savages wore a wild, brutish
look. A feverish ferocity, very near akin to insanity, possessed
them. They were not quiet a moment, but ran here and there, for no
apparent reason, except, possibly, to keep in action with the raging
fire in their hearts. The cleanliness which characterized the normal
Indian was absent in them; their scant buckskin dress was bedraggled
and stained. They were still drunk with rum and the lust for blood.
Murder gleamed from the glance of their eyes.

"Jake, come over here," said Girty to his renegade friend. "Ain't
she a prize?"

Girty and Deering stood before the poor, stricken girl, and gloated
over her fair beauty. She stood as when first transfixed by the
horror from which she had been fleeing. Her pale face was lowered,
her hands clenched tightly in the folds of her skirt.

Never before had two such coarse, cruel fiends as Deering and Girty
encumbered the earth. Even on the border, where the best men were
bad, they were the worst. Deering was yet drunk, but Girty had
recovered somewhat from the effects of the rum he had absorbed. The
former rolled his big eyes and nodded his shaggy head. He was
passing judgment, from his point of view, on the fine points of the
girl.

"She cer'aintly is," he declared with a grin. "She's a little
beauty. Beats any I ever seen!"

Jim Girty stroked his sharp chin with dirty fingers. His yellow
eyes, his burnt saffron skin, his hooked nose, his thin lips--all
his evil face seemed to shine with an evil triumph. To look at him
was painful. To have him gaze at her was enough to drive any woman
mad.

Dark stains spotted the bright frills of his gaudy dress, his
buckskin coat and leggins, and dotted his white eagle plumes. Dark
stains, horribly suggestive, covered him from head to foot. Blood
stains! The innocent blood of Christians crimsoned his renegade's
body, and every dark red blotch cried murder.

"Girl, I burned the Village of Peace to git you," growled Girty.
"Come here!"

With a rude grasp that tore open her dress, exposing her beautiful
white shoulder and bosom, the ruffian pulled her toward him. His
face was transfixed with a fierce joy, a brutal passion.

Deering looked on with a drunken grin, while his renegade friend
hugged the almost dying girl. The Indians paced the glade with short
strides like leashed tigers. The young missionary lay on the moss
with closed eyes. He could not endure the sight of Nell in Girty's
arms.

No one noticed Wingenund. He stood back a little, half screened by
drooping branches. Once again the chief's dark eyes gleamed, his
head turned a trifle aside, and, standing in the statuesque position
habitual with him when resting, he listened, as one who hears
mysterious sounds. Suddenly his keen glance was riveted on the ferns
above the low cliff. He had seen their graceful heads quivering.
Then two blinding sheets of flame burst from the ferns.

Spang! Spang!

The two rifle reports thundered through the glade. Two Indians
staggered and fell in their tracks--dead without a cry.

A huge yellow body, spread out like a panther in his spring,
descended with a crash upon Deering and Girty. The girl fell away
from the renegade as he went down with a shrill screech, dragging
Deering with him. Instantly began a terrific, whirling, wrestling
struggle.

A few feet farther down the cliff another yellow body came crashing
down to alight with a thud, to bound erect, to rush forward swift as
a leaping deer. The two remaining Indians had only time to draw
their weapons before this lithe, threatening form whirled upon them.
Shrill cries, hoarse yells, the clash of steel and dull blows
mingled together. One savage went down, twisted over, writhed and
lay still. The other staggered, warded off lightninglike blows until
one passed under his guard, and crashed dully on his head. Then he
reeled, rose again, but only to have his skull cloven by a bloody
tomahawk.

The victor darted toward the whirling mass.

"Lew, shake him loose! Let him go!" yelled Jonathan Zane, swinging
his bloody weapon.

High above Zane's cry, Deering's shouts and curses, Girty's shrieks
of fear and fury, above the noise of wrestling bodies and dull
blows, rose a deep booming roar.

It was Wetzel's awful cry of vengeance.

"Shake him loose," yelled Jonathan.

Baffled, he ran wildly around the wrestlers. Time and time again his
gory tomahawk was raised only to be lowered. He found no opportunity
to strike. Girty's ghastly countenance gleamed at him from the whirl
of legs, and arms and bodies. Then Wetzel's dark face, lighted by
merciless eyes, took its place, and that gave way to Deering's broad
features. The men being clad alike in buckskin, and their motions so
rapid, prevented Zane from lending a helping hand.

Suddenly Deering was propelled from the mass as if by a catapult.
His body straightened as it came down with a heavy thud. Zane
pounced upon it with catlike quickness. Once more he swung aloft the
bloody hatchet; then once more he lowered it, for there was no need
to strike. The renegade's side was torn open from shoulder to hip. A
deluge of blood poured out upon the moss. Deering choked, a bloody
froth formed on his lips. His fingers clutched at nothing. His eyes
rolled violently and then were fixed in an awful stare.

The girl lying so quiet in the woods near the old hut was avenged!

Jonathan turned again to Wetzel and Girty, not with any intention to
aid the hunter, but simply to witness the end of the struggle.

Without the help of the powerful Deering, how pitifully weak was the
Deathshead of the frontier in the hands of the Avenger!

Jim Girty's tomahawk was thrown in one direction and his knife in
another. He struggled vainly in the iron grip that held him.

Wetzel rose to his feet clutching the renegade. With his left arm,
which had been bared in the fight, he held Girty by the front of his
buckskin shirt, and dragged him to that tree which stood alone in
the glade. He pushed him against it, and held him there.

The white dog leaped and snarled around the prisoner.

Girty's hands pulled and tore at the powerful arm which forced him
hard against the beech. It was a brown arm, and huge with its
bulging, knotted, rigid muscles. A mighty arm, strong as the justice
which ruled it.

"Girty, thy race is run!" Wetzel's voice cut the silence like a
steel whip.

The terrible, ruthless smile, the glittering eyes of doom seemed
literally to petrify the renegade.

The hunter's right arm rose slowly. The knife in his hand quivered
as if with eagerness. The long blade, dripping with Deering's blood,
pointed toward the hilltop.

"Look thar! See 'em! Thar's yer friends!" cried Wetzel.

On the dead branches of trees standing far above the hilltop, were
many great, dark birds. They sat motionless as if waiting.

"Buzzards! Buzzards!" hissed Wetzel.

Girty's ghastly face became an awful thing to look upon. No living
countenance ever before expressed such fear, such horror, such
agony. He foamed at the mouth, he struggled, he writhed. With a
terrible fascination he watched that quivering, dripping blade, now
poised high.

Wetzel's arm swung with the speed of a shooting star. He drove the
blade into Girty's groin, through flesh and bone, hard and fast into
the tree. He nailed the renegade to the beech, there to await his
lingering doom.

"Ah-h! Ah-h! Ah-h!" shrieked Girty, in cries of agony. He fumbled
and pulled at the haft of the knife, but could not loosen it. He
beat his breast, he tore his hair. His screams were echoed from the
hilltop as if in mockery.

The white dog stood near, his hair bristling, his teeth snapping.

The dark birds sat on the dead branches above the hilltop, as if
waiting for their feast.



Chapter XXVIII.

Zane turned and cut the young missionary's bonds. Jim ran to where
Nell was lying on the ground, and tenderly raised her head, calling
to her that they were saved. Zane bathed the girl's pale face.
Presently she sighed and opened her eyes.

Then Zane looked from the statuelike form of Wingenund to the
motionless figure of Wetzel. The chief stood erect with his eyes on
the distant hills. Wetzel remained with folded arms, his cold eyes
fixed upon the writhing, moaning renegade.

"Lew, look here," said Zane, unhesitatingly, and pointed toward the
chief.

Wetzel quivered as if sharply stung; the cold glitter in his eyes
changed to lurid fire. With upraised tomahawk he bounded across the
brook.

"Lew, wait a minute!" yelled Zane.

"Wetzel! wait, wait!" cried Jim, grasping the hunter's arm; but the
latter flung him off, as the wind tosses a straw.

"Wetzel, wait, for God's sake, wait!" screamed Nell. She had risen
at Zane's call, and now saw the deadly resolve in the hunter's eyes.
Fearlessly she flung herself in front of him; bravely she risked her
life before his mad rush; frantically she threw her arms around him
and clung to his hands desperately.

Wetzel halted; frenzied as he was at the sight of his foe, he could
not hurt a woman.

"Girl, let go!" he panted, and his broad breast heaved.

"No, no, no! Listen, Wetzel, you must not kill the chief. He is a
friend."

"He is my great foe!"

"Listen, oh! please listen!" pleaded Nell. "He warned me to flee
from Girty; he offered to guide us to Fort Henry. He has saved my
life. For my sake, Wetzel, do not kill him! Don't let me be the
cause of his murder! Wetzel, Wetzel, lower your arm, drop your
hatchet. For pity's sake do not spill more blood. Wingenund is a
Christian!"

Wetzel stepped back breathing heavily. His white face resembled
chiseled marble. With those little hands at his breast he hesitated
in front of the chief he had hunted for so many long years.

"Would you kill a Christian?" pleaded Nell, her voice sweet and
earnest.

"I reckon not, but this Injun ain't one," replied Wetzel slowly.

"Put away your hatchet. Let me have it. Listen, and I will tell you,
after thanking you for this rescue. Do you know of my marriage?
Come, please listen! Forget for a moment your enmity. Oh! you must
be merciful! Brave men are always merciful!"

"Injun, are you a Christian?" hissed Wetzel.

"Oh! I know he is! I know he is!" cried Nell, still standing between
Wetzel and the chief.

Wingenund spoke no word. He did not move. His falcon eyes gazed
tranquilly at his white foe. Christian or pagan, he would not speak
one word to save his life.

"Oh! tell him you are a Christian," cried Nell, running to the
chief.

"Yellow-hair, the Delaware is true to his race."

As he spoke gently to Nell a noble dignity shone upon his dark face.

"Injun, my back bears the scars of your braves' whips," hissed
Wetzel, once more advancing.

"Deathwind, your scars are deep, but the Delaware's are deeper,"
came the calm reply. "Wingenund's heart bears two scars. His son
lies under the moss and ferns; Deathwind killed him; Deathwind alone
knows his grave. Wingenund's daughter, the delight of his waning
years, freed the Delaware's great foe, and betrayed her father. Can
the Christian God tell Wingenund of his child?"

Wetzel shook like a tree in a storm. Justice cried out in the
Indian's deep voice. Wetzel fought for mastery of himself.

"Delaware, your daughter lays there, with her lover," said Wetzel
firmly, and pointed into the spring.

"Ugh!" exclaimed the Indian, bending over the dark pool. He looked
long into its murky depths. Then he thrust his arm down into the
brown water.

"Deathwind tells no lie," said the chief, calmly, and pointed toward
Girty. The renegade had ceased struggling, his head was bowed upon
his breast. "The white serpent has stung the Delaware."

"What does it mean?" cried Jim.

"Your brother Joe and Whispering Winds lie in the spring," answered
Jonathan Zane. "Girty murdered them, and Wetzel buried the two
there."

"Oh, is it true?" cried Nell.

"True, lass," whispered Jim, brokenly, holding out his arms to her.
Indeed, he needed her strength as much as she needed his. The girl
gave one shuddering glance at the spring, and then hid her face on
her husband's shoulder.

"Delaware, we are sworn foes," cried Wetzel.

"Wingenund asks no mercy."

"Are you a Christian?"

"Wingenund is true to his race."

"Delaware, begone! Take these weapons an' go. When your shadow falls
shortest on the ground, Deathwind starts on your trail."

"Deathwind is the great white chief; he is the great Indian foe; he
is as sure as the panther in his leap; as swift as the wild goose in
his northern flight. Wingenund never felt fear." The chieftain's
sonorous reply rolled through the quiet glade. "If Deathwind thirsts
for Wingenund's blood, let him spill it now, for when the Delaware
goes into the forest his trail will fade."

"Begone!" roared Wetzel. The fever for blood was once more rising
within him.

The chief picked up some weapons of the dead Indians, and with
haughty stride stalked from the glade.

"Oh, Wetzel, thank you, I knew---" Nell's voice broke as she faced
the hunter. She recoiled from this changed man.

"Come, we'll go," said Jonathan Zane. "I'll guide you to Fort
Henry." He lifted the pack, and led Nell and Jim out of the glade.

They looked back once to picture forever in their minds the lovely
spot with its ghastly quiet bodies, the dark, haunting spring, the
renegade nailed to the tree, and the tall figure of Wetzel as he
watched his shadow on the ground.

                *       *       *

When Wetzel also had gone, only two living creatures remained in the
glade--the doomed renegade, and the white dog. The gaunt beast
watched the man with hungry, mad eyes.

A long moan wailed through the forest. It swelled mournfully on the
air, and died away. The doomed man heard it. He raised his ghastly
face; his dulled senses seemed to revive. He gazed at the stiffening
bodies of the Indians, at the gory corpse of Deering, at the savage
eyes of the dog.

Suddenly life seemed to surge strong within him.

"Hell's fire! I'm not done fer yet," he gasped. "This damned knife
can't kill me; I'll pull it out."

He worked at the heavy knife hilt. Awful curses passed his lips, but
the blade did not move. Retribution had spoken his doom.

Suddenly he saw a dark shadow moving along the sunlit ground. It
swept past him. He looked up to see a great bird with wide wings
sailing far above. He saw another still higher, and then a third. He
looked at the hilltop. The quiet, black birds had taken wing. They
were floating slowly, majestically upward. He watched their graceful
flight. How easily they swooped in wide circles. He remembered that
they had fascinated him when a boy, long, long ago, when he had a
home. Where was that home? He had one once. Ah! the long, cruel
years have rolled back. A youth blotted out by evil returned. He saw
a little cottage, he saw the old Virginia homestead, he saw his
brothers and his mother.

"Ah-h!" A cruel agony tore his heart. He leaned hard against the
knife. With the pain the present returned, but the past remained.
All his youth, all his manhood flashed before him. The long, bloody,
merciless years faced him, and his crimes crushed upon him with
awful might.

Suddenly a rushing sound startled him. He saw a great bird swoop
down and graze the tree tops. Another followed, and another, and
then a flock of them. He saw their gray, spotted breasts and hooked
beaks.

"Buzzards," he muttered, darkly eyeing the dead savages. The carrion
birds were swooping to their feast.

"By God! He's nailed me fast for buzzards!" he screamed in sudden,
awful frenzy. "Nailed fast! Ah-h! Ah-h! Ah-h! Eaten alive by
buzzards! Ah-h! Ah-h! Ah-h!"

He shrieked until his voice failed, and then he gasped.

Again the buzzards swooped overhead, this time brushing the leaves.
One, a great grizzled bird, settled upon a limb of the giant oak,
and stretched its long neck. Another alighted beside him. Others
sailed round and round the dead tree top.

The leader arched his wings, and with a dive swooped into the glade.
He alighted near Deering's dead body. He was a dark, uncanny bird,
with long, scraggy, bare neck, a wreath of white, grizzled feathers,
a cruel, hooked beak, and cold eyes.

The carrion bird looked around the glade, and put a great claw on
the dead man's breast.

"Ah-h! Ah-h!" shrieked Girty. His agonized yell of terror and horror
echoed mockingly from the wooded bluff.

The huge buzzard flapped his wings and flew away, but soon returned
to his gruesome feast. His followers, made bold by their leader,
floated down into the glade. Their black feathers shone in the sun.
They hopped over the moss; they stretched their grizzled necks, and
turned their heads sideways.

Girty was sweating blood. It trickled from his ghastly face. All the
suffering and horror he had caused in all his long career was as
nothing to that which then rended him. He, the renegade, the white
Indian, the Deathshead of the frontier, panted and prayed for a
merciful breath. He was exquisitely alive. He was human.

Presently the huge buzzard, the leader, raised his hoary head. He
saw the man nailed to the tree. The bird bent his head wisely to one
side, and then lightly lifted himself into the air. He sailed round
the glade, over the fighting buzzards, over the spring, and over the
doomed renegade. He flew out of the glade, and in again. He swooped
close to Girty. His broad wings scarcely moved as he sailed along.

Girty tried to strike the buzzard as he sailed close by, but his arm
fell useless. He tried to scream, but his voice failed.

Slowly the buzzard king sailed by and returned. Every time he
swooped a little nearer, and bent his long, scraggy neck.

Suddenly he swooped down, light and swift as a hawk; his wide wings
fanned the air; he poised under the tree, and then fastened sharp
talons in the doomed man's breast.



Chapter XXIX.

The fleeting human instinct of Wetzel had given way to the habit of
years. His merciless quest for many days had been to kill the
frontier fiend. Now that it had been accomplished, he turned his
vengeance into its accustomed channel, and once more became the
ruthless Indian-slayer.

A fierce, tingling joy surged through him as he struck the
Delaware's trail. Wingenund had made little or no effort to conceal
his tracks; he had gone northwest, straight as a crow flies, toward
the Indian encampment. He had a start of sixty minutes, and it would
require six hours of rapid traveling to gain the Delaware town.

"Reckon he'll make fer home," muttered Wetzel, following the trail
with all possible speed.

The hunter's method of trailing an Indian was singular. Intuition
played as great a part as sight. He seemed always to divine his
victim's intention. Once on the trail he was as hard to shake off as
a bloodhound. Yet he did not, by any means, always stick to the
Indian's footsteps. With Wetzel the direction was of the greatest
importance.

For half a mile he closely followed the Delaware's plainly marked
trail. Then he stopped to take a quick survey of the forest before
him. He abruptly left the trail, and, breaking into a run, went
through the woods as fleetly and noiselessly as a deer, running for
a quarter of a mile, when he stopped to listen. All seemed well, for
he lowered his head, and walked slowly along, examining the moss and
leaves. Presently he came upon a little open space where the soil
was a sandy loam. He bent over, then rose quickly. He had come upon
the Indian's trail. Cautiously he moved forward, stopping every
moment to listen. In all the close pursuits of his maturer years he
had never been a victim of that most cunning of Indian tricks, an
ambush. He relied solely on his ear to learn if foes were close by.
The wild creatures of the forest were his informants. As soon as he
heard any change in their twittering, humming or playing--whichever
way they manifested their joy or fear of life--he became as hard to
see, as difficult to hear as a creeping snake.

The Delaware's trail led to a rocky ridge and there disappeared.
Wetzel made no effort to find the chief's footprints on the flinty
ground, but halted a moment and studied the ridge, the lay of the
land around, a ravine on one side, and a dark impenetrable forest on
the other. He was calculating his chances of finding the Delaware's
trail far on the other side. Indian woodcraft, subtle, wonderful as
it may be, is limited to each Indian's ability. Savages, as well as
other men, were born unequal. One might leave a faint trail through
the forest, while another could be readily traced, and a third, more
cunning and skillful than his fellows, have flown under the shady
trees, for all the trail he left. But redmen followed the same
methods of woodcraft from tradition, as Wetzel had learned after
long years of study and experience.

And now, satisfied that he had divined the Delaware's intention, he
slipped down the bank of the ravine, and once more broke into a run.
He leaped lightly, sure-footed as a goat, from stone to stone, over
fallen logs, and the brawling brook. At every turn of the ravine, at
every open place, he stopped to listen.

Arriving on the other side of the ridge, he left the ravine and
passed along the edge of the rising ground. He listened to the
birds, and searched the grass and leaves. He found not the slightest
indication of a trail where he had expected to find one. He retraced
his steps patiently, carefully, scrutinizing every inch of the
ground. But it was all in vain. Wingenund had begun to show his
savage cunning. In his warrior days for long years no chief could
rival him. His boast had always been that, when Wingenund sought to
elude his pursuers, his trail faded among the moss and the ferns.

Wetzel, calm, patient, resourceful, deliberated a moment. The
Delaware had not crossed this rocky ridge. He had been cunning
enough to make his pursuer think such was his intention. The hunter
hurried to the eastern end of the ridge for no other reason than
apparently that course was the one the savage had the least reason
to take. He advanced hurriedly because every moment was precious.
Not a crushed blade of grass, a brushed leaf, an overturned pebble
nor a snapped twig did he find. He saw that he was getting near to
the side of the ridge where the Delaware's trail had abruptly ended.
Ah! what was there? A twisted bit of fern, with the drops of dew
brushed off. Bending beside the fern, Wetzel examined the grass; it
was not crushed. A small plant with triangular leaves of dark green,
lay under the fern. Breaking off one of these leaves, he exposed its
lower side to the light. The fine, silvery hair of fuzz that grew
upon the leaf had been crushed. Wetzel knew that an Indian could
tread so softly as not to break the springy grass blades, but the
under side of one of these leaves, if a man steps on it, always
betrays his passage through the woods. To keen eyes this leaf showed
that it had been bruised by a soft moccasin. Wetzel had located the
trail, but was still ignorant of its direction. Slowly he traced the
shaken ferns and bruised leaves down over the side of the ridge, and
at last, near a stone, he found a moccasin-print in the moss. It
pointed east. The Delaware was traveling in exactly the opposite
direction to that which he should be going. He was, moreover,
exercising wonderful sagacity in hiding his trail. This, however,
did not trouble Wetzel, for if it took him a long time to find the
trail, certainly the Delaware had expended as much, or more, in
choosing hard ground, logs or rocks on which to tread.

Wetzel soon realized that his own cunning was matched. He trusted no
more to his intuitive knowledge, but stuck close to the trail, as a
hungry wolf holds to the scent of his quarry.

The Delaware trail led over logs, stones and hard-baked ground, up
stony ravines and over cliffs. The wily chief used all of his old
skill; he walked backward over moss and sand where his footprints
showed plainly; he leaped wide fissures in stony ravines, and then
jumped back again; he let himself down over ledges by branches; he
crossed creeks and gorges by swinging himself into trees and
climbing from one to another; he waded brooks where he found hard
bottom, and avoided swampy, soft ground.

With dogged persistence and tenacity of purpose Wetzel stuck to this
gradually fading trail. Every additional rod he was forced to go
more slowly, and take more time in order to find any sign of his
enemy's passage through the forests. One thing struck him forcibly.
Wingenund was gradually circling to the southwest, a course that
took him farther and farther from the Delaware encampment.

Slowly it dawned upon Wetzel that the chief could hardly have any
reason for taking this circling course save that of pride and savage
joy in misleading, in fooling the foe of the Delawares, in
deliberately showing Deathwind that there was one Indian who could
laugh at and loose him in the forests. To Wetzel this was bitter as
gall. To be led a wild goose chase! His fierce heart boiled with
fury. His dark, keen eyes sought the grass and moss with terrible
earnestness. Yet in spite of the anger that increased to the white
heat of passion, he became aware of some strange sensation creeping
upon him. He remembered that the Delawares had offered his life.
Slowly, like a shadow, Wetzel passed up and down the ridges, through
the brown and yellow aisles of the forest, over the babbling brooks,
out upon the golden-flecked fields--always close on the trail.

At last in an open part of the forest, where a fire had once swept
away the brush and smaller timber, Wetzel came upon the spot where
the Delaware's trail ended.

There in the soft, black ground was a moccasin-print. The forest was
not dense; there was plenty of light; no logs, stones or trees were
near, and yet over all that glade no further evidence of the
Indian's trail was visible.

It faded there as the great chief had boasted it would.

Wetzel searched the burnt ground; he crawled on his hands and knees;
again and again he went over the surroundings. The fact that one
moccasin-print pointed west and the other east, showed that the
Delaware had turned in his tracks, was the most baffling thing that
had ever crossed the hunter in all his wild wanderings.

For the first time in many years he had failed. He took his defeat
hard, because he had been successful for so long he thought himself
almost infallible, and because the failure lost him the opportunity
to kill his great foe. In his passion he cursed himself for being so
weak as to let the prayer of a woman turn him from his life's
purpose.

With bowed head and slow, dragging steps he made his way westward.
The land was strange to him, but he knew he was going toward
familiar ground. For a time he walked quietly, all the time the
fierce fever in his veins slowly abating. Calm he always was, except
when that unnatural lust for Indians' blood overcame him.

On the summit of a high ridge he looked around to ascertain his
bearings. He was surprised to find he had traveled in a circle. A
mile or so below him arose the great oak tree which he recognized as
the landmark of Beautiful Spring. He found himself standing on the
hill, under the very dead tree to which he had directed Girty's
attention a few hours previous.

With the idea that he would return to the spring to scalp the dead
Indians, he went directly toward the big oak tree. Once out of the
forest a wide plain lay between him and the wooded knoll which
marked the glade of Beautiful Spring. He crossed this stretch of
verdant meadow-land, and entered the copse.

Suddenly he halted. His keen sense of the usual harmony of the
forest, with its innumerable quiet sounds, had received a severe
shock. He sank into the tall weeds and listened. Then he crawled a
little farther. Doubt became certainty. A single note of an oriole
warned him, and it needed not the quick notes of a catbird to tell
him that near at hand, somewhere, was human life.

Once more Wetzel became a tiger. The hot blood leaped from his
heart, firing all his veins and nerves. But calmly noiseless,
certain, cold, deadly as a snake he began the familiar crawling
method of stalking his game.

On, on under the briars and thickets, across the hollows full of
yellow leaves, up over stony patches of ground to the fern-covered
cliff overhanging the glade he glided--lithe, sinuous, a tiger in
movement and in heart.

He parted the long, graceful ferns and gazed with glittering eyes
down into the beautiful glade.

He saw not the shining spring nor the purple moss, nor the ghastly
white bones--all that the buzzards had left of the dead--nor
anything, save a solitary Indian standing erect in the glade.

There, within range of his rifle, was his great Indian foe,
Wingenund.

Wetzel sank back into the ferns to still the furious exultations
which almost consumed him during the moment when he marked his
victim. He lay there breathing hard, gripping tightly his rifle,
slowly mastering the passion that alone of all things might render
his aim futile.

For him it was the third great moment of his life, the last of three
moments in which the Indian's life had belonged to him. Once before
he had seen that dark, powerful face over the sights of his rifle,
and he could not shoot because his one shot must be for another.
Again had that lofty, haughty figure stood before him, calm,
disdainful, arrogant, and he yielded to a woman's prayer.

The Delaware's life was his to take, and he swore he would have it!
He trembled in the ecstasy of his triumphant passion; his great
muscles rippled and quivered, for the moment was entirely beyond his
control. Then his passion calmed. Such power for vengeance had he
that he could almost still the very beats of his heart to make sure
and deadly his fatal aim. Slowly he raised himself; his eyes of cold
fire glittered; slowly he raised the black rifle.

Wingenund stood erect in his old, grand pose, with folded arms, but
his eyes, instead of being fixed on the distant hills, were lowered
to the ground.

An Indian girl, cold as marble, lay at his feet. Her garments were
wet, and clung to her slender form. Her sad face was frozen into an
eternal rigidity.

By her side was a newly dug grave.

The bead on the front sight of the rifle had hardly covered the
chief's dark face when Wetzel's eye took in these other details. He
had been so absorbed in his purpose that he did not dream of the
Delaware's reason for returning to the Beautiful Spring.

Slowly Wetzel's forefinger stiffened; slowly he lowered the black
rifle.

Wingenund had returned to bury Whispering Winds.

Wetzel's teethe clenched, an awful struggle tore his heart. Slowly
the rifle rose, wavered and fell. It rose again, wavered and fell.
Something terrible was wrong with him; something awful was awakening
in his soul.

Wingenund had not made a fool of him. The Delaware had led him a
long chase, had given him the slip in the forest, not to boast of
it, but to hurry back to give his daughter Christian burial.

Wingenund was a Christian!

Had he not been, once having cast his daughter from him, he would
never have looked upon her face again.

Wingenund was true to his race, but he was a Christian.

Suddenly Wetzel's terrible temptation, his heart-racking struggle
ceased. He lowered the long, black rifle. He took one last look at
the chieftain's dark, powerful face.

Then the Avenger fled like a shadow through the forest.



Chapter XXX.

It was late afternoon at Fort Henry. The ruddy sun had already sunk
behind the wooded hill, and the long shadows of the trees lengthened
on the green square in front of the fort.

Colonel Zane stood in his doorway watching the river with eager
eyes. A few minutes before a man had appeared on the bank of the
island and hailed. The colonel had sent his brother Jonathan to
learn what was wanted. The latter had already reached the other
shore in his flatboat, and presently the little boat put out again
with the stranger seated at the stern.

"I thought, perhaps, it might be Wetzel," mused the colonel, "though
I never knew of Lew's wanting a boat."

Jonathan brought the man across the river, and up the winding path
to where Colonel Zane was waiting.

"Hello! It's young Christy!" exclaimed the colonel, jumping off the
steps, and cordially extending his hand. "Glad to see you! Where's
Williamson. How did you happen over here?"

"Captain Williamson and his men will make the river eight or ten
miles above," answered Christy. "I came across to inquire about the
young people who left the Village of Peace. Was glad to learn from
Jonathan they got out all right."

"Yes, indeed, we're all glad. Come and sit down. Of course you'll
stay over night. You look tired and worn. Well, no wonder, when you
saw that Moravian massacre. You must tell me about it. I saw Sam
Brady yesterday, and he spoke of seeing you over there. Sam told me
a good deal. Ah! here's Jim now."

The young missionary came out of the open door, and the two young
men greeted each other warmly.

"How is she?" asked Christy, when the first greetings had been
exchanged.

"Nell's just beginning to get over the shock. She'll be glad to see
you."

"Jonathan tells me you got married just before Girty came up with
you at Beautiful Spring."

"Yes; it is true. In fact, the whole wonderful story is true, yet I
cannot believe as yet. You look thin and haggard. When we last met
you were well."

"That awful time pulled me down. I was an unwilling spectator of all
that horrible massacre, and shall never get over it. I can still see
the fiendish savages running about with the reeking scalps of their
own people. I actually counted the bodies of forty-nine grown
Christians and twenty-seven children. An hour after you left us the
church was in ashes, and the next day I saw the burned bodies. Oh!
the sickening horror of the scene! It haunts me! That monster Jim
Girty killed fourteen Christians with his sledge-hammer."

"Did you hear of his death?" asked Colonel Zane.

"Yes, and a fitting end it was to the frontier 'Skull and
Cross-bones'."

"It was like Wetzel to think of such a vengeance."

"Has Wetzel come in since?"

"No. Jonathan says he went after Wingenund, and there's no telling
when he'll return."

"I hoped he would spare the Delaware."

"Wetzel spare an Indian!"

"But the chief was a friend. He surely saved the girl."

"I am sorry, too, because Wingenund was a fine Indian. But Wetzel is
implacable."

"Here's Nell, and Mrs. Clarke too. Come out, both of you," cried
Jim.

Nell appeared in the doorway with Colonel Zane's sister. The two
girls came down the steps and greeted the young man. The bride's
sweet face was white and thin, and there was a shadow in her eyes.

"I am so glad you got safely away from--from there," said Christy,
earnestly.

"Tell me of Benny?" asked Nell, speaking softly.

"Oh, yes, I forgot. Why, Benny is safe and well. He was the only
Christian Indian to escape the Christian massacre. Heckewelder hid
him until it was all over. He is going to have the lad educated."

"Thank Heaven!" murmured Nell.

"And the missionaries?" inquired Jim, earnestly.

"Were all well when I left, except, of course, Young. He was dying.
The others will remain out there, and try to get another hold, but I
fear it's impossible."

"It is impossible, not because the Indian does not want
Christianity, but because such white men as the Girty's rule. The
beautiful Village of Peace owes its ruin to the renegades," said
Colonel Zane impressively.

"Captain Williamson could have prevented the massacre," remarked
Jim.

"Possibly. It was a bad place for him, and I think he was wrong not
to try," declared the colonel.

"Hullo!" cried Jonathan Zane, getting up from the steps where he sat
listening to the conversation.

A familiar soft-moccasined footfall sounded on the path. All turned
to see Wetzel come slowly toward them. His buckskin hunting costume
was ragged and worn. He looked tired and weary, but the dark eyes
were calm.

It was the Wetzel whom they all loved.

They greeted him warmly. Nell gave him her hands, and smiled up at
him.

"I'm so glad you've come home safe," she said.

"Safe an' sound, lass, an' glad to find you well," answered the
hunter, as he leaned on his long rifle, looking from Nell to Colonel
Zane's sister. "Betty, I allus gave you first place among border
lasses, but here's one as could run you most any kind of a race," he
said, with the rare smile which so warmly lighted his dark, stern
face.

"Lew Wetzel making compliments! Well, of all things!" exclaimed the
colonel's sister.

Jonathan Zane stood closely scanning Wetzel's features. Colonel
Zane, observing his brother's close scrutiny of the hunter, guessed
the cause, and said:

"Lew, tell us, did you see Wingenund over the sights of your rifle?"

"Yes," answered the hunter simply.

A chill seemed to strike the hearts of the listeners. That simple
answer, coming from Wetzel, meant so much. Nell bowed her head
sadly. Jim turned away biting his lip. Christy looked across the
valley. Colonel Zane bent over and picked up some pebbles which he
threw hard at the cabin wall. Jonathan Zane abruptly left the group,
and went into the house.

But the colonel's sister fixed her large, black eyes on Wetzel's
face.

"Well?" she asked, and her voice rang.

Wetzel was silent for a moment. He met her eyes with that old,
inscrutable smile in his own. A slight shade flitted across his
face.

"Betty, I missed him," he said, calmly, and, shouldering his long
rifle, he strode away.

                *       *       *

Nell and Jim walked along the bluff above the river. Twilight was
deepening. The red glow in the west was slowly darkening behind the
boldly defined hills.

"So it's all settled, Jim, that we stay here," said Nell.

"Yes, dear. Colonel Zane has offered me work, and a church besides.
We are very fortunate, and should be contented. I am happy because
you're my wife, and yet I am sad when I think of--him. Poor Joe!"

"Don't you ever think we--we wronged him?" whispered Nell.

"No, he wished it. I think he knew how he would end. No, we did not
wrong him; we loved him."

"Yes, I loved him--I loved you both," said Nell softly.

"Then let us always think of him as he would have wished."

"Think of him? Think of Joe? I shall never forget. In winter, spring
and summer I shall remember him, but always most in autumn. For I
shall see that beautiful glade with its gorgeous color and the dark,
shaded spring where he lies asleep."

                *       *       *

The years rolled by with their changing seasons; every autumn the
golden flowers bloomed richly, and the colored leaves fell softly
upon the amber moss in the glade of Beautiful Spring.

The Indians camped there no more; they shunned the glade and called
it the Haunted Spring. They said the spirit of a white dog ran there
at night, and the Wind-of-Death mourned over the lonely spot.

At long intervals an Indian chief of lofty frame and dark, powerful
face stalked into the glade to stand for many moments silent and
motionless.

And sometimes at twilight when the red glow of the sun had faded to
gray, a stalwart hunter slipped like a shadow out of the thicket,
and leaned upon a long, black rifle while he gazed sadly into the
dark spring, and listened to the sad murmur of the waterfall. The
twilight deepened while he stood motionless. The leaves fell into
the water with a soft splash, a whippoorwill caroled his melancholy
song.

From the gloom of the forest came a low sigh which swelled
thrillingly upon the quiet air, and then died away like the wailing
of the night wind.

Quiet reigned once more over the dark, murky grave of the boy who
gave his love and his life to the wilderness.





